mrs. reed, when there was no company, dined early) the cold
winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and a rain so
penetrating, that further out-door exercise was now out of the question.

i was glad of it: i never liked long walks, especially on chilly
afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight, with
nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of bessie,
the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to
eliza, john, and georgiana reed.

the said eliza, john, and georgiana were now clustered round their mama
in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with
her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying)
looked perfectly happy.  me, she had dispensed from joining the group;
saying, "she regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a
distance; but that until she heard from bessie, and could discover by her
own observation, that i was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a
 
 ___________________________
 
how do you know her?"

"mr. reed was my uncle--my mother's brother."

"the deuce he was!  you never told me that before: you always said you
had no relations."

"none that would own me, sir.  mr. reed is dead, and his wife cast me
off."

"why?"

"because i was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me."

"but reed left children?--you must have cousins?  sir george lynn was
talking of a reed of gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of the
veriest rascals on town; and ingram was mentioning a georgiana reed of
the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago
in london."

"john reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined his
family, and is supposed to have committed suicide.  the news so shocked
his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack."

"and what good can you do her?  nonsense, jane!  i would never think of
running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead
before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off."

"yes, sir, but t