n: what are they?  to me you seem very
good."

"then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: i am, as miss scatcherd
said, slatternly; i seldom put, and never keep, things, in order; i am
careless; i forget rules; i read when i should learn my lessons; i have
no method; and sometimes i say, like you, i cannot _bear_ to be subjected
to systematic arrangements.  this is all very provoking to miss
scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, and particular."

"and cross and cruel," i added; but helen burns would not admit my
addition: she kept silence.

"is miss temple as severe to you as miss scatcherd?"

at the utterance of miss temple's name, a soft smile flitted over her
grave face.

"miss temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe to any one,
even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tells me of them
gently; and, if i do anything worthy of praise, she gives me my meed
liberally.  one strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is, that
even her expostulations, so mi
 
 ___________________________
 
don't understand."

"it is not violence that best overcomes hate--nor vengeance that most
certainly heals injury."

"what then?"

"read the new testament, and observe what christ says, and how he acts;
make his word your rule, and his conduct your example."

"what does he say?"

"love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate
you and despitefully use you."

"then i should love mrs. reed, which i cannot do; i should bless her son
john, which is impossible."

in her turn, helen burns asked me to explain, and i proceeded forthwith
to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.
bitter and truculent when excited, i spoke as i felt, without reserve or
softening.

helen heard me patiently to the end: i expected she would then make a
remark, but she said nothing.

"well," i asked impatiently, "is not mrs. reed a hard-hearted, bad
woman?"

"she has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikes your
cast of character, as miss scatcherd does min
 
 ___________________________
 
 the last: with this creed revenge never
worries my heart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice
never crushes me too low: i live in calm, looking to the end."

helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this
sentence.  i saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, but
rather to converse with her own thoughts.  she was not allowed much time
for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up,
exclaiming in a strong cumberland accent--

"helen burns, if you don't go and put your drawer in order, and fold up
your work this minute, i'll tell miss scatcherd to come and look at it!"

helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor
without reply as without delay.




chapter vii


my first quarter at lowood seemed an age; and not the golden age either;
it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties in habituating myself
to new rules and unwonted tasks.  the fear of failure in these points
harassed me worse than the phys
 
 ___________________________
 
reat girls who sit on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed me
towards the dread judge, and then miss temple gently assisted me to his
very feet, and i caught her whispered counsel--

"don't be afraid, jane, i saw it was an accident; you shall not be
punished."

the kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.

"another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite," thought i; and
an impulse of fury against reed, brocklehurst, and co. bounded in my
pulses at the conviction.  i was no helen burns.

"fetch that stool," said mr. brocklehurst, pointing to a very high one
from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.

"place the child upon it."

and i was placed there, by whom i don't know: i was in no condition to
note particulars; i was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the
height of mr. brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard of me, and
that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and a cloud of
silvery plumage extended and waved below me.

mr. brocklehurst
 
 ___________________________
 
my sensations were
no language can describe; but just as they all rose, stifling my breath
and constricting my throat, a girl came up and passed me: in passing, she
lifted her eyes.  what a strange light inspired them!  what an
extraordinary sensation that ray sent through me!  how the new feeling
bore me up!  it was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or victim,
and imparted strength in the transit.  i mastered the rising hysteria,
lifted up my head, and took a firm stand on the stool.  helen burns asked
some slight question about her work of miss smith, was chidden for the
triviality of the inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled at me as she
again went by.  what a smile!  i remember it now, and i know that it was
the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked
lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from
the aspect of an angel.  yet at that moment helen burns wore on her arm
"the untidy badge;" scarcely an hour ago i had heard her cond
 
 ___________________________
 
ose minute defects, and are blind to
the full brightness of the orb.




chapter viii


ere the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school was dismissed, and
all were gone into the refectory to tea.  i now ventured to descend: it
was deep dusk; i retired into a corner and sat down on the floor.  the
spell by which i had been so far supported began to dissolve; reaction
took place, and soon, so overwhelming was the grief that seized me, i
sank prostrate with my face to the ground.  now i wept: helen burns was
not here; nothing sustained me; left to myself i abandoned myself, and my
tears watered the boards.  i had meant to be so good, and to do so much
at lowood: to make so many friends, to earn respect and win affection.
already i had made visible progress: that very morning i had reached the
head of my class; miss miller had praised me warmly; miss temple had
smiled approbation; she had promised to teach me drawing, and to let me
learn french, if i continued to make similar improvement two mon
 
 ___________________________
 
ern for her.

resting my head on helen's shoulder, i put my arms round her waist; she
drew me to her, and we reposed in silence.  we had not sat long thus,
when another person came in.  some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a
rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming in through
a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which
we at once recognised as miss temple.

"i came on purpose to find you, jane eyre," said she; "i want you in my
room; and as helen burns is with you, she may come too."

we went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had to thread some
intricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached her
apartment; it contained a good fire, and looked cheerful.  miss temple
told helen burns to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of the
hearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her side.

"is it all over?" she asked, looking down at my face.  "have you cried
your grief away?"

"i am afraid i never shall do that."

 
 ___________________________
 
lence; she
then said--

"i know something of mr. lloyd; i shall write to him; if his reply agrees
with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared from every imputation;
to me, jane, you are clear now."

she kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where i was well
contented to stand, for i derived a child's pleasure from the
contemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, her white
forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes), she
proceeded to address helen burns.

"how are you to-night, helen?  have you coughed much to-day?"

"not quite so much, i think, ma'am."

"and the pain in your chest?"

"it is a little better."

miss temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; then she
returned to her own seat: as she resumed it, i heard her sigh low.  she
was pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she said cheerfully--

"but you two are my visitors to-night; i must treat you as such."  she
rang her bell.

"barbara," she said to the servant who an
 
 ___________________________
 
s to the fire; we sat
one on each side of her, and now a conversation followed between her and
helen, which it was indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.

miss temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state in her
mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation
into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something which chastened the
pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her, by a controlling
sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but as to helen burns, i was
struck with wonder.

the refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence and kindness of her
beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than all these, something in her
own unique mind, had roused her powers within her.  they woke, they
kindled: first, they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, which till
this hour i had never seen but pale and bloodless; then they shone in the
liquid lustre of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more
singular than that of miss temple's--a be
 
 ___________________________
 
cely finished ere the bell
announced bedtime! no delay could be admitted; miss temple embraced us
both, saying, as she drew us to her heart--

"god bless you, my children!"

helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more reluctantly;
it was helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second
time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.

on reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of miss scatcherd: she was
examining drawers; she had just pulled out helen burns's, and when we
entered helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow
she should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to her
shoulder.

"my things were indeed in shameful disorder," murmured helen to me, in a
low voice: "i intended to have arranged them, but i forgot."

next morning, miss scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on a piece
of pasteboard the word "slattern," and bound it like a phylactery round
helen's large, mild, intelligent, and benign-look
 
 ___________________________
 
ad a manner which set me at my ease.  some years
older than i, she knew more of the world, and could tell me many things i
liked to hear: with her my curiosity found gratification: to my faults
also she gave ample indulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything i
said.  she had a turn for narrative, i for analysis; she liked to inform,
i to question; so we got on swimmingly together, deriving much
entertainment, if not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.

and where, meantime, was helen burns?  why did i not spend these sweet
days of liberty with her?  had i forgotten her? or was i so worthless as
to have grown tired of her pure society?  surely the mary ann wilson i
have mentioned was inferior to my first acquaintance: she could only tell
me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip i chose
to indulge in; while, if i have spoken truth of helen, she was qualified
to give those who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of far
higher things.

true, reader; a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i knew and felt this: and though i am a defective
being, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet i never tired of
helen burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment of
attachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that ever animated
my heart.  how could it be otherwise, when helen, at all times and under
all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet and faithful friendship, which
ill-humour never soured, nor irritation never troubled?  but helen was
ill at present: for some weeks she had been removed from my sight to i
knew not what room upstairs.  she was not, i was told, in the hospital
portion of the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
or the first time glancing behind, on each
side, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: it felt the one
point where it stood--the present; all the rest was formless cloud and
vacant depth; and it shuddered at the thought of tottering, and plunging
amid that chaos.  while pondering this new idea, i heard the front door
open; mr. bates came out, and with him was a nurse.  after she had seen
him mount his horse and depart, she was about to close the door, but i
ran up to her.

"how is helen burns?"

"very poorly," was the answer.

"is it her mr. bates has been to see?"

"yes."

"and what does he say about her?"

"he says she'll not be here long."

this phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have only conveyed
the notion that she was about to be removed to northumberland, to her own
home.  i should not have suspected that it meant she was dying; but i
knew instantly now!  it opened clear on my comprehension that helen burns
was numbering her last days in this world, and that she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 her, and we both soon slumbered.

when i awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; i looked up; i
was in somebody's arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying me through
the passage back to the dormitory.  i was not reprimanded for leaving my
bed; people had something else to think about; no explanation was
afforded then to my many questions; but a day or two afterwards i learned
that miss temple, on returning to her own room at dawn, had found me laid
in the little crib; my face against helen burns's shoulder, my arms round
her neck.  i was asleep, and helen was--dead.

her grave is in brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years after her
death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marble tablet
marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word "resurgam."




chapter x


hitherto i have recorded in detail the events of my insignificant
existence: to the first ten years of my life i have given almost as many
chapters.  but this is not to be a regular autobiography.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
face sunk in the
pillows: the fire was dying in the grate.  i renewed the fuel,
re-arranged the bedclothes, gazed awhile on her who could not now gaze on
me, and then i moved away to the window.

the rain beat strongly against the panes, the wind blew tempestuously:
"one lies there," i thought, "who will soon be beyond the war of earthly
elements.  whither will that spirit--now struggling to quit its material
tenement--flit when at length released?"

in pondering the great mystery, i thought of helen burns, recalled her
dying words--her faith--her doctrine of the equality of disembodied
souls.  i was still listening in thought to her well-remembered
tones--still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect, her wasted face and
sublime gaze, as she lay on her placid deathbed, and whispered her
longing to be restored to her divine father's bosom--when a feeble voice
murmured from the couch behind: "who is that?"

i knew mrs. reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving?  i went up to
her.

"it is i, a