ess.  i stopped: the sound ceased, only for an instant; it
began again, louder: for at first, though distinct, it was very low.  it
passed off in a clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in every
lonely chamber; though it originated but in one, and i could have pointed
out the door whence the accents issued.

"mrs. fairfax!" i called out: for i now heard her descending the great
stairs.  "did you hear that loud laugh?  who is it?"

"some of the servants, very likely," she answered: "perhaps grace poole."

"did you hear it?" i again inquired.

"yes, plainly: i often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.
sometimes leah is with her; they are frequently noisy together."

the laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in an
odd murmur.

"grace!" exclaimed mrs. fairfax.

i really did not expect any grace to answer; for the laugh was as tragic,
as preternatural a laugh as any i ever heard; and, but that it was high
noon, and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied the c
 
 ___________________________
 
 brothers do; they suffer from
too rigid a restraint, too absolute a stagnation, precisely as men would
suffer; and it is narrow-minded in their more privileged fellow-creatures
to say that they ought to confine themselves to making puddings and
knitting stockings, to playing on the piano and embroidering bags.  it is
thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or
learn more than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.

when thus alone, i not unfrequently heard grace poole's laugh: the same
peal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, had thrilled
me: i heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than her laugh.  there
were days when she was quite silent; but there were others when i could
not account for the sounds she made.  sometimes i saw her: she would come
out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down
to the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romantic reader,
forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearing a 
 
 ___________________________
 
 rather, crouched by my pillow: but i rose, looked round, and
could see nothing; while, as i still gazed, the unnatural sound was
reiterated: and i knew it came from behind the panels.  my first impulse
was to rise and fasten the bolt; my next, again to cry out, "who is
there?"

something gurgled and moaned.  ere long, steps retreated up the gallery
towards the third-storey staircase: a door had lately been made to shut
in that staircase; i heard it open and close, and all was still.

"was that grace poole? and is she possessed with a devil?" thought i.
impossible now to remain longer by myself: i must go to mrs. fairfax.  i
hurried on my frock and a shawl; i withdrew the bolt and opened the door
with a trembling hand.  there was a candle burning just outside, and on
the matting in the gallery.  i was surprised at this circumstance: but
still more was i amazed to perceive the air quite dim, as if filled with
smoke; and, while looking to the right hand and left, to find whence
these blue wreaths i
 
 ___________________________
 
ssued, i became further aware of a strong smell of
burning.

something creaked: it was a door ajar; and that door was mr. rochester's,
and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence.  i thought no more of mrs.
fairfax; i thought no more of grace poole, or the laugh: in an instant, i
was within the chamber.  tongues of flame darted round the bed: the
curtains were on fire.  in the midst of blaze and vapour, mr. rochester
lay stretched motionless, in deep sleep.

"wake! wake!" i cried.  i shook him, but he only murmured and turned: the
smoke had stupefied him.  not a moment could be lost: the very sheets
were kindling, i rushed to his basin and ewer; fortunately, one was wide
and the other deep, and both were filled with water.  i heaved them 
 
 ___________________________
 
ting his candle down on the washstand; "it is as i thought."

"how, sir?"

he made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.
at the end of a few minutes he inquired in rather a peculiar tone--

"i forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber
door."

"no, sir, only the candlestick on the ground."

"but you heard an odd laugh?  you have heard that laugh before, i should
think, or something like it?"

"yes, sir: there is a woman who sews here, called grace poole,--she
laughs in that way.  she is a singular person."

"just so.  grace poole--you have guessed it.  she is, as you say,
singular--very.  well, i shall reflect on the subject.  meantime, i am
glad that you are the only person, besides myself, acquainted with the
precise details of to-night's incident.  you are no talking fool: say
nothing about it.  i will account for this state of affairs" (pointing to
the bed): "and now return to your own room.  i shall do very well on the
sofa in the library
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the room, in going downstairs to dinner, i saw
through the open door that all was again restored to complete order; only
the bed was stripped of its hangings.  leah stood up in the window-seat,
rubbing the panes of glass dimmed with smoke.  i was about to address
her, for i wished to know what account had been given of the affair: but,
on advancing, i saw a second person in the chamber--a woman sitting on a
chair by the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains.  that woman was
no other than grace poole.

there she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuff
gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap.  she was intent on
her work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hard
forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the
paleness or desperation one would have expected to see marking the
countenance of a woman who had attempted murder, and whose intended
victim had followed her last night to her lair, and (as i believed),
charged her wi
 
 ___________________________
 
rter and bit of pudding on a tray, and i'll
carry it upstairs."

"you'll have some meat?"

"just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that's all."

"and the sago?"

"never mind it at present: i shall be coming down before teatime: i'll
make it myself."

the cook here turned to me, saying that mrs. fairfax was waiting for me:
so i departed.

i hardly heard mrs. fairfax's account of the curtain conflagration during
dinner, so much was i occupied in puzzling my brains over the enigmatical
character of grace poole, and still more in pondering the problem of her
position at thornfield and questioning why she had not been given into
custody that morning, or, at the very least, dismissed from her master's
service.  he had almost as much as declared his conviction of her
criminality last night: what mysterious cause withheld him from accusing
her?  why had he enjoined me, too, to secrecy?  it was strange: a bold,
vindictive, and haughty gentleman seemed somehow in the power of one of
the meanest of his depen
 
 ___________________________
 
 language, glance, and tone seemed at the moment
vividly renewed.  i was now in the schoolroom; adele was drawing; i bent
over her and directed her pencil.  she looked up with a sort of start.

"qu' avez-vous, mademoiselle?" said she.  "vos doigts tremblent comme la
feuille, et vos joues sont rouges: mais, rouges comme des cerises!"

"i am hot, adele, with stooping!"  she went on sketching; i went on
thinking.

i hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion i had been conceiving
respecting grace poole; it disgusted me.  i compared myself with her, and
found we were different.  bessie leaven had said i was quite a lady; and
she spoke truth--i was a lady.  and now i looked much better than i did
when bessie saw me; i had more colour and more flesh, more life, more
vivacity, because i had brighter hopes and keener enjoyments.

"evening approaches," said i, as i looked towards the window.  "i have
never heard mr. rochester's voice or step in the house to-day; but surely
i shall see him before ni
 
 ___________________________
 
thursday afternoon, in time for
dinner at six.  during the intervening period i had no time to nurse
chimeras; and i believe i was as active and gay as anybody--adele
excepted.  still, now and then, i received a damping check to my
cheerfulness; and was, in spite of myself, thrown back on the region of
doubts and portents, and dark conjectures.  this was when i chanced to
see the third-storey staircase door (which of late had always been kept
locked) open slowly, and give passage to the form of grace poole, in prim
cap, white apron, and handkerchief; when i watched her glide along the
gallery, her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper; when i saw her look
into the bustling, topsy-turvy bedrooms,--just say a word, perhaps, to
the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate, or clean a marble
mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then pass on.  she
would thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat her dinner, smoke a
moderate pipe on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot of p
 
 ___________________________
 
e you;
but it was not right."

"oh, you have been very correct--very careful, very sensible."

i reflected, and thought, on the whole, i had.  it was a comfort; but,
indeed, i had been on my guard almost from the beginning of the
interview.  something of masquerade i suspected.  i knew gipsies and
fortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old woman had
expressed herself; besides i had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to
conceal her features.  but my mind had been running on grace poole--that
living enigma, that mystery of mysteries, as i considered her.  i had
never thought of mr. rochester.

"well," said he, "what are you musing about?  what does that grave smile
signify?"

"wonder and self-congratulation, sir.  i have your permission to retire
now, i suppose?"

"no; stay a moment; and tell me what the people in the drawing-room
yonder are doing."

"discussing the gipsy, i daresay."

"sit down!--let me hear what they said about me."

"i had better not stay long, sir; it must
 
 ___________________________
 
s. fairfax
showed me over the house: it was hung with tapestry; but the tapestry was
now looped up in one part, and there was a door apparent, which had then
been concealed.  this door was open; a light shone out of the room
within: i heard thence a snarling, snatching sound, almost like a dog
quarrelling.  mr. rochester, putting down his candle, said to me, "wait a
minute," and he went forward to the inner apartment.  a shout of laughter
greeted his entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in grace poole's
own goblin ha! ha!  _she_ then was there.  he made some sort of
arrangement without speaking, though i heard a low voice address him: he
came out and closed the door behind him.

"here, jane!" he said; and i walked round to the other side of a large
bed, which with its drawn curtains concealed a considerable portion of
the chamber.  an easy-chair was near the bed-head: a man sat in it,
dressed with the exception of his coat; he was still; his head leant
back; his eyes were closed.  mr. roches
 
 ___________________________
 
ad done.  he watched me a second, then saying,
"remember!--no conversation," he left the room.  i experienced a strange
feeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sound of his retreating
step ceased to be heard.

here then i was in the third storey, fastened into one of its mystic
cells; night around me; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes and
hands; a murderess hardly separated from me by a single door: yes--that
was appalling--the rest i could bear; but i shuddered at the thought of
grace poole bursting out upon me.

i must keep to my post, however.  i must watch this ghastly
countenance--these blue, still lips forbidden to unclose--these eyes now
shut, now opening, now wandering through the room, now fixing on me, and
ever glazed with the dulness of horror.  i must dip my hand again and
again in the basin of blood and water, and wipe away the trickling gore.
i must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on my employment; the
shadows darken on the wrought, antique tapestry round m
 
 ___________________________
 
clouds
which are sure to melt away as the day waxes warm--this placid and balmly
atmosphere?"

"i do, very much."

"you have passed a strange night, jane."

"yes, sir."

"and it has made you look pale--were you afraid when i left you alone
with mason?"

"i was afraid of some one coming out of the inner room."

"but i had fastened the door--i had the key in my pocket: i should have
been a careless shepherd if i had left a lamb--my pet lamb--so near a
wolf's den, unguarded: you were safe."

"will grace poole live here still, sir?"

"oh yes! don't trouble your head about her--put the thing out of your
thoughts."

"yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays."

"never fear--i will take care of myself."

"is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now, sir?"

"i cannot vouch for that till mason is out of england: nor even then.  to
live, for me, jane, is to stand on a crater-crust which may crack and
spue fire any day."

"but mr. mason seems a man easily led.  your influence, s
 
 ___________________________
 
one answered;
but a form emerged from the closet; it took the light, held it aloft, and
surveyed the garments pendent from the portmanteau.  'sophie!  sophie!'  i
again cried: and still it was silent.  i had risen up in bed, i bent
forward: first surprise, then bewilderment, came over me; and then my
blood crept cold through my veins.  mr. rochester, this was not sophie,
it was not leah, it was not mrs. fairfax: it was not--no, i was sure of
it, and am still--it was not even that strange woman, grace poole."

"it must have been one of them," interrupted my master.

"no, sir, i solemnly assure you to the contrary.  the shape standing
before me had never crossed my eyes within the precincts of thornfield
hall before; the height, the contour were new to me."

"describe it, jane."

"it seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and dark hair
hanging long down her back.  i know not what dress she had on: it was
white and straight; but whether gown, sheet, or shroud, i cannot tell."

"did you see
 
 ___________________________
 
e hastily flung his arms round
me.  "thank god!" he exclaimed, "that if anything malignant did come near
you last night, it was only the veil that was harmed.  oh, to think what
might have happened!"

he drew his breath short, and strained me so close to him, i could
scarcely pant.  after some minutes' silence, he continued, cheerily--

"now, janet, i'll explain to you all about it.  it was half dream, half
reality.  a woman did, i doubt not, enter your room: and that woman
was--must have been--grace poole.  you call her a strange being yourself:
from all you know, you have reason so to call her--what did she do to me?
what to mason?  in a state between sleeping and waking, you noticed her
entrance and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as you were, you
ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her own: the long
dishevelled hair, the swelled black face, the exaggerated stature, were
figments of imagination; results of nightmare: the spiteful tearing of
the veil was real: and it 
 
 ___________________________
 
 passed up the gallery, proceeded to the third storey:
the low, black door, opened by mr. rochester's master-key, admitted us to
the tapestried room, with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet.

"you know this place, mason," said our guide; "she bit and stabbed you
here."

he lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door: this,
too, he opened.  in a room without a window, there burnt a fire guarded
by a high and strong fender, and a lamp suspended from the ceiling by a
chain.  grace poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking something in a
saucepan.  in the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figure
ran backwards and forwards.  what it was, whether beast or human being,
one could not, at first sight, tell: it grovelled, seemingly, on all
fours; it snatched and growled like some strange wild animal: but it was
covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a
mane, hid its head and face.

"good-morrow, mrs. poole!" said mr. rochester.  "how are y
 
 ___________________________
 
three gentlemen retreated simultaneously.  mr.
rochester flung me behind him: the lunatic sprang and grappled his throat
viciously, and laid her teeth to his cheek: they struggled.  she was a
big woman, in stature almost equalling her husband, and corpulent
besides: she showed virile force in the contest--more than once she
almost throttled him, athletic as he was.  he could have settled her with
a well-planted blow; but he would not strike: he would only wrestle.  at
last he mastered her arms; grace poole gave him a cord, and he pinioned
them behind her: with more rope, which was at hand, he bound her to a
chair.  the operation was performed amidst the fiercest yells and the
most convulsive plunges.  mr. rochester then turned to the spectators: he
looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.

"that is _my wife_," said he.  "such is the sole conjugal embrace i am
ever to know--such are the endearments which are to solace my leisure
hours!  and _this_ is what i wished to have" (laying his 
 
 ___________________________
 
king collectedly at the gambols of a demon, i wanted her just
as a change after that fierce ragout.  wood and briggs, look at the
difference!  compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder--this
face with that mask--this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of
the gospel and man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judge
ye shall be judged!  off with you now.  i must shut up my prize."

we all withdrew.  mr. rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some
further order to grace poole.  the solicitor addressed me as he descended
the stair.

"you, madam," said he, "are cleared from all blame: your uncle will be
glad to hear it--if, indeed, he should be still living--when mr. mason
returns to madeira."

"my uncle!  what of him?  do you know him?"

"mr. mason does.  mr. eyre has been the funchal correspondent of his
house for some years.  when your uncle received your letter intimating
the contemplated union between yourself and mr. rochester, mr. mason, who
was staying at made
 
 ___________________________
 
.  glad was i when i at last got her to thornfield,
and saw her safely lodged in that third-storey room, of whose secret
inner cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast's den--a
goblin's cell.  i had some trouble in finding an attendant for her, as it
was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could be placed;
for her ravings would inevitably betray my secret: besides, she had lucid
intervals of days--sometimes weeks--which she filled up with abuse of me.
at last i hired grace poole from the grimbsy retreat.  she and the
surgeon, carter (who dressed mason's wounds that night he was stabbed and
worried), are the only two i have ever admitted to my confidence.  mrs.
fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but she could have gained no
precise knowledge as to facts.  grace has, on the whole, proved a good
keeper; though, owing partly to a fault of her own, of which it appears
nothing can cure her, and which is incident to her harassing profession,
her vigilance has been m