heir subtle violence as it had never felt
frost or fire; but i was collected, and in no danger of swooning.  i
looked at mr. rochester: i made him look at me.  his whole face was
colourless rock: his eye was both spark and flint.  he disavowed nothing:
he seemed as if he would defy all things.  without speaking, without
smiling, without seeming to recognise in me a human being, he only twined
my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side.

"who are you?" he asked of the intruder.

"my name is briggs, a solicitor of --- street, london."

"and you would thrust on me a wife?"

"i would remind you of your lady's existence, sir, which the law
recognises, if you do not."

"favour me with an account of her--with her name, her parentage, her
place of abode."

"certainly."  mr. briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket, and read
out in a sort of official, nasal voice:--

"'i affirm and can prove that on the 20th of october a.d. --- (a date of
fifteen years back), edward fairfax rochester, of thorn
 
 ___________________________
 
nd she came
of a mad family; idiots and maniacs through three generations!  her
mother, the creole, was both a madwoman and a drunkard!--as i found out
after i had wed the daughter: for they were silent on family secrets
before.  bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
i had a charming partner--pure, wise, modest: you can fancy i was a happy
man.  i went through rich scenes!  oh! my experience has been heavenly,
if you only knew it!  but i owe you no further explanation.  briggs,
wood, mason, i invite you all to come up to the house and visit mrs.
poole's patient, and _my wife_!  you shall see what sort of a being i was
cheated into espousing, and judge whether or not i had a right to break
the compact, and seek sympathy with something at least human.  this
girl," he continued, looking at me, "knew no more than you, wood, of the
disgusting secret: she thought all was fair and legal and never dreamt
she was going to be entrapped into a feigned union with a defrauded
wre
 
 ___________________________
 
rochester then turned to the spectators: he
looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.

"that is _my wife_," said he.  "such is the sole conjugal embrace i am
ever to know--such are the endearments which are to solace my leisure
hours!  and _this_ is what i wished to have" (laying his hand on my
shoulder): "this young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth
of hell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon, i wanted her just
as a change after that fierce ragout.  wood and briggs, look at the
difference!  compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder--this
face with that mask--this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of
the gospel and man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judge
ye shall be judged!  off with you now.  i must shut up my prize."

we all withdrew.  mr. rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some
further order to grace poole.  the solicitor addressed me as he descended
the stair.

"you, madam," said he, "are cleared from all bl
 
 ___________________________
 
an event
transpired which rendered inquiry after the governess necessary, it was
discovered she was gone--no one could tell when, where, or how.  she had
left thornfield hall in the night; every research after her course had
been vain: the country had been scoured far and wide; no vestige of
information could be gathered respecting her.  yet that she should be
found is become a matter of serious urgency: advertisements have been put
in all the papers; i myself have received a letter from one mr. briggs, a
solicitor, communicating the details i have just imparted.  is it not an
odd tale?"

"just tell me this," said i, "and since you know so much, you surely can
tell it me--what of mr. rochester?  how and where is he?  what is he
doing?  is he well?"

"i am ignorant of all concerning mr. rochester: the letter never mentions
him but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt i have adverted to.
you should rather ask the name of the governess--the nature of the event
which requires her appeara
 
 ___________________________
 
nce."

"did no one go to thornfield hall, then?  did no one see mr. rochester?"

"i suppose not."

"but they wrote to him?"

"of course."

"and what did he say?  who has his letters?"

"mr. briggs intimates that the answer to his application was not from mr.
rochester, but from a lady: it is signed 'alice fairfax.'"

i felt cold and dismayed: my worst fears then were probably true: he had
in all probability left england and rushed in reckless desperation to
some former haunt on the continent.  and what opiate for his severe
sufferings--what object for his strong passions--had he sought there?  i
dared not answer the question.  oh, my poor master--once almost my
husband--whom i had often 
 
 ___________________________
 
ished margin of the
portrait-cover.  he got up, held it close to my eyes: and i read, traced
in indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words "jane eyre"--the work
doubtless of some moment of abstraction.

"briggs wrote to me of a jane eyre:" he said, "the advertisements
demanded a jane eyre: i knew a jane elliott.--i confess i had my
suspicions, but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once
resolved into certainty.  you own the name and renounce the _alias_?"

"yes--yes; but where is mr. briggs?  he perhaps knows more of mr.
rochester than you do."

"briggs is in london.  i should doubt his knowing anything at all about
mr. rochester; it is not in mr. rochester he is interested.  meantime,
you forget essential points in pursuing trifles: you do not inquire why
mr. briggs sought after you--what he wanted with you."

"well, what did he want?"

"merely to tell you that your uncle, mr. eyre of madeira, is dead; that
he has left you all his property, and that you are now rich--merely
that-
 
 ___________________________
 
-nothing more."

"i!--rich?"

"yes, you, rich--quite an heiress."

silence succeeded.

"you must prove your identity of course," resumed st. john presently: "a
step which will offer no difficulties; you can then enter on immediate
possession.  your fortune is vested in the english funds; briggs has the
will and the necessary documents."

here was a new card turned up!  it is a fine thing, reader, to be lifted
in a moment from indigence to wealth--a very fine thing; but not a matter
one can comprehend, or consequently enjoy, all at once.  and then there
are other chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-giving: _this_
is solid, an affair of the actual world, nothing ideal about it: all its
associations are solid and sober, and its manifestations are the same.
one does not jump, a
 
 ___________________________
 
visions for
a hundred.  mr. rivers rose now and put his cloak on.

"if it were not such a very wild night," he said, "i would send hannah
down to keep you company: you look too desperately miserable to be left
alone.  but hannah, poor woman! could not stride the drifts so well as i:
her legs are not quite so long: so i must e'en leave you to your sorrows.
good-night."

he was lifting the latch: a sudden thought occurred to me.  "stop one
minute!" i cried.

"well?"

"it puzzles me to know why mr. briggs wrote to you about me; or how he
knew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-way
place, had the power to aid in my discovery."

"oh!  i am a clergyman," he said; "and the clergy are often appealed to
about odd matters."  again the latch rattled.

"no; that does not satisfy me!" i exclaimed: and indeed there was
something in the hasty and unexplanatory reply which, instead of
allaying, piqued my curiosity more than ever.

"it is a very strange piece of business," i added; "i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 chain that had been
lying hitherto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight,--every
ring was perfect, the connection complete.  i knew, by instinct, how the
matter stood, before st. john had said another word; but i cannot expect
the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so i must repeat his
explanation.

"my mother's name was eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, who
married miss jane reed, of gateshead; the other, john eyre, esq.,
merchant, late of funchal, madeira.  mr. briggs, being mr. eyre's
solicitor, wrote to us last august to inform us of our uncle's death, and
to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman's
orphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, never
forgiven, between him and my father.  he wrote again a few weeks since,
to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anything of
her.  a name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find
her out.  you know the rest."  again he was going, but
 
 ___________________________
 
or a moment.  his idea was still with
me, because it was not a vapour sunshine could disperse, nor a
sand-traced effigy storms could wash away; it was a name graven on a
tablet, fated to last as long as the marble it inscribed.  the craving to
know what had become of him followed me everywhere; when i was at morton,
i re-entered my cottage every evening to think of that; and now at moor
house, i sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.

in the course of my necessary correspondence with mr. briggs about the
will, i had inquired if he knew anything of mr. rochester's present
residence and state of health; but, as st. john had conjectured, he was
quite ignorant of all concerning him.  i then wrote to mrs. fairfax,
entreating information on the subject.  i had calculated with certainty
on this step answering my end: i felt sure it would elicit an early
answer.  i was astonished when a fortnight passed without reply; but when
two months wore away, and day after day the post arrived and broug
 
 ___________________________
 
rther my lessons in hindostanee, and
grew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment: and i, like a fool,
never thought of resisting him--i could not resist him.

one day i had come to my studies in lower spirits than usual; the ebb was
occasioned by a poignantly felt disappointment.  hannah had told me in
the morning there was a letter for me, and when i went down to take it,
almost certain that the long-looked for tidings were vouchsafed me at
last, i found only an unimportant note from mr. briggs on business.  the
bitter check had wrung from me some tears; and now, as i sat poring over
the crabbed characters and flourishing tropes of an indian scribe, my
eyes filled again.

st. john called me to his side to read; in attempting to do this my voice
failed me: words were lost in sobs.  he and i were the only occupants of
the parlour: diana was practising her music in the drawing-room, mary was
gardening--it was a very fine may day, clear, sunny, and breezy.  my
companion expressed no surpr