 loss with mademoiselle
adela.  she came and shook hand with me when she heard that i was her
governess; and as i led her in to breakfast, i addressed some phrases to
her in her own tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we were
seated at the table, and she had examined me some ten minutes with her
large hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.

"ah!" cried she, in french, "you speak my language as well as mr.
rochester does: i can talk to you as i can to him, and so can sophie.  she
will be glad: nobody here understands her: madame fairfax is all english.
sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a
chimney that smoked--how it did smoke!--and i was sick, and so was
sophie, and so was mr. rochester.  mr. rochester lay down on a sofa in a
pretty room called the salon, and sophie and i had little beds in another
place.  i nearly fell out of mine; it was like a shelf.  and
mademoiselle--what is your name?"

"eyre--jane eyre."

"aire?  bah!  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
cannot say it.  well, our ship stopped in the morning,
before it was quite daylight, at a great city--a huge city, with very
dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town i came
from; and mr. rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to the land,
and sophie came after, and we all got into a coach, which took us to a
beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called an hotel.  we
stayed there nearly a week: i and sophie used to walk every day in a
great green place full of trees, called the park; and there were many
children there besides me, and a pond with beautiful birds in it, that i
fed with crumbs."

"can you understand her when she runs on so fast?" asked mrs. fairfax.

i understood her very well, for i had been accustomed to the fluent
tongue of madame pierrot.

"i wish," continued the good lady, "you would ask her a question or two
about her parents: i wonder if she remembers them?"

"adele," i inquir
 
 ___________________________
 
nerally (oh, romantic reader,
forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearing a pot of porter.  her
appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral
oddities: hard-featured and staid, she had no point to which interest
could attach.  i made some attempts to draw her into conversation, but
she seemed a person of few words: a monosyllabic reply usually cut short
every effort of that sort.

the other members of the household, viz., john and his wife, leah the
housemaid, and sophie the french nurse, were decent people; but in no
respect remarkable; with sophie i used to talk french, and sometimes i
asked her questions about her native country; but she was not of a
descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused
answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.

october, november, december passed away.  one afternoon in january, mrs.
fairfax had begged a holiday for adele, because she had a cold; and, as
adele seconded the request
 
 ___________________________
 
while talking to you, i have also occasionally
watched adele (i have my own reasons for thinking her a curious
study,--reasons that i may, nay, that i shall, impart to you some day).
she pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silk
frock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry runs in her
blood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones.  'il
faut que je l'essaie!' cried she, 'et a l'instant meme!' and she rushed
out of the room.  she is now with sophie, undergoing a robing process: in
a few minutes she will re-enter; and i know what i shall see,--a
miniature of celine varens, as she used to appear on the boards at the
rising of--but never mind that.  however, my tenderest feelings are about
to receive a shock: such is my presentiment; stay now, to see whether it
will be realised."

ere long, adele's little foot was heard tripping across the hall.  she
entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.  a dress of
rose-coloured satin, very sh
 
 ___________________________
 
you dare!'

"'i will like it,' said i; 'i dare like it;' and" (he subjoined moodily)
"i will keep my word; i will break obstacles to happiness, to
goodness--yes, goodness.  i wish to be a better man than i have been,
than i am; as job's leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and the
habergeon, hindrances which others count as iron and brass, i will esteem
but straw and rotten wood."

adele here ran before him with her shuttlecock.  "away!" he cried
harshly; "keep at a distance, child; or go in to sophie!"  continuing
then to pursue his walk in silence, i ventured to recall him to the point
whence he had abruptly diverged--

"did you leave the balcony, sir," i asked, "when mdlle. varens entered?"

i almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timed question, but, on
the contrary, waking out of his scowling abstraction, he turned his eyes
towards me, and the shade seemed to clear off his brow.  "oh, i had
forgotten celine!  well, to resume.  when i saw my charmer thus come in
accompanied by a 
 
 ___________________________
 
had more colour and more flesh, more life, more
vivacity, because i had brighter hopes and keener enjoyments.

"evening approaches," said i, as i looked towards the window.  "i have
never heard mr. rochester's voice or step in the house to-day; but surely
i shall see him before night: i feared the meeting in the morning; now i
desire it, because expectation has been so long baffled that it is grown
impatient."

when dusk actually closed, and when adele left me to go and play in the
nursery with sophie, i did most keenly desire it.  i listened for the
bell to ring below; i listened for leah coming up with a message; i
fancied sometimes i heard mr. rochester's own tread, and i turned to the
door, expecting it to open and admit him.  the door remained shut;
darkness only came in through the window.  still it was not late; he
often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock, and it was yet but six.
surely i should not be wholly disappointed to-night, when i had so many
things to say to him!  i wante
 
 ___________________________
 
ars i was mistaken.  three women were got to help; and such
scrubbing, such brushing, such washing of paint and beating of carpets,
such taking down and putting up of pictures, such polishing of mirrors
and lustres, such lighting of fires in bedrooms, such airing of sheets
and feather-beds on hearths, i never beheld, either before or since.
adele ran quite wild in the midst of it: the preparations for company and
the prospect of their arrival, seemed to throw her into ecstasies.  she
would have sophie to look over all her "toilettes," as she called frocks;
to furbish up any that were "_passees_," and to air and arrange the new.
for herself, she did nothing but caper about in the front chambers, jump
on and off the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses and piled-up bolsters
and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in the chimneys.  from
school duties she was exonerated: mrs. fairfax had pressed me into her
service, and i was all day in the storeroom, helping (or hindering) her
and the coo
 
 ___________________________
 
ghtness
of glass; in the dining-room, the sideboard flashed resplendent with
plate; in the drawing-room and boudoir, vases of exotics bloomed on all
sides.

afternoon arrived: mrs. fairfax assumed her best black satin gown, her
gloves, and her gold watch; for it was her part to receive the
company,--to conduct the ladies to their rooms, &c.  adele, too, would be
dressed: though i thought she had little chance of being introduced to
the party that day at least.  however, to please her, i allowed sophie to
apparel her in one of her short, full muslin frocks.  for myself, i had
no need to make any change; i should not be called upon to quit my
sanctum of the schoolroom; for a sanctum it was now become to me,--"a
very pleasant refuge in time of trouble."

it had been a mild, serene spring day--one of those days which, towards
the end of march or the beginning of april, rise shining over the earth
as heralds of summer.  it was drawing to an end now; but the evening was
even warm, and i sat at wor
 
 ___________________________
 
choolroom door, which she held ajar.
"what beautiful ladies!" cried she in english.  "oh, i wish i might go to
them!  do you think mr. rochester will send for us by-and-bye, after
dinner?"

"no, indeed, i don't; mr. rochester has something else to think about.
never mind the ladies to-night; perhaps you will see them to-morrow: here
is your dinner."

she was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to divert her
attention for a time.  it was well i secured this forage, or both she, i,
and sophie, to whom i conveyed a share of our repast, would have run a
chance of getting no dinner at all: every one downstairs was too much
engaged to think of us.  the dessert was not carried out till after nine
and at ten footmen were still running to and fro with trays and coffee-
cups.  i allowed adele to sit up much later than usual; for she declared
she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and
shutting below, and people bustling about.  besides, she added, a message
might pos
 
 ___________________________
 
aster
recess, sir george lynn, who was lately elected member for millcote, will
have to go up to town and take his seat; i daresay mr. rochester will
accompany him: it surprises me that he has already made so protracted a
stay at thornfield."

it was with some trepidation that i perceived the hour approach when i
was to repair with my charge to the drawing-room.  adele had been in a
state of ecstasy all day, after hearing she was to be presented to the
ladies in the evening; and it was not till sophie commenced the operation
of dressing her that she sobered down.  then the importance of the
process quickly steadied her, and by the time she had her curls arranged
in well-smoothed, drooping clusters, her pink satin frock put on, her
long sash tied, and her lace mittens adjusted, she looked as grave as any
judge.  no need to warn her not to disarrange her attire: when she was
dressed, she sat demurely down in her little chair, taking care
previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she shoul
 
 ___________________________
 
 are: so much depressed that a few more words would
bring tears to your eyes--indeed, they are there now, shining and
swimming; and a bead has slipped from the lash and fallen on to the flag.
if i had time, and was not in mortal dread of some prating prig of a
servant passing, i would know what all this means.  well, to-night i
excuse you; but understand that so long as my visitors stay, i expect you
to appear in the drawing-room every evening; it is my wish; don't neglect
it.  now go, and send sophie for adele.  good-night, my--"  he stopped,
bit his lip, and abruptly left me.




chapter xviii


merry days were these at thornfield hall; and busy days too: how
different from the first three months of stillness, monotony, and
solitude i had passed beneath its roof!  all sad feelings seemed now
driven from the house, all gloomy associations forgotten: there was life
everywhere, movement all day long.  you could not now traverse the
gallery, once so hushed, nor enter the front chambers, once s
 
 ___________________________
 
leave him calmly.  an impulse held me fast--a force turned me round.  i
said--or something in me said for me, and in spite of me--

"thank you, mr. rochester, for your great kindness.  i am strangely glad
to get back again to you: and wherever you are is my home--my only home."

i walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had he
tried.  little adele was half wild with delight when she saw me.  mrs.
fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness.  leah smiled, and
even sophie bid me "bon soir" with glee.  this was very pleasant; there
is no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow-creatures, and
feeling that your presence is an addition to their comfort.

i that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future: i stopped my
ears against the voice that kept warning me of near separation and coming
grief.  when tea was over and mrs. fairfax had taken her knitting, and i
had assumed a low seat near her, and adele, kneeling on the carpet, had
nestled close up
 
 ___________________________
 
 tea, thinking of
you; and i beheld you in imagination so near me, i scarcely missed your
actual presence.  i thought of the life that lay before me--_your_ life,
sir--an existence more expansive and stirring than my own: as much more
so as the depths of the sea to which the brook runs are than the shallows
of its own strait channel.  i wondered why moralists call this world a
dreary wilderness: for me it blossomed like a rose.  just at sunset, the
air turned cold and the sky cloudy: i went in, sophie called me upstairs
to look at my wedding-dress, which they had just brought; and under it in
the box i found your present--the veil which, in your princely
extravagance, you sent for from london: resolved, i suppose, since i
would not have jewels, to cheat me into accepting something as costly.  i
smiled as i unfolded it, and devised how i would tease you about your
aristocratic tastes, and your efforts to masque your plebeian bride in
the attributes of a peeress.  i thought how i would carry d
 
 ___________________________
 
 lessening every moment.
the blast blew so strong i could not stand.  i sat down on the narrow
ledge; i hushed the scared infant in my lap: you turned an angle of the
road: i bent forward to take a last look; the wall crumbled; i was
shaken; the child rolled from my knee, i lost my balance, fell, and
woke."

"now, jane, that is all."

"all the preface, sir; the tale is yet to come.  on waking, a gleam
dazzled my eyes; i thought--oh, it is daylight!  but i was mistaken; it
was only candlelight.  sophie, i supposed, had come in.  there was a
light in the dressing-table, and the door of the closet, where, before
going to bed, i had hung my wedding-dress and veil, stood open; i heard a
rustling there.  i asked, 'sophie, what are you doing?'  no one answered;
but a form emerged from the closet; it took the light, held it aloft, and
surveyed the garments pendent from the portmanteau.  'sophie!  sophie!'  i
again cried: and still it was silent.  i had risen up in bed, i bent
forward: first surprise
 
 ___________________________
 
, then bewilderment, came over me; and then my
blood crept cold through my veins.  mr. rochester, this was not sophie,
it was not leah, it was not mrs. fairfax: it was not--no, i was sure of
it, and am still--it was not even that strange woman, grace poole."

"it must have been one of them," interrupted my master.

"no, sir, i solemnly assure you to the contrary.  the shape standing
before me had never crossed my eyes within the precincts of thornfield
hall before; the height, the contour were new to me."

"describe it, jane."

"it seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and dark hair
hanging long dow
 
 ___________________________
 
d it is like her.  i see you would ask why i keep
such a woman in my house: when we have been married a year and a day, i
will tell you; but not now.  are you satisfied, jane?  do you accept my
solution of the mystery?"

i reflected, and in truth it appeared to me the only possible one:
satisfied i was not, but to please him i endeavoured to appear
so--relieved, i certainly did feel; so i answered him with a contented
smile.  and now, as it was long past one, i prepared to leave him.

"does not sophie sleep with adele in the nursery?" he asked, as i lit my
candle.

"yes, sir."

"and there is room enough in adele's little bed for you.  you must share
it with her to-night, jane: it is no wonder that the incident you have
related should make you nervous, and i would rather you did not sleep
alone: promise me to go to the nursery."

"i shall be very glad to do so, sir."

"and fasten the door securely on the inside.  wake sophie when you go
upstairs, under pretence of requesting her to rouse you 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted for the coming day: all my life was
awake and astir in my frame: and as soon as the sun rose i rose too.  i
remember adele clung to me as i left her: i remember i kissed her as i
loosened her little hands from my neck; and i cried over her with strange
emotion, and quitted her because i feared my sobs would break her still
sound repose.  she seemed the emblem of my past life; and here i was now
to array myself to meet, the dread, but adored, type of my unknown future
day.




chapter xxvi


sophie came at seven to dress me: she was very long indeed in
accomplishing her task; so long that mr. rochester, grown, i suppose,
impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why i did not come.  she was just
fastening my veil (the plain square of blond after all) to my hair with a
brooch; i hurried from under her hands as soon as i could.

"stop!" she cried in french.  "look at yourself in the mirror: you have
not taken one peep."

so i turned at the door: i saw a robed and veiled figure, so unlike my
usu
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
disgusting secret: she thought all was fair and legal and never dreamt
she was going to be entrapped into a feigned union with a defrauded
wretch, already bound to a bad, mad, and embruted partner!  come all of
you--follow!"

still holding me fast, he left the church: the three gentlemen came
after.  at the front door of the hall we found the carriage.

"take it back to the coach-house, john," said mr. rochester coolly; "it
will not be wanted to-day."

at our entrance, mrs. fairfax, adele, sophie, leah, advanced to meet and
greet us.

"to the right-about--every soul!" cried the master; "away with your
congratulations!  who wants them?  not i!--they are fifteen years too
late!"

he passed on and ascended the stairs, still holding my hand, and still
beckoning the gentlemen to follow him, which they did.  we mounted the
first staircase, passed up the gallery, proceeded to the third storey:
the low, black door, opened by mr. rochester's master-key, admitted us to
the tapestried room, with i