nd cheek, loving him, being loved by him--the hope of
passing a lifetime at his side, would be renewed, with all its first
force and fire.  then i awoke.  then i recalled where i was, and how
situated.  then i rose up on my curtainless bed, trembling and quivering;
and then the still, dark night witnessed the convulsion of despair, and
heard the burst of passion.  by nine o'clock the next morning i was
punctually opening the school; tranquil, settled, prepared for the steady
duties of the day.

rosamond oliver kept her word in coming to visit me.  her call at the
school was generally made in the course of her morning ride.  she would
canter up to the door on her pony, followed by a mounted livery servant.
anything more exquisite than her appearance, in her purple habit, with
her amazon's cap of black velvet placed gracefully above the long curls
that kissed her cheek and floated to her shoulders, can scarcely be
imagined: and it was thus she would enter the rustic building, and glide
through the dazz
 
 ___________________________
 
e 5th of november, and a holiday.  my little servant, after
helping me to clean my house, was gone, well satisfied with the fee of a
penny for her aid.  all about me was spotless and bright--scoured floor,
polished grate, and well-rubbed chairs.  i had also made myself neat, and
had now the afternoon before me to spend as i would.

the translation of a few pages of german occupied an hour; then i got my
palette and pencils, and fell to the more soothing, because easier
occupation, of completing rosamond oliver's miniature.  the head was
finished already: there was but the background to tint and the drapery to
shade off; a touch of carmine, too, to add to the ripe lips--a soft curl
here and there to the tresses--a deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash
under the azured eyelid.  i was absorbed in the execution of these nice
details, when, after one rapid tap, my door unclosed, admitting st. john
rivers.

"i am come to see how you are spending your holiday," he said.  "not, i
hope, in thought?  no, that
 
 ___________________________
 
ne such hard things.  fancy me yielding and melting, as i am
doing: human love rising like a freshly opened fountain in my mind and
overflowing with sweet inundation all the field i have so carefully and
with such labour prepared--so assiduously sown with the seeds of good
intentions, of self-denying plans.  and now it is deluged with a
nectarous flood--the young germs swamped--delicious poison cankering
them: now i see myself stretched on an ottoman in the drawing-room at
vale hall at my bride rosamond oliver's feet: she is talking to me with
her sweet voice--gazing down on me with those eyes your skilful hand has
copied so well--smiling at me with these coral lips.  she is mine--i am
hers--this present life and passing world suffice to me.  hush! say
nothing--my heart is full of delight--my senses are entranced--let the
time i marked pass in peace."

i humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast and low: i stood
silent.  amidst this hush the quartet sped; he replaced the watch, laid
the pic
 
 ___________________________
 
ture down, rose, and stood on the hearth.

"now," said he, "that little space was given to delirium and delusion.  i
rested my temples on the breast of temptation, and put my neck
voluntarily under her yoke of flowers.  i tasted her cup.  the pillow was
burning: there is an asp in the garland: the wine has a bitter taste: her
promises are hollow--her offers false: i see and know all this."

i gazed at him in wonder.

"it is strange," pursued he, "that while i love rosamond oliver so
wildly--with all the intensity, indeed, of a first passion, the object of
which is exquisitely beautiful, graceful, fascinating--i experience at
the same time a calm, unwarped consciousness that she would not make me a
good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me; that i should
discover this within a year after marriage; and that to twelve months'
rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret.  this i know."

"strange indeed!" i could not help ejaculating.

"while something in me," he we
 
 ___________________________
 
rebuke our
vivacity; but he escaped from it: he was seldom in the house; his parish
was large, the population scattered, and he found daily business in
visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.

one morning at breakfast, diana, after looking a little pensive for some
minutes, asked him, "if his plans were yet unchanged."

"unchanged and unchangeable," was the reply.  and he proceeded to inform
us that his departure from england was now definitively fixed for the
ensuing year.

"and rosamond oliver?" suggested mary, the words seeming to escape her
lips involuntarily: for no sooner had she uttered them, than she made a
gesture as if wishing to recall them.  st. john had a book in his hand--it
was his unsocial custom to read at meals--he closed it, and looked up.

"rosamond oliver," said he, "is about to be married to mr. granby, one of
the best connected and most estimable residents in s-, grandson and heir
to sir frederic granby: i had the intelligence from her father
yesterday."

his sis