d at the bed-
foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near my
pillow, leaning over me.

i felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection and
security, when i knew that there was a stranger in the room, an
individual not belonging to gateshead, and not related to mrs. reed.
turning from bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to me
than that of abbot, for instance, would have been), i scrutinised the
face of the gentleman: i knew him; it was mr. lloyd, an apothecary,
sometimes called in by mrs. reed when the servants were ailing: for
herself and the children she employed a physician.

"well, who am i?" he asked.

i pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he took it,
smiling and saying, "we shall do very well by-and-by."  then he laid me
down, and addressing bessie, charged her to be very careful that i was
not disturbed during the night.  having given some further directions,
and intimates that he should call again the ne
 
 ___________________________
 
dare say i should think them shrewd now: he had a
hard-featured yet good-natured looking face.  having considered me at
leisure, he said--

"what made you ill yesterday?"

"she had a fall," said bessie, again putting in her word.

"fall! why, that is like a baby again!  can't she manage to walk at her
age?  she must be eight or nine years old."

"i was knocked down," was the blunt explanation, jerked out of me by
another pang of mortified pride; "but that did not make me ill," i added;
while mr. lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.

as he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rang for
the servants' dinner; he knew what it was.  "that's for you, nurse," said
he; "you can go down; i'll give miss jane a lecture till you come back."

bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because
punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at gateshead hall.

"the fall did not make you ill; what did, then?" pursued mr. lloyd when
bessie was gone.

"i was shut up in a 
 
 ___________________________
 
room where there is a ghost till after dark."

i saw mr. lloyd smile and frown at the same time.

"ghost!  what, you are a baby after all!  you are afraid of ghosts?"

"of mr. reed's ghost i am: he died in that room, and was laid out there.
neither bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, if they can
help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without a candle,--so cruel
that i think i shall never forget it."

"nonsense!  and is it that makes you so miserable?  are you afraid now in
daylight?"

"no: but night will come again before long: and bes
 
 ___________________________
 
 thought, they know
not how to express the result of the process in words.  fearful, however,
of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by
imparting it, i, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meagre,
though, as far as it went, true response.

"for one thing, i have no father or mother, brothers or sisters."

"you have a kind aunt and cousins."

again i paused; then bunglingly enounced--

"but john reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red-room."

mr. lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

"don't you think gateshead hall a very beautiful house?" asked he.  "are
you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?"

"it is not my house, sir; and abbot says i have less right to be here
than a servant."

"pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?"

"if i had anywhere else to go, i should be glad to leave it; but i can
never get away from gateshead till i am a woman."

"perhaps you may--who knows?  have you a
 
 ___________________________
 
iful paintings of landscapes and
flowers by them executed; of songs they could sing and pieces they could
play, of purses they could net, of french books they could translate;
till my spirit was moved to emulation as i listened.  besides, school
would be a complete change: it implied a long journey, an entire
separation from gateshead, an entrance into a new life.

"i should indeed like to go to school," was the audible conclusion of my
musings.

"well, well! who knows what may happen?" said mr. lloyd, as he got up.
"the child ought to have change of air and scene," he added, speaking to
himself; "nerves not in a good state."

bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up
the gravel-walk.

"is that your mistress, nurse?" asked mr. lloyd.  "i should like to speak
to her before i go."

bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the way out.
in the interview which followed between him and mrs. reed, i presume,
from after-occurrences, that the apothec
 
 ___________________________
 
tle toad as that."

"not a great deal, to be sure," agreed bessie: "at any rate, a beauty
like miss georgiana would be more moving in the same condition."

"yes, i doat on miss georgiana!" cried the fervent abbot.  "little
darling!--with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweet colour
as she has; just as if she were painted!--bessie, i could fancy a welsh
rabbit for supper."

"so could i--with a roast onion.  come, we'll go down."  they went.




chapter iv


from my discourse with mr. lloyd, and from the above reported conference
between bessie and abbot, i gathered enough of hope to suffice as a
motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,--i desired and
waited it in silence.  it tarried, however: days and weeks passed: i had
regained my normal state of health, but no new allusion was made to the
subject over which i brooded.  mrs. reed surveyed me at times with a
severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my illness, she had drawn a
more marked line of separation than e
 
 ___________________________
 
to arrange
coherently what i had to say, i told her all the story of my sad
childhood.  exhausted by emotion, my language was more subdued than it
generally was when it developed that sad theme; and mindful of helen's
warnings against the indulgence of resentment, i infused into the
narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary.  thus restrained
and simplified, it sounded more credible: i felt as i went on that miss
temple fully believed me.

in the course of the tale i had mentioned mr. lloyd as having come to see
me after the fit: for i never forgot the, to me, frightful episode of the
red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure, in some degree, to
break bounds; for nothing could soften in my recollection the spasm of
agony which clutched my heart when mrs. reed spurned my wild supplication
for pardon, and locked me a second time in the dark and haunted chamber.

i had finished: miss temple regarded me a few minutes in silence; she
then said--

"i know something of mr. llo
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deserved
punishment.  the moment miss scatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, i
ran to helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which
she was incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and
large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her
sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.

about a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, miss temple,
who had written to mr. lloyd, received his answer: it appeared that what
he said went to corroborate my account.  miss temple, having assembled
the whole school, announced that inquiry had been made into the charges
alleged against jane eyre, and that she was most happy to be able to
pronounce her completely cleared from every imputation.  the teachers
then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a murmur of pleasure ran
through the ranks of my companions.

thus relieved of a grievous load, i from that hour set to work afre