 john?"

"nay; he doesn't live here: he is only staying a while.  when he is at
home, he is in his own parish at morton."

"that village a few miles off?

"aye."

"and what is he?"

"he is a parson."

i remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage, when i
had asked to see the clergyman.  "this, then, was his father's
residence?"

"aye; old mr. rivers lived here, and his father, and grandfather, and
gurt (great) grandfather afore him."

"the name, then, of that gentleman, is mr. st. john rivers?"

"aye; st. john is like his kirstened name."

"and his sisters are called diana and mary rivers?"

"yes."

"their father is dead?"

"dead three weeks sin' of a stroke."

"they have no mother?"

"the mistress has been dead this mony a year."

"have you lived with the family long?"

"i've lived here thirty year.  i nursed them all three."

"that proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant.  i will
say so much for you, though you have had the incivility to call me a
beggar."

she ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ion--were frequent; and each
reference to these points sounded like a sentence pronounced for doom.
when he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightened by
his discourse, i experienced an inexpressible sadness; for it seemed to
me--i know not whether equally so to others--that the eloquence to which
i had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of
disappointment--where moved troubling impulses of insatiate yearnings and
disquieting aspirations.  i was sure st. john rivers--pure-lived,
conscientious, zealous as he was--had not yet found that peace of god
which passeth all understanding: he had no more found it, i thought, than
had i with my concealed and racking regrets for my broken idol and lost
elysium--regrets to which i have latterly avoided referring, but which
possessed me and tyrannised over me ruthlessly.

meantime a month was gone.  diana and mary were soon to leave moor house,
and return to the far different life and scene which awaited them, as
govern
 
 ___________________________
 
resh too,
ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed; the even and gleaming teeth without flaw;
the small dimpled chin; the ornament of rich, plenteous tresses--all
advantages, in short, which, combined, realise the ideal of beauty, were
fully hers.  i wondered, as i looked at this fair creature: i admired her
with my whole heart.  nature had surely formed her in a partial mood;
and, forgetting her usual stinted step-mother dole of gifts, had endowed
this, her darling, with a grand-dame's bounty.

what did st. john rivers think of this earthly angel?  i naturally asked
myself that question as i saw him turn to her and look at her; and, as
naturally, i sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance.  he had
already withdrawn his eye from the peri, and was looking at a humble tuft
of daisies which grew by the wicket.

"a lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone," he said, as he
crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers with his foot.

"oh, i only came home from s-" (she mentioned the name of a lar
 
 ___________________________
 
en me half his
fortune, without demanding so much as a kiss in return, rather than i
should have flung myself friendless on the wide world.  i had endured, he
was certain, more than i had confessed to him.

"well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very short," i
answered: and then i proceeded to tell him how i had been received at
moor house; how i had obtained the office of schoolmistress, &c.  the
accession of fortune, the discovery of my relations, followed in due
order.  of course, st. john rivers' name came in frequently in the
progress of my tale.  when i had done, that name was immediately taken
up.

"this st. john, then, is your cousin?"

"yes."

"you have spoken of him often: do you like him?"

"he was a very good man, sir; i could not help liking him."

"a good man.  does that mean a respectable well-conducted man of fifty?
or what does it mean?"

"st john was only twenty-nine, sir."

"'_jeune encore_,' as the french say.  is he a person of low stature,
phlegmatic, and plain.  a pe
 
 ___________________________
 
s mourning her, she was loving another!  but it is
useless grieving.  jane, leave me: go and marry rivers."

"shake me off, then, sir,--push me away, for i'll not leave you of my own
accord."

"jane, i ever like your tone of voice: it still renews hope, it sounds so
truthful.  when i hear it, it carries me back a year.  i forget that you
have formed a new tie.  but i am not a fool--go--"

"where must i go, sir?"

"your own way--with the husband you have chosen."

"who is that?"

"you know--this st. john rivers."

"he is not my husband, nor ever will be.  he does not love me: i do not
love him.  he loves (as he _can_ love, and that is not as you love) a
beautiful young lady called rosamond.  he wanted to marry me only because
he thought i should make a suitable missionary's wife, which she would
not have done.  he is good and great, but severe; and, for me, cold as an
iceberg.  he is not like you, sir: i am not happy at his side, nor near
him, nor with him.  he has no indulgence for me--no fondness.  
 
 ___________________________
 
dward and i, then, are happy: and the more so, because those we most
love are happy likewise.  diana and mary rivers are both married:
alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to see them.
diana's husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a good
man.  mary's is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother's, and, from
his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.  both captain
fitzjames and mr. wharton love their wives, and are loved by them.

as to st. john rivers, he left england: he went to india.  he entered on
the path he had marked for himself; he pursues it still.  a more
resolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he
labours for his race; he clears their painful way to improvement; he hews
down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber it.  he
may be stern; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; but his is the
sternness of the war