defect; omit no harsh line, smooth away no displeasing
irregularity; write under it, 'portrait of a governess, disconnected,
poor, and plain.'

"afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory--you have one prepared in your
drawing-box: take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearest
tints; choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils; delineate carefully
the loveliest face you can imagine; paint it in your softest shades and
sweetest lines, according to the description given by mrs. fairfax of
blanche ingram; remember the raven ringlets, the oriental eye;--what! you
revert to mr. rochester as a model!  order!  no snivel!--no sentiment!--no
regret!  i will endure only sense and resolution.  recall the august yet
harmonious lineaments, the grecian neck and bust; let the round and
dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand; omit neither diamond ring
nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the attire, aerial lace and
glistening satin, graceful scarf and golden rose; call it 'blanche, an
accomplished 
 
 ___________________________
 
well of you, take out these two pictures and compare them: say, 'mr.
rochester might probably win that noble lady's love, if he chose to
strive for it; is it likely he would waste a serious thought on this
indigent and insignificant plebeian?'"

"i'll do it," i resolved: and having framed this determination, i grew
calm, and fell asleep.

i kept my word.  an hour or two sufficed to sketch my own portrait in
crayons; and in less than a fortnight i had completed an ivory miniature
of an imaginary blanche ingram.  it looked a lovely face enough, and when
compared with the real head in chalk, the contrast was as great as self-
control could desire.  i derived benefit from the task: it had kept my
head and hands employed, and had given force and fixedness to the new
impressions i wished to stamp indelibly on my heart.

ere long, i had reason to congratulate myself on the course of wholesome
discipline to which i had thus forced my feelings to submit.  thanks to
it, i was able to meet subsequent occurrenc
 
 ___________________________
 
her the engravings of a
splendid volume: she looks, smiles now and then, but apparently says
little.  the tall and phlegmatic lord ingram leans with folded arms on
the chair-back of the little and lively amy eshton; she glances up at
him, and chatters like a wren: she likes him better than she does mr.
rochester.  henry lynn has taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of
louisa: adele shares it with him: he is trying to talk french with her,
and louisa laughs at his blunders.  with whom will blanche ingram pair?
she is standing alone at the table, bending gracefully over an album.  she
seems waiting to be sought; but she will not wait too long: she herself
selects a mate.

mr. rochester, having quitted the eshtons, stands on the hearth as
solitary as she stands by the table: she confronts him, taking her
station on the opposite side of the mantelpiece.

"mr. rochester, i thought you were not fond of children?"

"nor am i."

"then, what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?"
(p
 
 ___________________________
 
nce appeared to be peculiarly felt one
day that he had been summoned to millcote on business, and was not likely
to return till late.  the afternoon was wet: a walk the party had
proposed to take to see a gipsy camp, lately pitched on a common beyond
hay, was consequently deferred.  some of the gentlemen were gone to the
stables: the younger ones, together with the younger ladies, were playing
billiards in the billiard-room.  the dowagers ingram and lynn sought
solace in a quiet game at cards.  blanche ingram, after having repelled,
by supercilious taciturnity, some efforts of mrs. dent and mrs. eshton to
draw her into conversation, had first murmured over some sentimental
tunes and airs on the piano, and then, having fetched a novel from the
library, had flung herself in haughty listlessness on a sofa, and
prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedious hours of
absence.  the room and the house were silent: only now and then the
merriment of the billiard-players was heard from above.

it 
 
 ___________________________
 
e was certain his possessions were real and vast: he made
inquiries.  mr. mason, he found, had a son and daughter; and he learned
from him that he could and would give the latter a fortune of thirty
thousand pounds: that sufficed.  when i left college, i was sent out to
jamaica, to espouse a bride already courted for me.  my father said
nothing about her money; but he told me miss mason was the boast of
spanish town for her beauty: and this was no lie.  i found her a fine
woman, in the style of blanche ingram: tall, dark, and majestic.  her
family wished to secure me because i was of a good race; and so did she.
they showed her to me in parties, splendidly dressed.  i seldom saw her
alone, and had very little private conversation with her.  she flattered
me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and
accomplishments.  all the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy
me.  i was dazzled, stimulated: my senses were excited; and being
ignorant, raw, and inexperienced, i thought i loved