e in saying that
this interchange and this meddling of one with another is the ruin of
the state.

most true.

seeing then, i said, that there are three distinct classes, any meddling
of one with another, or the change of one into another, is the greatest
harm to the state, and may be most justly termed evil-doing?

precisely.

and the greatest degree of evil-doing to one's own city would be termed
by you injustice?

certainly.

this then is injustice; and on the other hand when the trader, the
auxiliary, and the guardian each do their own business, that is justice,
and will make the city just.

i agree with you.

we will not, i said, be over-positive as yet; but if, on trial, this
conception of justice be verified in the individual as well as in
the state, there will be no longer any room for doubt; if it be not
verified, we must have a fresh enquiry. first let us complete the old
investigation, which we began, as you remember, under the impression
that, if we could previously examine justice 
 
 ___________________________
 
side of the rational principle.

most assuredly.

but a further question arises: is passion different from reason also, or
only a kind of reason; in which latter case, instead of three principles
in the soul, there will only be two, the rational and the concupiscent;
or rather, as the state was composed of three classes, traders,
auxiliaries, counsellors, so may there not be in the individual soul a
third element which is passion or spirit, and when not corrupted by bad
education is the natural auxiliary of reason?

yes, he said, there must be a third.

yes, i replied, if passion, which has already been shown to be different
from desire, turn out also to be different from reason.

but that is easily proved:--we may observe even in young children that
they are full of spirit almost as soon as they are born, whereas some
of them never seem to attain to the use of reason, and most of them late
enough.

excellent, i said, and you may see passion equally in brute animals,
which is a further proof of
 
 ___________________________
 
will run at you might
and main, before you know where you are, intending to do heaven knows
what; and if you don't prepare an answer, and put yourself in motion,
you will be 'pared by their fine wits,' and no mistake.

you got me into the scrape, i said.

and i was quite right; however, i will do all i can to get you out of
it; but i can only give you good-will and good advice, and, perhaps, i
may be able to fit answers to your questions better than another--that
is all. and now, having such an auxiliary, you must do your best to show
the unbelievers that you are right.

i ought to try, i said, since you offer me such invaluable assistance.
and i think that, if there is to be a chance of our escaping, we must
explain to them whom we mean when we say that philosophers are to rule
in the state; then we shall be able to defend ourselves: there will be
discovered to be some natures who ought to study philosophy and to be
leaders in the state; and others who are not born to be philosophers,
and are 