r
theatrically caught up under her bosom by a girdle with a large
old-fashioned clasp.  the wearer of this unusual dress, who seemed
quite unconscious of the attention it was attracting, stood a moment in
the centre of the box, discussing with mrs. welland the propriety of
taking the latter's place in the front right-hand corner; then she
yielded with a slight smile, and seated herself in line with mrs.
welland's sister-in-law, mrs. lovell mingott, who was installed in the
opposite corner.

mr. sillerton jackson had returned the opera-glass to lawrence
lefferts.  the whole of the club turned instinctively, waiting to hear
what the old man had to say; for old mr. jackson was as great an
authority on "family" as lawrence lefferts was on "form."  he knew all
the ramifications of new york's cousinships; and could not only
elucidate such complicated questions as that of the connection between
the mingotts (through the thorleys) with the dallases of south
carolina, and that of the relationship of the elder b
 
 ___________________________
 
istics of each family: as, for instance,
the fabulous stinginess of the younger lines of leffertses (the long
island ones); or the fatal tendency of the rushworths to make foolish
matches; or the insanity recurring in every second generation of the
albany chiverses, with whom their new york cousins had always refused
to intermarry--with the disastrous exception of poor medora manson,
who, as everybody knew ... but then her mother was a rushworth.

in addition to this forest of family trees, mr. sillerton jackson
carried between his narrow hollow temples, and under his soft thatch of
silver hair, a register of most of the scandals and mysteries that had
smouldered under the unruffled surface of new york society within the
last fifty years.  so far indeed did his information extend, and so
acutely retentive was his memory, that he was supposed to be the only
man who could have told you who julius beaufort, the banker, really
was, and what had become of handsome bob spicer, old mrs. manson
mingott's fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
  but the cream-coloured
house (supposed to be modelled on the private hotels of the parisian
aristocracy) was there as a visible proof of her moral courage; and she
throned in it, among pre-revolutionary furniture and souvenirs of the
tuileries of louis napoleon (where she had shone in her middle age), as
placidly as if there were nothing peculiar in living above
thirty-fourth street, or in having french windows that opened like
doors instead of sashes that pushed up.

every one (including mr. sillerton jackson) was agreed that old
catherine had never had beauty--a gift which, in the eyes of new york,
justified every success, and excused a certain number of failings.
unkind people said that, like her imperial namesake, she had won her
way to success by strength of will and hardness of heart, and a kind of
haughty effrontery that was somehow justified by the extreme decency
and dignity of her private life.  mr. manson mingott had died when she
was only twenty-eight, and had "tied up" the money with an 
 
 ___________________________
 
additional
caution born of the general distrust of the spicers; but his bold young
widow went her way fearlessly, mingled freely in foreign society,
married her daughters in heaven knew what corrupt and fashionable
circles, hobnobbed with dukes and ambassadors, associated familiarly
with papists, entertained opera singers, and was the intimate friend of
mme. taglioni; and all the while (as sillerton jackson was the first to
proclaim) there had never been a breath on her reputation; the only
respect, he always added, in which she differed from the earlier
catherine.

mrs. manson mingott had long since succeeded in untying her husband's
fortune, and had lived in affluence for half a century; but memories of
her early straits had made her excessively thrifty, and though, when
she bought a dress or a piece of furniture, she took care that it
should be of the best, she could not bring herself to spend 
 
 ___________________________
 
in many an
exclusive bosom.  but the beauforts were not exactly common; some
people said they were even worse.  mrs. beaufort belonged indeed to one
of america's most honoured families; she had been the lovely regina
dallas (of the south carolina branch), a penniless beauty introduced to
new york society by her cousin, the imprudent medora manson, who was
always doing the wrong thing from the right motive.  when one was
related to the mansons and the rushworths one had a "droit de cite" (as
mr. sillerton jackson, who had frequented the tuileries, called it) in
new york society; but did one not forfeit it in marrying julius
beaufort?

the question was: who was beaufort?  he passed for an englishman, was
agreeable, handsome, ill-tempered, hospitable and witty.  he had come
to america with letters of recommendation from old mrs. manson
mingott's english son-in-law, the banker, and had speedily made himself
an important position in the world of affairs; but his habits were
dissipated, his tongue was bitter
 
 ___________________________
 

arrival, parading up fifth avenue at the crowded hour with julius
beaufort--" and the young man himself mentally added:  "and she ought
to know that a man who's just engaged doesn't spend his time calling on
married women.  but i daresay in the set she's lived in they do--they
never do anything else." and, in spite of the cosmopolitan views on
which he prided himself, he thanked heaven that he was a new yorker,
and about to ally himself with one of his own kind.



v.

the next evening old mr. sillerton jackson came to dine with the
archers.

mrs. archer was a shy woman and shrank from society; but she liked to
be well-informed as to its doings.  her old friend mr. sillerton
jackson applied to the investigation of his friends' affairs the
patience of a collector and the science of a naturalist; and his
sister, miss sophy jackson, who lived with him, and was entertained by
all the people who could not secure her much-sought-after brother,
brought home bits of minor gossip that filled out usefully the g
 
 ___________________________
 
year later, then; for somebody met 'em living at
lausanne together."

newland reddened.  "living together?  well, why not?  who had the right
to make her life over if she hadn't?  i'm sick of the hypocrisy that
would bury alive a woman of her age if her husband prefers to live with
harlots."

he stopped and turned away angrily to light his cigar.  "women ought to
be free--as free as we are," he declared, making a discovery of which
he was too irritated to measure the terrific consequences.

mr. sillerton jackson stretched his ankles nearer the coals and emitted
a sardonic whistle.

"well," he said after a pause, "apparently count olenski takes your
view; for i never heard of his having lifted a finger to get his wife
back."



vi.

that evening, after mr. jackson had taken himself away, and the ladies
had retired to their chintz-curtained bedroom, newland archer mounted
thoughtfully to his own study.  a vigilant hand had, as usual, kept the
fire alive and the lamp trimmed; and the room, with its rows a
 
 ___________________________
 

words "to meet the countess olenska," in accordance with the hospitable
american fashion, which treats strangers as if they were royalties, or
at least as their ambassadors.

the guests had been selected with a boldness and discrimination in
which the initiated recognised the firm hand of catherine the great.
associated with such immemorial standbys as the selfridge merrys, who
were asked everywhere because they always had been, the beauforts, on
whom there was a claim of relationship, and mr. sillerton jackson and
his sister sophy (who went wherever her brother told her to), were some
of the most fashionable and yet most irreproachable of the dominant
"young married" set; the lawrence leffertses, mrs. lefferts rushworth
(the lovely widow), the harry thorleys, the reggie chiverses and young
morris dagonet and his wife (who was a van der luyden).  the company
indeed was perfectly assorted, since all the members belonged to the
little inner group of people who, during the long new york season,
disported
 
 ___________________________
 
 a
protesting hand.

"there is nothing to thank me for, dear adeline; nothing whatever.
this kind of thing must not happen in new york; it shall not, as long
as i can help it," he pronounced with sovereign gentleness as he
steered his cousins to the door.

two hours later, every one knew that the great c-spring barouche in
which mrs. van der luyden took the air at all seasons had been seen at
old mrs. mingott's door, where a large square envelope was handed in;
and that evening at the opera mr. sillerton jackson was able to state
that the envelope contained a card inviting the countess olenska to the
dinner which the van der luydens were giving the following week for
their cousin, the duke of st. austrey.

some of the younger men in the club box exchanged a smile at this
announcement, and glanced sideways at lawrence lefferts, who sat
carelessly in the front of the box, pulling his long fair moustache,
and who remarked with authority, as the soprano paused:  "no one but
patti ought to attempt the sonna
 
 ___________________________
 
reggie were engaged for two
years: grace and thorley for nearly a year and a half.  why aren't we
very well off as we are?"

it was the traditional maidenly interrogation, and he felt ashamed of
himself for finding it singularly childish.  no doubt she simply echoed
what was said for her; but she was nearing her twenty-second birthday,
and he wondered at what age "nice" women began to speak for themselves.

"never, if we won't let them, i suppose," he mused, and recalled his
mad outburst to mr. sillerton jackson: "women ought to be as free as we
are--"

it would presently be his task to take the bandage from this young
woman's eyes, and bid her look forth on the world.  but how many
generations of the women who had gone to her making had descended
bandaged to the family vault?  he shivered a little, remembering some
of the new ideas in his scientific books, and the much-cited instance
of the kentucky cave-fish, which had ceased to develop eyes because
they had no use for them.  what if, when he had bid
 
 ___________________________
 
-"

mrs. archer produced an indulgent smile.  "has the duke been carrying
her off to parties?"

"you know what these english grandees are.  they're all alike.  louisa
and i are very fond of our cousin--but it's hopeless to expect people
who are accustomed to the european courts to trouble themselves about
our little republican distinctions.  the duke goes where he's amused."
mr. van der luyden paused, but no one spoke.  "yes--it seems he took
her with him last night to mrs. lemuel struthers's.  sillerton jackson
has just been to us with the foolish story, and louisa was rather
troubled.  so i thought the shortest way was to go straight to countess
olenska and explain--by the merest hint, you know--how we feel in new
york about certain things.  i felt i might, without indelicacy, because
the evening she dined with us she rather suggested ... rather let me
see that she would be grateful for guidance.  and she was."

mr. van der luyden looked about the room with what would have been
self-satisfaction on f
 
 ___________________________
 
me a mild benevolence which mrs. archer's countenance
dutifully reflected.

"how kind you both are, dear henry--always!  newland will particularly
appreciate what you have done because of dear may and his new
relations."

she shot an admonitory glance at her son, who said: "immensely, sir.
but i was sure you'd like madame olenska."

mr. van der luyden looked at him with extreme gentleness.  "i never ask
to my house, my dear newland," he said, "any one whom i do not like.
and so i have just told sillerton jackson."  with a glance at the clock
he rose and added:  "but louisa will be waiting.  we are dining early,
to take the duke to the opera."

after the portieres had solemnly closed behind their visitor a silence
fell upon the archer family.

"gracious--how romantic!" at last broke explosively from janey.  no one
knew exactly what inspired her elliptic comments, and her relations had
long since given up trying to interpret them.

mrs. archer shook her head with a sigh.  "provided it all turns out for
t
 
 ___________________________
 
he best," she said, in the tone of one who knows how surely it will
not.  "newland, you must stay and see sillerton jackson when he comes
this evening: i really shan't know what to say to him."

"poor mother!  but he won't come--" her son laughed, stooping to kiss
away her frown.



xi.

some two weeks later, newland archer, sitting in abstracted idleness in
his private compartment of the office of letterblair, lamson and low,
attorneys at law, was summoned by the head of the firm.

old mr. letterblair, the accredited legal adviser of three generations
of new york gentility, throned behind his mahogany desk in evide
 
 ___________________________
 
en with her
alone since their evening together, and had tried to avoid being with
her in company; but now their eyes met, and as mrs. beaufort recognised
him at the same time, and made her languid little gesture of
invitation, it was impossible not to go into the box.

beaufort and lefferts made way for him, and after a few words with mrs.
beaufort, who always preferred to look beautiful and not have to talk,
archer seated himself behind madame olenska.  there was no one else in
the box but mr. sillerton jackson, who was telling mrs. beaufort in a
confidential undertone about mrs. lemuel struthers's last sunday
reception (where some people reported that there had been dancing).
under cover of this circumstantial narrative, to which mrs. beaufort
listened with her perfect smile, and her head at just the right angle
to be seen in profile from the stalls, madame olenska turned and spoke
in a low voice.

"do you think," she asked, glancing toward the stage, "he will send her
a bunch of yellow roses tomorro
 
 ___________________________
 
view, one by one, the familiar
countenances in the first rows; the women's sharp with curiosity and
excitement, the men's sulky with the obligation of having to put on
their frock-coats before luncheon, and fight for food at the
wedding-breakfast.

"too bad the breakfast is at old catherine's," the bridegroom could
fancy reggie chivers saying.  "but i'm told that lovell mingott
insisted on its being cooked by his own chef, so it ought to be good if
one can only get at it."  and he could imagine sillerton jackson adding
with authority:  "my dear fellow, haven't you heard?  it's to be served
at small tables, in the new english fashion."

archer's eyes lingered a moment on the left-hand pew, where his mother,
who had entered the church on mr. henry van der luyden's arm, sat
weeping softly under her chantilly veil, her hands in her grandmother's
ermine muff.

"poor janey!" he thought, looking at his sister, "even by screwing her
head around she can see only the people in the few front pews; and
they're mos
 
 ___________________________
 
 gasped, as if a second reading had been
necessary to bring the monstrous absurdity of the thing home to him.

"poor amy sillerton--you never can tell what her husband will do next,"
mrs. welland sighed.  "i suppose he's just discovered the blenkers."

professor emerson sillerton was a thorn in the side of newport society;
and a thorn that could not be plucked out, for it grew on a venerable
and venerated family tree.  he was, as people said, a man who had had
"every advantage."  his father was sillerton jackson's uncle, his
mother a pennilow of boston; on each side there was wealth and
position, and mutual suitability.  nothing--as mrs. welland had often
remarked--nothing on earth obliged emerson sillerton to be an
archaeologist, or indeed a professor of any sort, or to live in newport
in winter, or do any of the other revolutionary things that he did.
but at least, if he was going to break with tradition and flout society
in the face, he need not have married poor amy dagonet, who had a right
to expe
 
 ___________________________
 
ins.

by the first of november this household ritual was over, and society
had begun to look about and take stock of itself.  by the fifteenth the
season was in full blast, opera and theatres were putting forth their
new attractions, dinner-engagements were accumulating, and dates for
dances being fixed.  and punctually at about this time mrs. archer
always said that new york was very much changed.

observing it from the lofty stand-point of a non-participant, she was
able, with the help of mr. sillerton jackson and miss sophy, to trace
each new crack in its surface, and all the strange weeds pushing up
between the ordered rows of social vegetables.  it had been one of the
amusements of archer's youth to wait for this annual pronouncement of
his mother's, and to hear her enumerate the minute signs of
disintegration that his careless gaze had overlooked.  for new york, to
mrs. archer's mind, never changed without changing for the worse; and
in this view miss sophy jackson heartily concurred.

mr. siller
 
 ___________________________
 
ore conservative than new york; but i always
think it's a safe rule for a lady to lay aside her french dresses for
one season," mrs. archer conceded.

"it was beaufort who started the new fashion by making his wife clap
her new clothes on her back as soon as they arrived: i must say at
times it takes all regina's distinction not to look like ... like ..."
miss jackson glanced around the table, caught janey's bulging gaze, and
took refuge in an unintelligible murmur.

"like her rivals," said mr. sillerton jackson, with the air of
producing an epigram.

"oh,--" the ladies murmured; and mrs. archer added, partly to distract
her daughter's attention from forbidden topics:  "poor regina!  her
thanksgiving hasn't been a very cheerful one, i'm afraid.  have you
heard the rumours about beaufort's speculations, sillerton?"

mr. jackson nodded carelessly.  every one had heard the rumours in
question, and he scorned to confirm a tale that was already common
property.

a gloomy silence fell upon the party.  no one
 
 ___________________________
 
in
circumstances that ... well ... if one had cared to look into them ...

"madame olenska is a great favourite with the gentlemen," said miss
sophy, with her air of wishing to put forth something conciliatory when
she knew that she was planting a dart.

"ah, that's the danger that a young woman like madame olenska is always
exposed to," mrs. archer mournfully agreed; and the ladies, on this
conclusion, gathered up their trains to seek the carcel globes of the
drawing-room, while archer and mr. sillerton jackson withdrew to the
gothic library.

once established before the grate, and consoling himself for the
inadequacy of the dinner by the perfection of his cigar, mr. jackson
became portentous and communicable.

"if the beaufort smash comes," he announced, "there are going to be
disclosures."

archer raised his head quickly: he could never hear the name without
the sharp vision of beaufort's heavy figure, opulently furred and shod,
advancing through the snow at skuytercliff.

"there's bound to be," mr.
 
 ___________________________
 
 "of course you
understand that i know all that people have been saying about ellen,
and heartily sympathise with my family in their effort to get her to
return to her husband.  i also know that, for some reason you have not
chosen to tell me, you have advised her against this course, which all
the older men of the family, as well as our grandmother, agree in
approving; and that it is owing to your encouragement that ellen defies
us all, and exposes herself to the kind of criticism of which mr.
sillerton jackson probably gave you, this evening, the hint that has
made you so irritable....  hints have indeed not been wanting; but
since you appear unwilling to take them from others, i offer you this
one myself, in the only form in which well-bred people of our kind can
communicate unpleasant things to each other: by letting you understand
that i know you mean to see ellen when you are in washington, and are
perhaps going there expressly for that purpose; and that, since you are
sure to see her, i wish you
 
 ___________________________
 
etched
its dead-black bulk down the side street that he had taken his first
kiss from may; it was under the myriad candles of the ball-room that he
had seen her appear, tall and silver-shining as a young diana.

now the house was as dark as the grave, except for a faint flare of gas
in the basement, and a light in one upstairs room where the blind had
not been lowered.  as archer reached the corner he saw that the
carriage standing at the door was mrs. manson mingott's.  what an
opportunity for sillerton jackson, if he should chance to pass!  archer
had been greatly moved by old catherine's account of madame olenska's
attitude toward mrs. beaufort; it made the righteous reprobation of new
york seem like a passing by on the other side.  but he knew well enough
what construction the clubs and drawing-rooms would put on ellen
olenska's visits to her cousin.

he paused and looked up at the lighted window.  no doubt the two women
were sitting together in that room: beaufort had probably sought
consolation e
 
 ___________________________
 
ut, aren't we?" he asked, moving
from the fire.

she rose also, but lingered near the hearth.  as he walked past her she
moved forward impulsively, as though to detain him: their eyes met, and
he saw that hers were of the same swimming blue as when he had left her
to drive to jersey city.

she flung her arms about his neck and pressed her cheek to his.

"you haven't kissed me today," she said in a whisper; and he felt her
tremble in his arms.



xxxii.

"at the court of the tuileries," said mr. sillerton jackson with his
reminiscent smile, "such things were pretty openly tolerated."

the scene was the van der luydens' black walnut dining-room in madison
avenue, and the time the evening after newland archer's visit to the
museum of art.  mr. and mrs. van der luyden had come to town for a few
days from skuytercliff, whither they had precipitately fled at the
announcement of beaufort's failure.  it had been represented to them
that the disarray into which society had been thrown by this deplorable
affair 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the
epidemic of chicken-pox in new york the winter mrs. struthers first
appeared that the married men slipped away to her house while their
wives were in the nursery.  you and dear henry, louisa, must stand in
the breach as you always have."

mr. and mrs. van der luyden could not remain deaf to such a call, and
reluctantly but heroically they had come to town, unmuffled the house,
and sent out invitations for two dinners and an evening reception.

on this particular evening they had invited sillerton jackson, mrs.
archer and newland and his wife to go with them to the opera, where
faust was being sung for the first time that winter.  nothing was done
without ceremony under the van der luyden roof, and though there were
but four guests the repast had begun at seven punctually, so that the
proper sequence of courses might be served without haste before the
gentlemen settled down to their cigars.

archer had not seen his wife since the evening before.  he had left
early for the office, where he had pl
 
 ___________________________
 
unged into an accumulation of
unimportant business.  in the afternoon one of the senior partners had
made an unexpected call on his time; and he had reached home so late
that may had preceded him to the van der luydens', and sent back the
carriage.

now, across the skuytercliff carnations and the massive plate, she
struck him as pale and languid; but her eyes shone, and she talked with
exaggerated animation.

the subject which had called forth mr. sillerton jackson's favourite
allusion had been brought up (archer fancied not without intention) by
their hostess.  the beaufort failure, or rather the beaufort attitude
since the failure, was still a fruitful theme for the drawing-room
moralist; and after it had been thoroughly examined and condemned mrs.
van der luyden had turned her scrupulous eyes on may archer.

"is it possible, dear, that what i hear is true?  i was told your
grandmother mingott's carriage was seen standing at mrs. beaufort's
door."  it w
 
 ___________________________
 
n, of all that had so
long enclosed him in the warm shelter of habit.  he walked along the
semi-circular passage at the back of the house, and opened the door of
mrs. van der luyden's box as if it had been a gate into the unknown.

"m'ama!" thrilled out the triumphant marguerite; and the occupants of
the box looked up in surprise at archer's entrance.  he had already
broken one of the rules of his world, which forbade the entering of a
box during a solo.

slipping between mr. van der luyden and sillerton jackson, he leaned
over his wife.

"i've got a beastly headache; don't tell any one, but come home, won't
you?" he whispered.

may gave him a glance of comprehension, and he saw her whisper to his
mother, who nodded sympathetically; then she murmured an excuse to mrs.
van der luyden, and rose from her seat just as marguerite fell into
faust's arms.  archer, while he helped her on with her opera cloak,
noticed the exchange of a significant smile between the older ladies.

as they drove away may laid her
 
 ___________________________
 
rk silver baskets between
the candelabra.  on the piano stood a large basket of orchids which mr.
van der luyden had had sent from skuytercliff.  everything was, in
short, as it should be on the approach of so considerable an event.

mrs. archer ran thoughtfully over the list, checking off each name with
her sharp gold pen.

"henry van der luyden--louisa--the lovell mingotts--the reggie
chiverses--lawrence lefferts and gertrude--(yes, i suppose may was
right to have them)--the selfridge merrys, sillerton jackson, van
newland and his wife. (how time passes!  it seems only yesterday that
he was your best man, newland)--and countess olenska--yes, i think
that's all...."

mrs. welland surveyed her son-in-law affectionately.  "no one can say,
newland, that you and may are not giving ellen a handsome send-off."

"ah, well," said mrs. archer, "i understand may's wanting her cousin to
tell people abroad that we're not quite barbarians."

"i'm sure ellen will appreciate it.  she was to arrive this morning, i
be
 
 ___________________________
 
t no
distant date.

"if things go on at this pace," lefferts thundered, looking like a
young prophet dressed by poole, and who had not yet been stoned, "we
shall see our children fighting for invitations to swindlers' houses,
and marrying beaufort's bastards."

"oh, i say--draw it mild!" reggie chivers and young newland protested,
while mr. selfridge merry looked genuinely alarmed, and an expression
of pain and disgust settled on mr. van der luyden's sensitive face.

"has he got any?" cried mr. sillerton jackson, pricking up his ears;
and while lefferts tried to turn the question with a laugh, the old
gentleman twittered into archer's ear:  "queer, those fellows who are
always wanting to set things right.  the people who have the worst
cooks are always telling you they're poisoned when they dine out.  but
i hear there are pressing reasons for our friend lawrence's
diatribe:--typewriter this time, i understand...."

the talk swept past archer like some senseless river running and
running because it did 