carriage; and departure by the same means had the
immense advantage of enabling one (with a playful allusion to
democratic principles) to scramble into the first brown conveyance in
the line, instead of waiting till the cold-and-gin congested nose of
one's own coachman gleamed under the portico of the academy.  it was
one of the great livery-stableman's most masterly intuitions to have
discovered that americans want to get away from amusement even more
quickly than they want to get to it.

when newland archer opened the door at the back of the club box the
curtain had just gone up on the garden scene.  there was no reason why
the young man should not have come earlier, for he had dined at seven,
alone with his mother and sister, and had lingered afterward over a
cigar in the gothic library with glazed black-walnut bookcases and
finial-topped chairs which was the only room in the house where mrs.
archer allowed smoking.  but, in the first place, new york was a
metropolis, and perfectly aware that in 
 
 ___________________________
 
metropolises it was "not the
thing" to arrive early at the opera; and what was or was not "the
thing" played a part as important in newland archer's new york as the
inscrutable totem terrors that had ruled the destinies of his
forefathers thousands of years ago.

the second reason for his delay was a personal one.  he had dawdled
over his cigar because he was at heart a dilettante, and thinking over
a pleasure to come often gave him a subtler satisfaction than its
realisation.  this was especially the case when the pleasure was a
delicate one, as his pleasures mostly were; and on this occasion the
moment he looked forward to was so rare a
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the academy at a more
significant moment than just as she was singing:  "he loves me--he
loves me not--he loves me!--" and sprinkling the falling daisy petals
with notes as clear as dew.

she sang, of course, "m'ama!" and not "he loves me," since an
unalterable and unquestioned law of the musical world required that the
german text of french operas sung by swedish artists should be
translated into italian for the clearer understanding of
english-speaking audiences.  this seemed as natural to newland archer
as all the other conventions on which his life was moulded: such as the
duty of using two silver-backed brushes with his monogram in blue
enamel to part his hair, and of never appearing in society without a
flower (preferably a gardenia) in his buttonhole.

"m'ama ... non m'ama ..." the prima donna sang, and "m'ama!", with a
final burst of love triumphant, as she pressed the dishevelled daisy to
her lips and lifted her large eyes to the sophisticated countenance of
the little brown faust-capoul
 
 ___________________________
 
, who was vainly trying, in a tight purple
velvet doublet and plumed cap, to look as pure and true as his artless
victim.

newland archer, leaning against the wall at the back of the club box,
turned his eyes from the stage and scanned the opposite side of the
house.  directly facing him was the box of old mrs. manson mingott,
whose monstrous obesity had long since made it impossible for her to
attend the opera, but who was always represented on fashionable nights
by some of the younger members of the family.  on this occasion, the
front of the box was filled by her daughter-in-law, mrs. lovell
mingott, and her daughter, mrs. wel
 
 ___________________________
 
s sat a young girl in white with eyes ecstatically
fixed on the stagelovers.  as madame nilsson's "m'ama!" thrilled out
above the silent house (the boxes always stopped talking during the
daisy song) a warm pink mounted to the girl's cheek, mantled her brow
to the roots of her fair braids, and suffused the young slope of her
breast to the line where it met a modest tulle tucker fastened with a
single gardenia.  she dropped her eyes to the immense bouquet of
lilies-of-the-valley on her knee, and newland archer saw her
white-gloved finger-tips touch the flowers softly.  he drew a breath of
satisfied vanity and his eyes returned to the stage.

no expense had been spared on the setting, which was acknowledged to be
very beautiful even by people who shared his acquaintance with the
opera houses of paris and vienna.  the foreground, to the footlights,
was covered with emerald green cloth.  in the middle distance
symmetrical mounds of woolly green moss bounded by croquet hoops formed
the base of shrubs sha
 
 ___________________________
 
 of this enchanted garden madame nilsson, in white
cashmere slashed with pale blue satin, a reticule dangling from a blue
girdle, and large yellow braids carefully disposed on each side of her
muslin chemisette, listened with downcast eyes to m. capoul's
impassioned wooing, and affected a guileless incomprehension of his
designs whenever, by word or glance, he persuasively indicated the
ground floor window of the neat brick villa projecting obliquely from
the right wing.

"the darling!" thought newland archer, his glance flitting back to the
young girl with the lilies-of-the-valley.  "she doesn't even guess what
it's all about." and he contemplated her absorbed young face with a
thrill of possessorship in which pride in his own masculine initiation
was mingled with a tender reverence for her abysmal purity.  "we'll
read faust together ... by the italian lakes ..." he thought, somewhat
hazily confusing the scene of his projected honey-moon with the
masterpieces of literature which it would be his man
 
 ___________________________
 
ly privilege to
reveal to his bride.  it was only that afternoon that may welland had
let him guess that she "cared" (new york's consecrated phrase of maiden
avowal), and already his imagination, leaping ahead of the engagement
ring, the betrothal kiss and the march from lohengrin, pictured her at
his side in some scene of old european witchery.

he did not in the least wish the future mrs. newland archer to be a
simpleton.  he meant her (thanks to his enlightening companionship) to
develop a social tact and readiness of wit enabling her to hold her own
with the most popular married women of the "younger set," in which it
was the recognised custom to attract masculine homage while playfully
discouraging it.  if he had probed to the bottom of his vanity (as he
sometimes nearly did) he would have found there the wish that his wife
should be as worldly-wise and as eager to please as the married lad
 
 ___________________________
 
 fire and ice was to be created, and to sustain
itself in a harsh world, he had never taken the time to think out; but
he was content to hold his view without analysing it, since he knew it
was that of all the carefully-brushed, white-waistcoated,
button-hole-flowered gentlemen who succeeded each other in the club
box, exchanged friendly greetings with him, and turned their
opera-glasses critically on the circle of ladies who were the product
of the system.  in matters intellectual and artistic newland archer
felt himself distinctly the superior of these chosen specimens of old
new york gentility; he had probably read more, thought more, and even
seen a good deal more of the world, than any other man of the number.
singly they betrayed their inferiority; but grouped together they
represented "new york," and the habit of masculine solidarity made him
accept their doctrine on all the issues called moral.  he instinctively
felt that in this respect it would be troublesome--and also rather bad
form--to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the knowledge of "form" must be
congenital in any one who knew how to wear such good clothes so
carelessly and carry such height with so much lounging grace.  as a
young admirer had once said of him:  "if anybody can tell a fellow just
when to wear a black tie with evening clothes and when not to, it's
larry lefferts."  and on the question of pumps versus patent-leather
"oxfords" his authority had never been disputed.

"my god!" he said; and silently handed his glass to old sillerton
jackson.

newland archer, following lefferts's glance, saw with surprise that his
exclamation had been occasioned by the entry of a new figure into old
mrs. mingott's box.  it was that of a slim young woman, a little less
tall than may welland, with brown hair growing in close curls about her
temples and held in place by a narrow band of diamonds.  the suggestion
of this headdress, which gave her what was then called a "josephine
look," was carried out in the cut of the dark blue velvet gown rather
theatrically caught 
 
 ___________________________
 
parted, but he was fully aware that his
reputation for discretion increased his opportunities of finding out
what he wanted to know.

the club box, therefore, waited in visible suspense while mr. sillerton
jackson handed back lawrence lefferts's opera-glass.  for a moment he
silently scrutinised the attentive group out of his filmy blue eyes
overhung by old veined lids; then he gave his moustache a thoughtful
twist, and said simply:  "i didn't think the mingotts would have tried
it on."



ii.

newland archer, during this brief episode, had been thrown into a
strange state of embarrassment.

it was annoying that the box which was thus attracting the undivided
attention of masculine new york should be that in which his betrothed
was seated between her mother and aunt; and for a moment he could not
identify the lady in the empire dress, nor imagine why her presence
created such excitement among the initiated.  then light dawned on him,
and with it came a momentary rush of indignation.  no, indeed; no 
 
 ___________________________
 
e mingotts was their
resolute championship of the few black sheep that their blameless stock
had produced.  there was nothing mean or ungenerous in the young man's
heart, and he was glad that his future wife should not be restrained by
false prudery from being kind (in private) to her unhappy cousin; but
to receive countess olenska in the family circle was a different thing
from producing her in public, at the opera of all places, and in the
very box with the young girl whose engagement to him, newland archer,
was to be announced within a few weeks.  no, he felt as old sillerton
jackson felt; he did not think the mingotts would have tried it on!

he knew, of course, that whatever man dared (within fifth avenue's
limits) that old mrs. manson mingott, the matriarch of the line, would
dare.  he had always admired the high and mighty old lady, who, in
spite of having been only catherine spicer of staten island, with a
father mysteriously discredited, and neither money nor position enough
to make people 
 
 ___________________________
 
to redeem it.  her relatives considered that the penury of her
table discredited the mingott name, which had always been associated
with good living; but people continued to come to her in spite of the
"made dishes" and flat champagne, and in reply to the remonstrances of
her son lovell (who tried to retrieve the family credit by having the
best chef in new york) she used to say laughingly:  "what's the use of
two good cooks in one family, now that i've married the girls and can't
eat sauces?"

newland archer, as he mused on these things, had once more turned his
eyes toward the mingott box.  he saw that mrs. welland and her
sister-in-law were facing their semicircle of critics with the
mingottian aplomb which old catherine had inculcated in all her tribe,
and that only may welland betrayed, by a heightened colour (perhaps due
to the knowledge that he was watching her) a sense of the gravity of
the situation.  as for the cause of the commotion, she sat gracefully
in her corner of the box, her eyes f
 
 ___________________________
 
ixed on the stage, and revealing,
as she leaned forward, a little more shoulder and bosom than new york
was accustomed to seeing, at least in ladies who had reasons for
wishing to pass unnoticed.

few things seemed to newland archer more awful than an offence against
"taste," that far-off divinity of whom "form" was the mere visible
representative and vicegerent.  madame olenska's pale and serious face
appealed to his fancy as suited to the occasion and to her unhappy
situation; but the way her dress (which had no tucker) sloped away from
her thin shoulders shocked and troubled him.  he hated to think of may
welland's being exposed to the influence of a young woman so careless
of the dictates of taste.

"after all," he hea
 
 ___________________________
 

this was greeted with an irreverent laugh, and the youth blushed
deeply, and tried to look as if he had meant to insinuate what knowing
people called a "double entendre."

"well--it's queer to have brought miss welland, anyhow," some one said
in a low tone, with a side-glance at archer.

"oh, that's part of the campaign: granny's orders, no doubt," lefferts
laughed.  "when the old lady does a thing she does it thoroughly."

the act was ending, and there was a general stir in the box.  suddenly
newland archer felt himself impelled to decisive action.  the desire to
be the first man to enter mrs. mingott's box, to proclaim to the
waiting world his engagement to may welland, and to see her through
whatever difficulties her cousin's anomalous situation might involve
her in; this impulse had abruptly overruled all scruples and
hesitations, and sent him hurrying through the red corridors to the
farther side of the house.

as he entered the box his eyes met miss welland's, and he saw that she
had instantl
 
 ___________________________
 
agreeable as their expression was, the young man was shocked that they
should reflect so unseemly a picture of the august tribunal before
which, at that very moment, her case was being tried.  nothing could be
in worse taste than misplaced flippancy; and he answered somewhat
stiffly:  "yes, you have been away a very long time."

"oh, centuries and centuries; so long," she said, "that i'm sure i'm
dead and buried, and this dear old place is heaven;" which, for reasons
he could not define, struck newland archer as an even more
disrespectful way of describing new york society.



iii.

it invariably happened in the same way.

mrs. julius beaufort, on the night of her annual ball, never failed to
appear at the opera; indeed, she always gave her ball on an opera night
in order to emphasise her complete superiority to household cares, and
her possession of a staff of servants competent to organise every
detail of the entertainment in her absence.

the beauforts' house was one of the few in new york that p
 
 ___________________________
 
en they left home.

then the house had been boldly planned with a ball-room, so that,
instead of squeezing through a narrow passage to get to it (as at the
chiverses') one marched solemnly down a vista of enfiladed
drawing-rooms (the sea-green, the crimson and the bouton d'or), seeing
from afar the many-candled lustres reflected in the polished parquetry,
and beyond that the depths of a conservatory where camellias and
tree-ferns arched their costly foliage over seats of black and gold
bamboo.

newland archer, as became a young man of his position, strolled in
somewhat late.  he had left his overcoat with the silk-stockinged
footmen (the stockings were one of beaufort's few fatuities), had
dawdled a while in the library hung with spanish leather and furnished
with buhl and malachite, where a few men were chatting and putting on
their dancing-gloves, and had finally joined the line of guests whom
mrs. beaufort was receiving on the threshold of the crimson
drawing-room.

archer was distinctly nervous.
 
 ___________________________
 
it that ritual of ignoring the "unpleasant" in which they
had both been brought up.

"she knows as well as i do," he reflected, "the real reason of her
cousin's staying away; but i shall never let her see by the least sign
that i am conscious of there being a shadow of a shade on poor ellen
olenska's reputation."



iv.

in the course of the next day the first of the usual betrothal visits
were exchanged.  the new york ritual was precise and inflexible in such
matters; and in conformity with it newland archer first went with his
mother and sister to call on mrs. welland, after which he and mrs.
welland and may drove out to old mrs. manson mingott's to receive that
venerable ancestress's blessing.

a visit to mrs. manson mingott was always an amusing episode to the
young man.  the house in itself was already an historic document,
though not, of course, as venerable as certain other old family houses
in university place and lower fifth avenue.  those were of the purest
1830, with a grim harmony of cab
 
 ___________________________
 
stered like a sofa, and a toilet-table with
frivolous lace flounces and a gilt-framed mirror.

her visitors were startled and fascinated by the foreignness of this
arrangement, which recalled scenes in french fiction, and architectural
incentives to immorality such as the simple american had never dreamed
of.  that was how women with lovers lived in the wicked old societies,
in apartments with all the rooms on one floor, and all the indecent
propinquities that their novels described.  it amused newland archer
(who had secretly situated the love-scenes of "monsieur de camors" in
mrs. mingott's bedroom) to picture her blameless life led in the
stage-setting of adultery; but he said to himself, with considerable
admiration, that if a lover had been what she wanted, the intrepid
woman would have had him too.

to the general relief the countess olenska was not present in her
grandmother's drawing-room during the visit of the betrothed couple.
mrs. mingott said she had gone out; which, on a day of such gl
 
 ___________________________
 
ff into an account of his
visit to old mrs. mingott.

after dinner, according to immemorial custom, mrs. archer and janey
trailed their long silk draperies up to the drawing-room, where, while
the gentlemen smoked below stairs, they sat beside a carcel lamp with
an engraved globe, facing each other across a rosewood work-table with
a green silk bag under it, and stitched at the two ends of a tapestry
band of field-flowers destined to adorn an "occasional" chair in the
drawing-room of young mrs. newland archer.

while this rite was in progress in the drawing-room, archer settled mr.
jackson in an armchair near the fire in the gothic library and handed
him a cigar.  mr. jackson sank into the armchair with satisfaction, lit
his cigar with perfect confidence (it was newland who bought them), and
stretching his thin old ankles to the coals, said:  "you say the
secretary merely helped her to get away, my dear fellow?  well, he was
still helping her a year later, then; for somebody met 'em living at
lausan
 
 ___________________________
 
ht to
be free--as free as we are," he declared, making a discovery of which
he was too irritated to measure the terrific consequences.

mr. sillerton jackson stretched his ankles nearer the coals and emitted
a sardonic whistle.

"well," he said after a pause, "apparently count olenski takes your
view; for i never heard of his having lifted a finger to get his wife
back."



vi.

that evening, after mr. jackson had taken himself away, and the ladies
had retired to their chintz-curtained bedroom, newland archer mounted
thoughtfully to his own study.  a vigilant hand had, as usual, kept the
fire alive and the lamp trimmed; and the room, with its rows and rows
of books, its bronze and steel statuettes of "the fencers" on the
mantelpiece and its many photographs of famous pictures, looked
singularly home-like and welcoming.

as he dropped into his armchair near the fire his eyes rested on a
large photograph of may welland, which the young girl had given him in
the first days of their romance, and which h
 
 ___________________________
 
were in fact only a
humbugging disguise of the inexorable conventions that tied things
together and bound people down to the old pattern.  but here he was
pledged to defend, on the part of his betrothed's cousin, conduct that,
on his own wife's part, would justify him in calling down on her all
the thunders of church and state.  of course the dilemma was purely
hypothetical; since he wasn't a blackguard polish nobleman, it was
absurd to speculate what his wife's rights would be if he were.  but
newland archer was too imaginative not to feel that, in his case and
may's, the tie might gall for reasons far less gross and palpable.
what could he and she really know of each other, since it was his duty,
as a "decent" fellow, to conceal his past from her, and hers, as a
marriageable girl, to have no past to conceal?  what if, for some one
of the subtler reasons that would tell with both of them, they should
tire of each other, misunderstand or irritate each other?  he reviewed
his friends' marriages--the 
 
 ___________________________
 
urity, so cunningly manufactured by a conspiracy of mothers and aunts
and grandmothers and long-dead ancestresses, because it was supposed to
be what he wanted, what he had a right to, in order that he might
exercise his lordly pleasure in smashing it like an image made of snow.

there was a certain triteness in these reflections: they were those
habitual to young men on the approach of their wedding day.  but they
were generally accompanied by a sense of compunction and self-abasement
of which newland archer felt no trace.  he could not deplore (as
thackeray's heroes so often exasperated him by doing) that he had not a
blank page to offer his bride in exchange for the unblemished one she
was to give to him.  he could not get away from the fact that if he had
been brought up as she had they would have been no more fit to find
their way about than the babes in the wood; nor could he, for all his
anxious cogitations, see any honest reason (any, that is, unconnected
with his own momentary pleasure, and
 
 ___________________________
 
those days, far too small, and too scant in
its resources, for every one in it (including livery-stable-keepers,
butlers and cooks) not to know exactly on which evenings people were
free; and it was thus possible for the recipients of mrs. lovell
mingott's invitations to make cruelly clear their determination not to
meet the countess olenska.

the blow was unexpected; but the mingotts, as their way was, met it
gallantly.  mrs. lovell mingott confided the case to mrs. welland, who
confided it to newland archer; who, aflame at the outrage, appealed
passionately and authoritatively to his mother; who, after a painful
period of inward resistance and outward temporising, succumbed to his
instances (as she always did), and immediately embracing his cause with
an energy redoubled by her previous hesitations, put on her grey velvet
bonnet and said:  "i'll go and see louisa van der luyden."

the new york of newland archer's day was a small and slippery pyramid,
in which, as yet, hardly a fissure had been mad
 
 ___________________________
 
hair before a green rep curtain.  mrs. van der
luyden still wore black velvet and venetian point when she went into
society--or rather (since she never dined out) when she threw open her
own doors to receive it.  her fair hair, which had faded without
turning grey, was still parted in flat overlapping points on her
forehead, and the straight nose that divided her pale blue eyes was
only a little more pinched about the nostrils than when the portrait
had been painted.  she always, indeed, struck newland archer as having
been rather gruesomely preserved in the airless atmosphere of a
perfectly irreproachable existence, as bodies caught in glaciers keep
for years a rosy life-in-death.

like all his family, he esteemed and admired mrs. van der luyden; but
he found her gentle bending sweetness less approachable than the
grimness of some of his mother's old aunts, fierce spinsters who said
"no" on principle before they knew what they were going to be asked.

mrs. van der luyden's attitude said neither yes
 
 ___________________________
 
cher.

but instantly she became aware of her mistake.  the van der luydens
were morbidly sensitive to any criticism of their secluded existence.
they were the arbiters of fashion, the court of last appeal, and they
knew it, and bowed to their fate.  but being shy and retiring persons,
with no natural inclination for their part, they lived as much as
possible in the sylvan solitude of skuytercliff, and when they came to
town, declined all invitations on the plea of mrs. van der luyden's
health.

newland archer came to his mother's rescue.  "everybody in new york
knows what you and cousin louisa represent.  that's why mrs. mingott
felt she ought not to allow this slight on countess olenska to pass
without consulting you."

mrs. van der luyden glanced at her husband, who glanced back at her.

"it is the principle that i dislike," said mr. van der luyden.  "as
long as a member of a well-known family is backed up by that family it
should be considered--final."

"it seems so to me," said his wife, as if s
 
 ___________________________
 
the following week for
their cousin, the duke of st. austrey.

some of the younger men in the club box exchanged a smile at this
announcement, and glanced sideways at lawrence lefferts, who sat
carelessly in the front of the box, pulling his long fair moustache,
and who remarked with authority, as the soprano paused:  "no one but
patti ought to attempt the sonnambula."



viii.

it was generally agreed in new york that the countess olenska had "lost
her looks."

she had appeared there first, in newland archer's boyhood, as a
brilliantly pretty little girl of nine or ten, of whom people said that
she "ought to be painted." her parents had been continental wanderers,
and after a roaming babyhood she had lost them both, and been taken in
charge by her aunt, medora manson, also a wanderer, who was herself
returning to new york to "settle down."

poor medora, repeatedly widowed, was always coming home to settle down
(each time in a less expensive house), and bringing with her a new
husband or an adopted 
 
 ___________________________
 
les of shooting
in transylvania.  she disappeared in a kind of sulphurous apotheosis,
and when a few years later medora again came back to new york, subdued,
impoverished, mourning a third husband, and in quest of a still smaller
house, people wondered that her rich niece had not been able to do
something for her.  then came the news that ellen's own marriage had
ended in disaster, and that she was herself returning home to seek rest
and oblivion among her kinsfolk.

these things passed through newland archer's mind a week later as he
watched the countess olenska enter the van der luyden drawing-room on
the evening of the momentous dinner.  the occasion was a solemn one,
and he wondered a little nervously how she would carry it off.  she
came rather late, one hand still ungloved, and fastening a bracelet
about her wrist; yet she entered without any appearance of haste or
embarrassment the drawing-room in which new york's most chosen company
was somewhat awfully assembled.

in the middle of the room 
 
 ___________________________
 
she paused, looking about her with a grave
mouth and smiling eyes; and in that instant newland archer rejected the
general verdict on her looks.  it was true that her early radiance was
gone.  the red cheeks had paled; she was thin, worn, a little
older-looking than her age, which must have been nearly thirty.  but
there was about her the mysterious authority of beauty, a sureness in
the carriage of the head, the movement of the eyes, which, without
being in the least theatrical, struck his as highly trained and full of
a conscious power.  at the same time she was simpler in manner than
most of
 
 ___________________________
 
d talk.  neither seemed aware that the duke should first have
paid his respects to mrs. lovell mingott and mrs. headly chivers, and
the countess have conversed with that amiable hypochondriac, mr. urban
dagonet of washington square, who, in order to have the pleasure of
meeting her, had broken through his fixed rule of not dining out
between january and april.  the two chatted together for nearly twenty
minutes; then the countess rose and, walking alone across the wide
drawing-room, sat down at newland archer's side.

it was not the custom in new york drawing-rooms for a lady to get up
and walk away from one gentleman in order to seek the company of
another.  etiquette required that she should wait, immovable as an
idol, while the men who wished to converse with her succeeded each
other at her side.  but the countess was apparently unaware of having
broken any rule; she sat at perfect ease in a corner of the sofa beside
archer, and looked at him with the kindest eyes.

"i want you to talk to me abou
 
 ___________________________
 
undeniably exciting to meet a
lady who found the van der luydens' duke dull, and dared to utter the
opinion.  he longed to question her, to hear more about the life of
which her careless words had given him so illuminating a glimpse; but
he feared to touch on distressing memories, and before he could think
of anything to say she had strayed back to her original subject.

"may is a darling; i've seen no young girl in new york so handsome and
so intelligent.  are you very much in love with her?"

newland archer reddened and laughed.  "as much as a man can be."

she continued to consider him thoughtfully, as if not to miss any shade
of meaning in what he said, "do you think, then, there is a limit?"

"to being in love?  if there is, i haven't found it!"

she glowed with sympathy.  "ah--it's really and truly a romance?"

"the most romantic of romances!"

"how delightful!  and you found it all out for yourselves--it was not
in the least arranged for you?"

archer looked at her incredulously.  "have you f
 
 ___________________________
 
own on him from the pure eminence of black velvet and the
family diamonds.  "it was good of you, dear newland, to devote yourself
so unselfishly to madame olenska.  i told your cousin henry he must
really come to the rescue."

he was aware of smiling at her vaguely, and she added, as if
condescending to his natural shyness:  "i've never seen may looking
lovelier.  the duke thinks her the handsomest girl in the room."



ix.

the countess olenska had said "after five"; and at half after the hour
newland archer rang the bell of the peeling stucco house with a giant
wisteria throttling its feeble cast-iron balcony, which she had hired,
far down west twenty-third street, from the vagabond medora.

it was certainly a strange quarter to have settled in.  small
dress-makers, bird-stuffers and "people who wrote" were her nearest
neighbours; and further down the dishevelled street archer recognised a
dilapidated wooden house, at the end of a paved path, in which a writer
and journalist called winsett, whom h
 
 ___________________________
 
."

what he saw, meanwhile, with the help of the lamp, was the faded
shadowy charm of a room unlike any room he had known.  he knew that the
countess olenska had brought some of her possessions with her--bits of
wreckage, she called them--and these, he supposed, were represented by
some small slender tables of dark wood, a delicate little greek bronze
on the chimney-piece, and a stretch of red damask nailed on the
discoloured wallpaper behind a couple of italian-looking pictures in
old frames.

newland archer prided himself on his knowledge of italian art.  his
boyhood had been saturated with ruskin, and he had read all the latest
books: john addington symonds, vernon lee's "euphorion," the essays of
p. g. hamerton, and a wonderful new volume called "the renaissance" by
walter pater.  he talked easily of botticelli, and spoke of fra
angelico with a faint condescension.  but these pictures bewildered
him, for they were like nothing that he was accustomed to look at (and
therefore able to see) when he
 
 ___________________________
 
p to expiate her crimes."

"oh, of course you see only the mingott side," his mother answered, in
the sensitive tone that was her nearest approach to anger.

the sad butler drew back the drawing-room portieres and announced:
"mr. henry van der luyden."

mrs. archer dropped her needle and pushed her chair back with an
agitated hand.

"another lamp," she cried to the retreating servant, while janey bent
over to straighten her mother's cap.

mr. van der luyden's figure loomed on the threshold, and newland archer
went forward to greet his cousin.

"we were just talking about you, sir," he said.

mr. van der luyden seemed overwhelmed by the announcement.  he drew off
his glove to shake hands with the ladies, and smoothed his tall hat
shyly, while janey pushed an arm-chair forward, and archer continued:
"and the countess olenska."

mrs. archer paled.

"ah--a charming woman.  i have just been to see her," said mr. van der
luyden, complacency restored to his brow.  he sank into the chair, laid
his hat and g
 
 ___________________________
 
w exactly what inspired her elliptic comments, and her relations had
long since given up trying to interpret them.

mrs. archer shook her head with a sigh.  "provided it all turns out for
the best," she said, in the tone of one who knows how surely it will
not.  "newland, you must stay and see sillerton jackson when he comes
this evening: i really shan't know what to say to him."

"poor mother!  but he won't come--" her son laughed, stooping to kiss
away her frown.



xi.

some two weeks later, newland archer, sitting in abstracted idleness in
his private compartment of the office of letterblair, lamson and low,
attorneys at law, was summoned by the head of the firm.

old mr. letterblair, the accredited legal adviser of three generations
of new york gentility, throned behind his mahogany desk in evident
perplexity.  as he stroked his closeclipped white whiskers and ran his
hand through the rumpled grey locks above his jutting brows, his
disrespectful junior partner thought how much he looked like th
 
 ___________________________
 
ly
breathed the new york air there were times when anything less
crystalline seemed stifling.


the papers he had retired to read did not tell him much in fact; but
they plunged him into an atmosphere in which he choked and spluttered.
they consisted mainly of an exchange of letters between count olenski's
solicitors and a french legal firm to whom the countess had applied for
the settlement of her financial situation.  there was also a short
letter from the count to his wife: after reading it, newland archer
rose, jammed the papers back into their envelope, and reentered mr.
letterblair's office.

"here are the letters, sir.  if you wish, i'll see madame olenska," he
said in a constrained voice.

"thank you--thank you, mr. archer.  come and dine with me tonight if
you're free, and we'll go into the matter afterward: in case you wish
to call on our client tomorrow."

newland archer walked straight home again that afternoon.  it was a
winter evening of transparent clearness, with an innocent young mo
 
 ___________________________
 
ecause it reminded her of gala
nights at the italiens, in the days of her triumph at the tuileries.
possibly beaufort, who was her match in daring, would have succeeded in
bringing about a fusion; but his grand house and silk-stockinged
footmen were an obstacle to informal sociability.  moreover, he was as
illiterate as old mrs. mingott, and considered "fellows who wrote" as
the mere paid purveyors of rich men's pleasures; and no one rich enough
to influence his opinion had ever questioned it.

newland archer had been aware of these things ever since he could
remember, and had accepted them as part of the structure of his
universe.  he knew that there were societies where painters and poets
and novelists and men of science, and even great actors, were as sought
after as dukes; he had often pictured to himself what it would have
been to live in the intimacy of drawing-rooms dominated by the talk of
merimee (whose "lettres a une inconnue" was one of his inseparables),
of thackeray, browning or william
 
 ___________________________
 
bout her feet.  around her neck was a narrow
black velvet ribbon with the ends falling down her back.

when her wooer turned from her she rested her arms against the
mantel-shelf and bowed her face in her hands.  on the threshold he
paused to look at her; then he stole back, lifted one of the ends of
velvet ribbon, kissed it, and left the room without her hearing him or
changing her attitude.  and on this silent parting the curtain fell.

it was always for the sake of that particular scene that newland archer
went to see "the shaughraun." he thought the adieux of montague and ada
dyas as fine as anything he had ever seen croisette and bressant do in
paris, or madge robertson and kendal in london; in its reticence, its
dumb sorrow, it moved him more than the most famous histrionic
outpourings.

on the evening in question the little scene acquired an added poignancy
by reminding him--he could not have said why--of his leave-taking from
madame olenska after their confidential talk a week or ten days ea
 
 ___________________________
 
rlier.

it would have been as difficult to discover any resemblance between the
two situations as between the appearance of the persons concerned.
newland archer could not pretend to anything approaching the young
english actor's romantic good looks, and miss dyas was a tall
red-haired woman of monumental build whose pale and pleasantly ugly
face was utterly unlike ellen olenska's vivid countenance.  nor were
archer and madame olenska two lovers parting in heart-broken silence;
they were client and lawyer separating after a talk which had given the
lawyer the worst possible impression of the client's case.  wherein,
then, lay the resemblance that made t
 
 ___________________________
 
in the snow, and a
general flavour of mild flirting and milder practical jokes.  he had
just received a box of new books from his london book-seller, and had
preferred the prospect of a quiet sunday at home with his spoils.  but
he now went into the club writing-room, wrote a hurried telegram, and
told the servant to send it immediately.  he knew that mrs. reggie
didn't object to her visitors' suddenly changing their minds, and that
there was always a room to spare in her elastic house.



xv.

newland archer arrived at the chiverses' on friday evening, and on
saturday went conscientiously through all the rites appertaining to a
week-end at highbank.

in the morning he had a spin in the ice-boat with his hostess and a few
of the hardier guests; in the afternoon he "went over the farm" with
reggie, and listened, in the elaborately appointed stables, to long and
impressive disquisitions on the horse; after tea he talked in a corner
of the firelit hall with a young lady who had professed herself
broken
 
 ___________________________
 
rried in a month."

janey fell upon his neck and pressed him to her purple flannel breast.
"oh newland, how wonderful!  i'm so glad!  but, dearest, why do you
keep on laughing?  do hush, or you'll wake mamma."




book ii



xix.

the day was fresh, with a lively spring wind full of dust.  all the old
ladies in both families had got out their faded sables and yellowing
ermines, and the smell of camphor from the front pews almost smothered
the faint spring scent of the lilies banking the altar.

newland archer, at a signal from the sexton, had come out of the vestry
and placed himself with his best man on the chancel step of grace
church.

the signal meant that the brougham bearing the bride and her father was
in sight; but there was sure to be a considerable interval of
adjustment and consultation in the lobby, where the bridesmaids were
already hovering like a cluster of easter blossoms.  during this
unavoidable lapse of time the bridegroom, in proof of his eagerness,
was expected to expose himself
 
 ___________________________
 
y
happy in."

"well--that's what we're going to be, isn't it?" cried her husband
gaily; and she answered with her boyish smile:  "ah, it's just our luck
beginning--the wonderful luck we're always going to have together!"



xx.

"of course we must dine with mrs. carfry, dearest," archer said; and
his wife looked at him with an anxious frown across the monumental
britannia ware of their lodging house breakfast-table.

in all the rainy desert of autumnal london there were only two people
whom the newland archers knew; and these two they had sedulously
avoided, in conformity with the old new york tradition that it was not
"dignified" to force one's self on the notice of one's acquaintances in
foreign countries.

mrs. archer and janey, in the course of their visits to europe, had so
unflinchingly lived up to this principle, and met the friendly advances
of their fellow-travellers with an air of such impenetrable reserve,
that they had almost achieved the record of never having exchanged a
word with a "f
 
 ___________________________
 
lothes.

she pushed back her chair with a sigh.  "that's dear of you, newland;
but it doesn't help me much."

he had an inspiration.  "why not wear your wedding-dress?  that can't
be wrong, can it?"

"oh, dearest!  if i only had it here!  but it's gone to paris to be
made over for next winter, and worth hasn't sent it back."

"oh, well--" said archer, getting up.  "look here--the fog's lifting.
if we made a dash for the national gallery we might manage to catch a
glimpse of the pictures."


the newland archers were on their way home, after a three months'
wedding-tour which may, in writing to her girl friends, vaguely
summarised as "blissful."

they had not gone to the italian lakes: on reflection, archer had not
been able to picture his wife in that particular setting.  her own
inclination (after a month with the paris dressmakers) was for
mountaineering in july and swimming in august.  this plan they
punctually fulfilled, spending july at interlaken and grindelwald, and
august at a little place ca
 
 ___________________________
 
d been placed against a background of shrubbery.  on the
other side of the lawn, facing the targets, was pitched a real tent,
with benches and garden-seats about it.  a number of ladies in summer
dresses and gentlemen in grey frock-coats and tall hats stood on the
lawn or sat upon the benches; and every now and then a slender girl in
starched muslin would step from the tent, bow in hand, and speed her
shaft at one of the targets, while the spectators interrupted their
talk to watch the result.

newland archer, standing on the verandah of the house, looked curiously
down upon this scene.  on each side of the shiny painted steps was a
large blue china flower-pot on a bright yellow china stand.  a spiky
green plant filled each pot, and below the verandah ran a wide border
of blue hydrangeas edged with more red geraniums.  behind him, the
french windows of the drawing-rooms through which he had passed gave
glimpses, between swaying lace curtains, of glassy parquet floors
islanded with chintz poufs, dwar
 
 ___________________________
 
it for this annual pronouncement of
his mother's, and to hear her enumerate the minute signs of
disintegration that his careless gaze had overlooked.  for new york, to
mrs. archer's mind, never changed without changing for the worse; and
in this view miss sophy jackson heartily concurred.

mr. sillerton jackson, as became a man of the world, suspended his
judgment and listened with an amused impartiality to the lamentations
of the ladies.  but even he never denied that new york had changed; and
newland archer, in the winter of the second year of his marriage, was
himself obliged to admit that if it had not actually changed it was
certainly changing.

these points had been raised, as usual, at mrs. archer's thanksgiving
dinner.  at the date when she was officially enjoined to give thanks
for the blessings of the year it was her habit to take a mournful
though not embittered stock of her world, and wonder what there was to
be thankful for.  at any rate, not the state of society; society, if it
could b
 
 ___________________________
 
h a derisive chuckle.  but his eminence as a valetudinarian
now made him an object of engrossing interest, and mrs. mingott issued
an imperial summons to him to come and compare diets as soon as his
temperature permitted; for old catherine was now the first to recognise
that one could not be too careful about temperatures.

twenty-four hours after madame olenska's summons a telegram announced
that she would arrive from washington on the evening of the following
day.  at the wellands', where the newland archers chanced to be
lunching, the question as to who should meet her at jersey city was
immediately raised; and the material difficulties amid which the
welland household struggled as if it had been a frontier outpost, lent
animation to the debate.  it was agreed that mrs. welland could not
possibly go to jersey city because she was to accompany her husband to
old catherine's that afternoon, and the brougham could not be spared,
since, if mr. welland were "upset" by seeing his mother-in-law for the

 
 ___________________________
 
rture like that?  there ought to be.  ah, believe me, it's
a miserable little country!"

the carriage had crossed forty-second street: may's sturdy
brougham-horse was carrying them northward as if he had been a kentucky
trotter.  archer choked with the sense of wasted minutes and vain words.

"then what, exactly, is your plan for us?" he asked.

"for us?  but there's no us in that sense!  we're near each other only
if we stay far from each other.  then we can be ourselves.  otherwise
we're only newland archer, the husband of ellen olenska's cousin, and
ellen olenska, the cousin of newland archer's wife, trying to be happy
behind the backs of the people who trust them."

"ah, i'm beyond that," he groaned.

"no, you're not!  you've never been beyond.  and i have," she said, in
a strange voice, "and i know what it looks like there."

he sat silent, dazed with inarticulate pain.  then he groped in the
darkness of the carriage for the little bell that signalled orders to
the coachman.  he remembered that
 
 ___________________________
 
hat hers were of the same swimming blue as when he had left her
to drive to jersey city.

she flung her arms about his neck and pressed her cheek to his.

"you haven't kissed me today," she said in a whisper; and he felt her
tremble in his arms.



xxxii.

"at the court of the tuileries," said mr. sillerton jackson with his
reminiscent smile, "such things were pretty openly tolerated."

the scene was the van der luydens' black walnut dining-room in madison
avenue, and the time the evening after newland archer's visit to the
museum of art.  mr. and mrs. van der luyden had come to town for a few
days from skuytercliff, whither they had precipitately fled at the
announcement of beaufort's failure.  it had been represented to them
that the disarray into which society had been thrown by this deplorable
affair made their presence in town more necessary than ever.  it was
one of the occasions when, as mrs. archer put it, they "owed it to
society" to show themselves at the opera, and even to open their own

 
 ___________________________
 
child.  then he remembered the passionate
generosity latent under that incurious calm.  he recalled her glance of
understanding when he had urged that their engagement should be
announced at the beaufort ball; he heard the voice in which she had
said, in the mission garden:  "i couldn't have my happiness made out of
a wrong--a wrong to some one else;" and an uncontrollable longing
seized him to tell her the truth, to throw himself on her generosity,
and ask for the freedom he had once refused.

newland archer was a quiet and self-controlled young man.  conformity
to the discipline of a small society had become almost his second
nature.  it was deeply distasteful to him to do anything melodramatic
and conspicuous, anything mr. van der luyden would have deprecated and
the club box condemned as bad form.  but he had become suddenly
unconscious of the club box, of mr. van der luyden, of all that had so
long enclosed him in the warm shelter of habit.  he walked along the
semi-circular passage at the back
 
 ___________________________
 
 for him to speak, and then added slowly:
"she understood my wishing to tell her this.  i think she understands
everything."

she went up to archer, and taking one of his cold hands pressed it
quickly against her cheek.

"my head aches too; good-night, dear," she said, and turned to the
door, her torn and muddy wedding-dress dragging after her across the
room.



xxxiii.

it was, as mrs. archer smilingly said to mrs. welland, a great event
for a young couple to give their first big dinner.

the newland archers, since they had set up their household, had
received a good deal of company in an informal way.  archer was fond of
having three or four friends to dine, and may welcomed them with the
beaming readiness of which her mother had set her the example in
conjugal affairs.  her husband questioned whether, if left to herself,
she would ever have asked any one to the house; but he had long given
up trying to disengage her real self from the shape into which
tradition and training had moulded her.  it 
 
 ___________________________
 
archer suddenly saw before him the embodied image of the family.

"oh, all right," he said, staring with unseeing eyes at the list of
guests that she had put in his hand.

when he entered the drawing-room before dinner may was stooping over
the fire and trying to coax the logs to burn in their unaccustomed
setting of immaculate tiles.

the tall lamps were all lit, and mr. van der luyden's orchids had been
conspicuously disposed in various receptacles of modern porcelain and
knobby silver.  mrs. newland archer's drawing-room was generally
thought a great success.  a gilt bamboo jardiniere, in which the
primulas and cinerarias were punctually renewed, blocked the access to
the bay window (where the old-fashioned would have preferred a bronze
reduction of the venus of milo); the sofas and arm-chairs of pale
brocade were cleverly grouped about little plush tables densely covered
with silver toys, porcelain animals and efflorescent photograph frames;
and tall rosy-shaded lamps shot up like tropical flowe
 
 ___________________________
 
ar she was to
me."

"ah--" said archer, his heart stopping.

he felt that his wife was watching him intently.  "did you mind my
telling her first, newland?"

"mind?  why should i?"  he made a last effort to collect himself.  "but
that was a fortnight ago, wasn't it?  i thought you said you weren't
sure till today."

her colour burned deeper, but she held his gaze.  "no; i wasn't sure
then--but i told her i was.  and you see i was right!" she exclaimed,
her blue eyes wet with victory.



xxxiv.

newland archer sat at the writing-table in his library in east
thirty-ninth street.

he had just got back from a big official reception for the inauguration
of the new galleries at the metropolitan museum, and the spectacle of
those great spaces crowded with the spoils of the ages, where the
throng of fashion circulated through a series of scientifically
catalogued treasures, had suddenly pressed on a rusted spring of memory.

"why, this used to be one of the old cesnola rooms," he heard some one
say; and ins
 
 ___________________________
 
.  he was subsequently heard of in
constantinople, then in russia; and a dozen years later american
travellers were handsomely entertained by him in buenos ayres, where he
represented a large insurance agency.  he and his wife died there in
the odour of prosperity; and one day their orphaned daughter had
appeared in new york in charge of may archer's sister-in-law, mrs. jack
welland, whose husband had been appointed the girl's guardian.  the
fact threw her into almost cousinly relationship with newland archer's
children, and nobody was surprised when dallas's engagement was
announced.

nothing could more dearly give the measure of the distance that the
world had travelled.  people nowadays were too busy--busy with reforms
and "movements," with fads and fetishes and frivolities--to bother much
about their neighbours.  and of what account was anybody's past, in the
huge kaleidoscope where all the social atoms spun around on the same
plane?

newland archer, looking out of his hotel window at the statel
 
 ___________________________
 
to me here than if i went up," he suddenly heard
himself say; and the fear lest that last shadow of reality should lose
its edge kept him rooted to his seat as the minutes succeeded each
other.

he sat for a long time on the bench in the thickening dusk, his eyes
never turning from the balcony.  at length a light shone through the
windows, and a moment later a man-servant came out on the balcony, drew
up the awnings, and closed the shutters.

at that, as if it had been the signal he waited for, newland archer got
up slowly and walked back alone to his hotel.
