cimens of old
new york gentility; he had probably read more, thought more, and even
seen a good deal more of the world, than any other man of the number.
singly they betrayed their inferiority; but grouped together they
represented "new york," and the habit of masculine solidarity made him
accept their doctrine on all the issues called moral.  he instinctively
felt that in this respect it would be troublesome--and also rather bad
form--to strike out for himself.

"well--upon my soul!" exclaimed lawrence lefferts, turning his
opera-glass abruptly away from the stage.  lawrence lefferts was, on
the whole, the foremost authority on "form" in new york.  he had
probably devoted more time than any one else to the study of this
intricate and fascinating question; but study alone could not account
for his complete and easy competence.  one had only to look at him,
from the slant of his bald forehead and the curve of his beautiful fair
moustache to the long patent-leather feet at the other end of his lean
and e
 
 ___________________________
 
he box, discussing with mrs. welland the propriety of
taking the latter's place in the front right-hand corner; then she
yielded with a slight smile, and seated herself in line with mrs.
welland's sister-in-law, mrs. lovell mingott, who was installed in the
opposite corner.

mr. sillerton jackson had returned the opera-glass to lawrence
lefferts.  the whole of the club turned instinctively, waiting to hear
what the old man had to say; for old mr. jackson was as great an
authority on "family" as lawrence lefferts was on "form."  he knew all
the ramifications of new york's cousinships; and could not only
elucidate such complicated questions as that of the connection between
the mingotts (through the thorleys) with the dallases of south
carolina, and that of the relationship of the elder branch of
philadelphia thorleys to the albany chiverses (on no account to be
confused with the manson chiverses of university place), but could also
enumerate the leading characteristics of each family: as, for instance,

 
 ___________________________
 
who had been delighting thronged
audiences in the old opera-house on the battery had taken ship for
cuba.  but these mysteries, and many others, were closely locked in mr.
jackson's breast; for not only did his keen sense of honour forbid his
repeating anything privately imparted, but he was fully aware that his
reputation for discretion increased his opportunities of finding out
what he wanted to know.

the club box, therefore, waited in visible suspense while mr. sillerton
jackson handed back lawrence lefferts's opera-glass.  for a moment he
silently scrutinised the attentive group out of his filmy blue eyes
overhung by old veined lids; then he gave his moustache a thoughtful
twist, and said simply:  "i didn't think the mingotts would have tried
it on."



ii.

newland archer, during this brief episode, had been thrown into a
strange state of embarrassment.

it was annoying that the box which was thus attracting the undivided
attention of masculine new york should be that in which his betrothed
was s
 
 ___________________________
 
's being exposed to the influence of a young woman so careless
of the dictates of taste.

"after all," he heard one of the younger men begin behind him
(everybody talked through the mephistopheles-and-martha scenes), "after
all, just what happened?"

"well--she left him; nobody attempts to deny that."

"he's an awful brute, isn't he?" continued the young enquirer, a candid
thorley, who was evidently preparing to enter the lists as the lady's
champion.

"the very worst; i knew him at nice," said lawrence lefferts with
authority.  "a half-paralysed white sneering fellow--rather handsome
head, but eyes with a lot of lashes.  well, i'll tell you the sort:
when he wasn't with women he was collecting china.  paying any price
for both, i understand."

there was a general laugh, and the young champion said:  "well,
then----?"

"well, then; she bolted with his secretary."

"oh, i see."  the champion's face fell.

"it didn't last long, though: i heard of her a few months later living
alone in venice.  i believe 
 
 ___________________________
 
had been selected with a boldness and discrimination in
which the initiated recognised the firm hand of catherine the great.
associated with such immemorial standbys as the selfridge merrys, who
were asked everywhere because they always had been, the beauforts, on
whom there was a claim of relationship, and mr. sillerton jackson and
his sister sophy (who went wherever her brother told her to), were some
of the most fashionable and yet most irreproachable of the dominant
"young married" set; the lawrence leffertses, mrs. lefferts rushworth
(the lovely widow), the harry thorleys, the reggie chiverses and young
morris dagonet and his wife (who was a van der luyden).  the company
indeed was perfectly assorted, since all the members belonged to the
little inner group of people who, during the long new york season,
disported themselves together daily and nightly with apparently
undiminished zest.

forty-eight hours later the unbelievable had happened; every one had
refused the mingotts' invitation except the
 
 ___________________________
 
.  archer contemplated with awe the two slender faded
figures, seated side by side in a kind of viceregal rigidity,
mouthpieces of some remote ancestral authority which fate compelled
them to wield, when they would so much rather have lived in simplicity
and seclusion, digging invisible weeds out of the perfect lawns of
skuytercliff, and playing patience together in the evenings.

mr. van der luyden was the first to speak.

"you really think this is due to some--some intentional interference of
lawrence lefferts's?" he enquired, turning to archer.

"i'm certain of it, sir.  larry has been going it rather harder than
usual lately--if cousin louisa won't mind my mentioning it--having
rather a stiff affair with the postmaster's wife in their village, or
some one of that sort; and whenever poor gertrude lefferts begins to
suspect anything, and he's afraid of trouble, he gets up a fuss of this
kind, to show how awfully moral he is, and talks at the top of his
voice about the impertinence of inviting his wif
 
 ___________________________
 
e to meet people he
doesn't wish her to know.  he's simply using madame olenska as a
lightning-rod; i've seen him try the same thing often before."

"the leffertses!--" said mrs. van der luyden.

"the leffertses!--" echoed mrs. archer.  "what would uncle egmont have
said of lawrence lefferts's pronouncing on anybody's social position?
it shows what society has come to."

"we'll hope it has not quite come to that," said mr. van der luyden
firmly.

"ah, if only you and louisa went out more!" sighed mrs. archer.

but instantly she became aware of her mistake.  the van der luydens
were morbidly sensitive to any criticism of their secluded existence.
they were the arbiters of fashion, the court of last appeal, and they
knew it, and bowed to their fate.  but being shy and retiring person
 
 ___________________________
 
e in
which mrs. van der luyden took the air at all seasons had been seen at
old mrs. mingott's door, where a large square envelope was handed in;
and that evening at the opera mr. sillerton jackson was able to state
that the envelope contained a card inviting the countess olenska to the
dinner which the van der luydens were giving the following week for
their cousin, the duke of st. austrey.

some of the younger men in the club box exchanged a smile at this
announcement, and glanced sideways at lawrence lefferts, who sat
carelessly in the front of the box, pulling his long fair moustache,
and who remarked with authority, as the soprano paused:  "no one but
patti ought to attempt the sonnambula."



viii.

it was generally agreed in new york that the countess olenska had "lost
her looks."

she had appeared there first, in newland archer's boyhood, as a
brilliantly pretty little girl of nine or ten, of whom people said that
she "ought to be painted." her parents had been continental wanderers,
and after 
 
 ___________________________
 
  the countess greeted them with her grave smile, and
archer, feeling his host's admonitory glance on him, rose and
surrendered his seat.

madame olenska held out her hand as if to bid him goodbye.

"tomorrow, then, after five--i shall expect you," she said; and then
turned back to make room for mr. dagonet.

"tomorrow--" archer heard himself repeating, though there had been no
engagement, and during their talk she had given him no hint that she
wished to see him again.

as he moved away he saw lawrence lefferts, tall and resplendent,
leading his wife up to be introduced; and heard gertrude lefferts say,
as she beamed on the countess with her large unperceiving smile:  "but
i think we used to go to dancing-school together when we were
children--."  behind her, waiting their turn to name themselves to the
countess, archer noticed a number of the recalcitrant couples who had
declined to meet her at mrs. lovell mingott's.  as mrs. archer
remarked: when the van der luydens chose, they knew how to give a
le
 
 ___________________________
 
such "women" (as they were called) were few in
new york, those driving their own carriages still fewer, and the
appearance of miss fanny ring in fifth avenue at the fashionable hour
had profoundly agitated society.  only the day before, her carriage had
passed mrs. lovell mingott's, and the latter had instantly rung the
little bell at her elbow and ordered the coachman to drive her home.
"what if it had happened to mrs. van der luyden?" people asked each
other with a shudder.  archer could hear lawrence lefferts, at that
very hour, holding forth on the disintegration of society.

he raised his head irritably when his sister janey entered, and then
quickly bent over his book (swinburne's "chastelard"--just out) as if
he had not seen her.  she glanced at the writing-table heaped with
books, opened a volume of the "contes drolatiques," made a wry face
over the archaic french, and sighed:  "what learned things you read!"

"well--?" he asked, as she hovered cassandra-like before him.

"mother's very angry."
 
 ___________________________
 
sense it
was.  wanting to pass herself off as ellen mingott and an old maid,
when she has the luck to be a married woman and a countess!"

these incidents had made the memory of his last talk with madame
olenska so vivid to the young man that as the curtain fell on the
parting of the two actors his eyes filled with tears, and he stood up
to leave the theatre.

in doing so, he turned to the side of the house behind him, and saw the
lady of whom he was thinking seated in a box with the beauforts,
lawrence lefferts and one or two other men.  he had not spoken with her
alone since their evening together, and had tried to avoid being with
her in company; but now their eyes met, and as mrs. beaufort recognised
him at the same time, and made her languid little gesture of
invitation, it was impossible not to go into the box.

beaufort and lefferts made way for him, and after a few words with mrs.
beaufort, who always preferred to look beautiful and not have to talk,
archer seated himself behind madame olenska.
 
 ___________________________
 
o her about what she really cares for."

his wise may--how he had loved her for that letter!  but he had not
meant to act on it; he was too busy, to begin with, and he did not
care, as an engaged man, to play too conspicuously the part of madame
olenska's champion.  he had an idea that she knew how to take care of
herself a good deal better than the ingenuous may imagined.  she had
beaufort at her feet, mr. van der luyden hovering above her like a
protecting deity, and any number of candidates (lawrence lefferts among
them) waiting their opportunity in the middle distance.  yet he never
saw her, or exchanged a word with her, without feeling that, after all,
may's ingenuousness almost amounted to a gift of divination.  ellen
olenska was lonely and she was unhappy.



xiv.

as he came out into the lobby archer ran across his friend ned winsett,
the only one among what janey called his "clever people" with whom he
cared to probe into things a little deeper than the average level of
club and chop-house ban
 
 ___________________________
 
nto momentary well-being.
her rivals--mrs. reggie chivers, the merry girls, and divers rosy
thorleys, dagonets and mingotts, stood behind her in a lovely anxious
group, brown heads and golden bent above the scores, and pale muslins
and flower-wreathed hats mingled in a tender rainbow.  all were young
and pretty, and bathed in summer bloom; but not one had the nymph-like
ease of his wife, when, with tense muscles and happy frown, she bent
her soul upon some feat of strength.

"gad," archer heard lawrence lefferts say, "not one of the lot holds
the bow as she does"; and beaufort retorted:  "yes; but that's the only
kind of target she'll ever hit."

archer felt irrationally angry.  his host's contemptuous tribute to
may's "niceness" was just what a husband should have wished to hear
said of his wife.  the fact that a coarseminded man found her lacking
in attraction was simply another proof of her quality; yet the words
sent a faint shiver through his heart.  what if "niceness" carried to
that supreme degr
 
 ___________________________
 
n boston, and should take the fall river boat that night and
go on to new york the following evening.  it had always been understood
that he would return to town early in the week, and when he got back
from his expedition to portsmouth a letter from the office, which fate
had conspicuously placed on a corner of the hall table, sufficed to
justify his sudden change of plan.  he was even ashamed of the ease
with which the whole thing had been done: it reminded him, for an
uncomfortable moment, of lawrence lefferts's masterly contrivances for
securing his freedom.  but this did not long trouble him, for he was
not in an analytic mood.

after breakfast he smoked a cigarette and glanced over the commercial
advertiser.  while he was thus engaged two or three men he knew came
in, and the usual greetings were exchanged: it was the same world after
all, though he had such a queer sense of having slipped through the
meshes of time and space.

he looked at his watch, and finding that it was half-past nine got up

 
 ___________________________
 
ned on the key of the lamp as she turned to him slowly.
the heat from its flame had brought back a glow to her face, but it
paled as she looked up.

"on business?" she asked, in a tone which implied that there could be
no other conceivable reason, and that she had put the question
automatically, as if merely to finish his own sentence.

"on business, naturally.  there's a patent case coming up before the
supreme court--"  he gave the name of the inventor, and went on
furnishing details with all lawrence lefferts's practised glibness,
while she listened attentively, saying at intervals:  "yes, i see."

"the change will do you good," she said simply, when he had finished;
"and you must be sure to go and see ellen," she added, looking him
straight in the eyes with her cloudless smile, and speaking in the tone
she might have employed in urging him not to neglect some irksome
family duty.

it was the only word that passed between them on the subject; but in
the code in which they had both been trained it me
 
 ___________________________
 
he walked hastily away toward the
telegraph office.



xxviii.

"ol-ol--howjer spell it, anyhow?" asked the tart young lady to whom
archer had pushed his wife's telegram across the brass ledge of the
western union office.

"olenska--o-len-ska," he repeated, drawing back the message in order to
print out the foreign syllables above may's rambling script.

"it's an unlikely name for a new york telegraph office; at least in
this quarter," an unexpected voice observed; and turning around archer
saw lawrence lefferts at his elbow, pulling an imperturbable moustache
and affecting not to glance at the message.

"hallo, newland: thought i'd catch you here.  i've just heard of old
mrs. mingott's stroke; and as i was on my way to the house i saw you
turning down this street and nipped after you.  i suppose you've come
from there?"

archer nodded, and pushed his telegram under the lattice.

"very bad, eh?" lefferts continued.  "wiring to the family, i suppose.
i gather it is bad, if you're including countess olen
 
 ___________________________
 
ska."

archer's lips stiffened; he felt a savage impulse to dash his fist into
the long vain handsome face at his side.

"why?" he questioned.

lefferts, who was known to shrink from discussion, raised his eye-brows
with an ironic grimace that warned the other of the watching damsel
behind the lattice.  nothing could be worse "form" the look reminded
archer, than any display of temper in a public place.

archer had never been more indifferent to the requirements of form; but
his impulse to do lawrence lefferts a physical injury was only
momentary.  the idea of bandying ellen olenska's name with him at such
a time, and on whatsoever provocation, was unthinkable.  he paid for
his telegram, and the two young men went out together into the street.
there archer, having regained his self-control, went on:  "mrs. mingott
is much better: the doctor feels no anxiety whatever"; and lefferts,
with profuse expressions of relief, asked him if he had heard that
there were beastly bad rumours again about beaufort..
 
 ___________________________
 
 young men of
fashionable cut approaching.  there was a familiar air about their
overcoats and the way their smart silk mufflers were folded over their
white ties; and he wondered how youths of their quality happened to be
dining out so early.  then he remembered that the reggie chiverses,
whose house was a few doors above, were taking a large party that
evening to see adelaide neilson in romeo and juliet, and guessed that
the two were of the number.  they passed under a lamp, and he
recognised lawrence lefferts and a young chivers.

a mean desire not to have madame olenska seen at the beauforts' door
vanished as he felt the penetrating warmth of her hand.

"i shall see you now--we shall be together," he broke out, hardly
knowing what he said.

"ah," she answered, "granny has told you?"

while he watched her he was aware that lefferts and chivers, on
reaching the farther side of the street corner, had discreetly struck
away across fifth avenue.  it was the kind of masculine solidarity that
he himself o
 
 ___________________________
 
s and maidenhair in the centre of the long table, and
the placing of the maillard bonbons in openwork silver baskets between
the candelabra.  on the piano stood a large basket of orchids which mr.
van der luyden had had sent from skuytercliff.  everything was, in
short, as it should be on the approach of so considerable an event.

mrs. archer ran thoughtfully over the list, checking off each name with
her sharp gold pen.

"henry van der luyden--louisa--the lovell mingotts--the reggie
chiverses--lawrence lefferts and gertrude--(yes, i suppose may was
right to have them)--the selfridge merrys, sillerton jackson, van
newland and his wife. (how time passes!  it seems only yesterday that
he was your best man, newland)--and countess olenska--yes, i think
that's all...."

mrs. welland surveyed her son-in-law affectionately.  "no one can say,
newland, that you and may are not giving ellen a handsome send-off."

"ah, well," said mrs. archer, "i understand may's wanting her cousin to
tell people abroad that we'r
 
 ___________________________
 
ded, it didn't matter; for when you'd seen athens and smyrna and
constantinople, what else was there?  and mrs. merry said she could
never be too grateful to dr. bencomb for having made them promise not
to go to naples on account of the fever.

"but you must have three weeks to do india properly," her husband
conceded, anxious to have it understood that he was no frivolous
globe-trotter.

and at this point the ladies went up to the drawing-room.

in the library, in spite of weightier presences, lawrence lefferts
predominated.

the talk, as usual, had veered around to the beauforts, and even mr.
van der luyden and mr. selfridge merry, installed in the honorary
arm-chairs tacitly reserved for them, paused to listen to the younger
man's philippic.

never had lefferts so abounded in the sentiments that adorn christian
manhood and exalt the sanctity of the home.  indignation lent him a
scathing eloquence, and it was clear that if others had followed his
example, and acted as he talked, society would never h
 
 ___________________________
 
k and
fan with one hand, held out the other to him.  "good-bye," she said.

"good-bye--but i shall see you soon in paris," he answered aloud--it
seemed to him that he had shouted it.

"oh," she murmured, "if you and may could come--!"

mr. van der luyden advanced to give her his arm, and archer turned to
mrs. van der luyden.  for a moment, in the billowy darkness inside the
big landau, he caught the dim oval of a face, eyes shining
steadily--and she was gone.

as he went up the steps he crossed lawrence lefferts coming down with
his wife.  lefferts caught his host by the sleeve, drawing back to let
gertrude pass.

"i say, old chap: do you mind just letting it be understood that i'm
dining with you at the club tomorrow night?  thanks so much, you old
brick!  good-night."

"it did go off beautifully, didn't it?" may questioned from the
threshold of the library.

archer roused himself with a start.  as soon as the last carriage had
driven away, he had come up to the library and shut himself in, with
the h
 
 ___________________________
 
 had taken.  the trenchant divisions between right and wrong,
honest and dishonest, respectable and the reverse, had left so little
scope for the unforeseen.  there are moments when a man's imagination,
so easily subdued to what it lives in, suddenly rises above its daily
level, and surveys the long windings of destiny.  archer hung there and
wondered....

what was left of the little world he had grown up in, and whose
standards had bent and bound him?  he remembered a sneering prophecy of
poor lawrence lefferts's, uttered years ago in that very room:  "if
things go on at this rate, our children will be marrying beaufort's
bastards."

it was just what archer's eldest son, the pride of his life, was doing;
and nobody wondered or reproved.  even the boy's aunt janey, who still
looked so exactly as she used to in her elderly youth, had taken her
mother's emeralds and seed-pearls out of their pink cotton-wool, and
carried them with her own twitching hands to the future bride; and
fanny beaufort, instead of