cent; and i understand you invited mrs.
lemuel struthers?  well--i've a curiosity to see the woman myself."

she had forgotten her relatives, who were drifting out into the hall
under ellen olenska's guidance.  old mrs. mingott had always professed
a great admiration for julius beaufort, and there was a kind of kinship
in their cool domineering way and their short-cuts through the
conventions.  now she was eagerly curious to know what had decided the
beauforts to invite (for the first time) mrs. lemuel struthers, the
widow of struthers's shoe-polish, who had returned the previous year
from a long initiatory sojourn in europe to lay siege to the tight
little citadel of new york.  "of course if you and regina invite her
the thing is settled.  well, we need new blood and new money--and i
hear she's still very good-looking," the carnivorous old lady declared.

in the hall, while mrs. welland and may drew on their furs, archer saw
that the countess olenska was looking at him with a faintly questioning
smile
 
 ___________________________
 
r. jackson would
rather have had him dine out; but he had his own reasons for not doing
so.

of course old jackson wanted to talk about ellen olenska, and of course
mrs. archer and janey wanted to hear what he had to tell.  all three
would be slightly embarrassed by newland's presence, now that his
prospective relation to the mingott clan had been made known; and the
young man waited with an amused curiosity to see how they would turn
the difficulty.

they began, obliquely, by talking about mrs. lemuel struthers.

"it's a pity the beauforts asked her," mrs. archer said gently.  "but
then regina always does what he tells her; and beaufort--"

"certain nuances escape beaufort," said mr. jackson, cautiously
inspecting the broiled shad, and wondering for the thousandth time why
mrs. archer's cook always burnt the roe to a cinder. (newland, who had
long shared his wonder, could always detect it in the older man's
expression of melancholy disapproval.)

"oh, necessarily; beaufort is a vulgar man," said mrs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
she
was, sillerton?"

"out of a mine: or rather out of the saloon at the head of the pit.
then with living wax-works, touring new england.  after the police
broke that up, they say she lived--"  mr. jackson in his turn glanced
at janey, whose eyes began to bulge from under her prominent lids.
there were still hiatuses for her in mrs. struthers's past.

"then," mr. jackson continued (and archer saw he was wondering why no
one had told the butler never to slice cucumbers with a steel knife),
"then lemuel struthers came along.  they say his advertiser used the
girl's head for the shoe-polish posters; her hair's intensely black,
you know--the egyptian style.  anyhow, he--eventually--married her."
there were volumes of innuendo in the way the "eventually" was spaced,
and each syllable given its due stress.

"oh, well--at the pass we've come to nowadays, it doesn't matter," said
mrs. archer indifferently.  the ladies were not really interested in
mrs. struthers just then; the subject of ellen olenska was too
 
 ___________________________
 
 know if you've heard--"

mrs. archer produced an indulgent smile.  "has the duke been carrying
her off to parties?"

"you know what these english grandees are.  they're all alike.  louisa
and i are very fond of our cousin--but it's hopeless to expect people
who are accustomed to the european courts to trouble themselves about
our little republican distinctions.  the duke goes where he's amused."
mr. van der luyden paused, but no one spoke.  "yes--it seems he took
her with him last night to mrs. lemuel struthers's.  sillerton jackson
has just been to us with the foolish story, and louisa was rather
troubled.  so i thought the shortest way was to go straight to countess
olenska and explain--by the merest hint, you know--how we feel in new
york about certain things.  i felt i might, without indelicacy, because
the evening she dined with us she rather suggested ... rather let me
see that she would be grateful for guidance.  and she was."

mr. van der luyden looked about the room with what would have been

 
 ___________________________
 
 she denies it."

"then--"

"will you oblige me, mr. archer, by first looking through these papers?
afterward, when we have talked the case over, i will give you my
opinion."

archer withdrew reluctantly with the unwelcome documents.  since their
last meeting he had half-unconsciously collaborated with events in
ridding himself of the burden of madame olenska.  his hour alone with
her by the firelight had drawn them into a momentary intimacy on which
the duke of st. austrey's intrusion with mrs. lemuel struthers, and the
countess's joyous greeting of them, had rather providentially broken.
two days later archer had assisted at the comedy of her reinstatement
in the van der luydens' favour, and had said to himself, with a touch
of tartness, that a lady who knew how to thank all-powerful elderly
gentlemen to such good purpose for a bunch of flowers did not need
either the private consolations or the public championship of a young
man of his small compass.  to look at the matter in this light
simplified h
 
 ___________________________
 
n company; but now their eyes met, and as mrs. beaufort recognised
him at the same time, and made her languid little gesture of
invitation, it was impossible not to go into the box.

beaufort and lefferts made way for him, and after a few words with mrs.
beaufort, who always preferred to look beautiful and not have to talk,
archer seated himself behind madame olenska.  there was no one else in
the box but mr. sillerton jackson, who was telling mrs. beaufort in a
confidential undertone about mrs. lemuel struthers's last sunday
reception (where some people reported that there had been dancing).
under cover of this circumstantial narrative, to which mrs. beaufort
listened with her perfect smile, and her head at just the right angle
to be seen in profile from the stalls, madame olenska turned and spoke
in a low voice.

"do you think," she asked, glancing toward the stage, "he will send her
a bunch of yellow roses tomorrow morning?"

archer reddened, and his heart gave a leap of surprise.  he had called
onl
 
 ___________________________
 
ked, as she walked with him to the door of
the room.

"whenever you like; but it must be soon if you want to see the little
house again.  i am moving next week."

a pang shot through him at the memory of his lamplit hours in the
low-studded drawing-room.  few as they had been, they were thick with
memories.

"tomorrow evening?"

she nodded.  "tomorrow; yes; but early.  i'm going out."

the next day was a sunday, and if she were "going out" on a sunday
evening it could, of course, be only to mrs. lemuel struthers's.  he
felt a slight movement of annoyance, not so much at her going there
(for he rather liked her going where she pleased in spite of the van
der luydens), but because it was the kind of house at which she was
sure to meet beaufort, where she must have known beforehand that she
would meet him--and where she was probably going for that purpose.

"very well; tomorrow evening," he repeated, inwardly resolved that he
would not go early, and that by reaching her door late he would either
prevent h
 
 ___________________________
 
 to hide her own countenance
than to talk about other people's," mrs. lovell mingott agreed.  "i
understand that the emerald necklace she wore at the opera last friday
had been sent on approval from ball and black's in the afternoon.  i
wonder if they'll ever get it back?"

archer listened unmoved to the relentless chorus.  the idea of absolute
financial probity as the first law of a gentleman's code was too deeply
ingrained in him for sentimental considerations to weaken it.  an
adventurer like lemuel struthers might build up the millions of his
shoe polish on any number of shady dealings; but unblemished honesty
was the noblesse oblige of old financial new york.  nor did mrs.
beaufort's fate greatly move archer.  he felt, no doubt, more sorry for
her than her indignant relatives; but it seemed to him that the tie
between husband and wife, even if breakable in prosperity, should be
indissoluble in misfortune.  as mr. letterblair had said, a wife's
place was at her husband's side when he was in trouble