lley.  "she doesn't even guess what
it's all about." and he contemplated her absorbed young face with a
thrill of possessorship in which pride in his own masculine initiation
was mingled with a tender reverence for her abysmal purity.  "we'll
read faust together ... by the italian lakes ..." he thought, somewhat
hazily confusing the scene of his projected honey-moon with the
masterpieces of literature which it would be his manly privilege to
reveal to his bride.  it was only that afternoon that may welland had
let him guess that she "cared" (new york's consecrated phrase of maiden
avowal), and already his imagination, leaping ahead of the engagement
ring, the betrothal kiss and the march from lohengrin, pictured her at
his side in some scene of old european witchery.

he did not in the least wish the future mrs. newland archer to be a
simpleton.  he meant her (thanks to his enlightening companionship) to
develop a social tact and readiness of wit enabling her to hold her own
with the most popular
 
 ___________________________
 
 a fellow just
when to wear a black tie with evening clothes and when not to, it's
larry lefferts."  and on the question of pumps versus patent-leather
"oxfords" his authority had never been disputed.

"my god!" he said; and silently handed his glass to old sillerton
jackson.

newland archer, following lefferts's glance, saw with surprise that his
exclamation had been occasioned by the entry of a new figure into old
mrs. mingott's box.  it was that of a slim young woman, a little less
tall than may welland, with brown hair growing in close curls about her
temples and held in place by a narrow band of diamonds.  the suggestion
of this headdress, which gave her what was then called a "josephine
look," was carried out in the cut of the dark blue velvet gown rather
theatrically caught up under her bosom by a girdle with a large
old-fashioned clasp.  the wearer of this unusual dress, who seemed
quite unconscious of the attention it was attracting, stood a moment in
the centre of the box, discussing wi
 
 ___________________________
 
lovell (who tried to retrieve the family credit by having the
best chef in new york) she used to say laughingly:  "what's the use of
two good cooks in one family, now that i've married the girls and can't
eat sauces?"

newland archer, as he mused on these things, had once more turned his
eyes toward the mingott box.  he saw that mrs. welland and her
sister-in-law were facing their semicircle of critics with the
mingottian aplomb which old catherine had inculcated in all her tribe,
and that only may welland betrayed, by a heightened colour (perhaps due
to the knowledge that he was watching her) a sense of the gravity of
the situation.  as for the cause of the commotion, she sat gracefully
in her corner of the box, her eyes fixed on the stage, and revealing,
as she leaned forward, a little more shoulder and bosom than new york
was accustomed to seeing, at least in ladies who had reasons for
wishing to pass unnoticed.

few things seemed to newland archer more awful than an offence against
"taste," t
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"well--it's queer to have brought miss welland, anyhow," some one said
in a low tone, with a side-glance at archer.

"oh, that's part of the campaign: granny's orders, no doubt," lefferts
laughed.  "when the old lady does a thing she does it thoroughly."

the act was ending, and there was a general stir in the box.  suddenly
newland archer felt himself impelled to decisive action.  the desire to
be the first man to enter mrs. mingott's box, to proclaim to the
waiting world his engagement to may welland, and to see her through
whatever difficulties her cousin's anomalous situation might involve
her in; this impulse had abruptly overruled all scruples and
hesitations, and sent him hurrying through the red corridors to the
farther side of the house.

as he entered the box his eyes met miss welland's, and he saw that she
had instantly understood his motive, though the family dignity which
both considered so high a virtue would not permit her to tell him so.
the persons of their world lived in an 
 
 ___________________________
 
paused a moment.  it was at his express wish that the
announcement had been made, and yet it was not thus that he would have
wished to have his happiness known.  to proclaim it in the heat and
noise of a crowded ball-room was to rob it of the fine bloom of privacy
which should belong to things nearest the heart.  his joy was so deep
that this blurring of the surface left its essence untouched; but he
would have liked to keep the surface pure too.  it was something of a
satisfaction to find that may welland shared this feeling.  her eyes
fled to his beseechingly, and their look said:  "remember, we're doing
this because it's right."

no appeal could have found a more immediate response in archer's
breast; but he wished that the necessity of their action had been
represented by some ideal reason, and not simply by poor ellen olenska.
the group about miss welland made way for him with significant smiles,
and after taking his share of the felicitations he drew his betrothed
into the middle of the bal
 
 ___________________________
 
tess olenska?  was she at the ball too?"

there was a faint touch of sarcasm in the reference to her son, and
archer knew it and had expected it.  even mrs. archer, who was seldom
unduly pleased with human events, had been altogether glad of her son's
engagement. ("especially after that silly business with mrs.
rushworth," as she had remarked to janey, alluding to what had once
seemed to newland a tragedy of which his soul would always bear the
scar.)

there was no better match in new york than may welland, look at the
question from whatever point you chose.  of course such a marriage was
only what newland was entitled to; but young men are so foolish and
incalculable--and some women so ensnaring and unscrupulous--that it was
nothing short of a miracle to see one's only son safe past the siren
isle and in the haven of a blameless domesticity.

all this mrs. archer felt, and her son knew she felt; but he knew also
that she had been perturbed by the premature announcement of his
engagement, or rath
 
 ___________________________
 
aken himself away, and the ladies
had retired to their chintz-curtained bedroom, newland archer mounted
thoughtfully to his own study.  a vigilant hand had, as usual, kept the
fire alive and the lamp trimmed; and the room, with its rows and rows
of books, its bronze and steel statuettes of "the fencers" on the
mantelpiece and its many photographs of famous pictures, looked
singularly home-like and welcoming.

as he dropped into his armchair near the fire his eyes rested on a
large photograph of may welland, which the young girl had given him in
the first days of their romance, and which had now displaced all the
other portraits on the table.  with a new sense of awe he looked at the
frank forehead, serious eyes and gay innocent mouth of the young
creature whose soul's custodian he was to be.  that terrifying product
of the social system he belonged to and believed in, the young girl who
knew nothing and expected everything, looked back at him like a
stranger through may welland's familiar feature
 
 ___________________________
 
of each other, since it was his duty,
as a "decent" fellow, to conceal his past from her, and hers, as a
marriageable girl, to have no past to conceal?  what if, for some one
of the subtler reasons that would tell with both of them, they should
tire of each other, misunderstand or irritate each other?  he reviewed
his friends' marriages--the supposedly happy ones--and saw none that
answered, even remotely, to the passionate and tender comradeship which
he pictured as his permanent relation with may welland.  he perceived
that such a picture presupposed, on her part, the experience, the
versatility, the freedom of judgment, which she had been carefully
trained not to possess; and with a shiver of foreboding he saw his
marriage becoming what most of the other marriages about him were: a
dull association of material and social interests held together by
ignorance on the one side and hypocrisy on the other.  lawrence
lefferts occurred to him as the husband who had most completely
realised this enviab
 
 ___________________________
 
  that's why i came
home.  i want to forget everything else, to become a complete american
again, like the mingotts and wellands, and you and your delightful
mother, and all the other good people here tonight.  ah, here's may
arriving, and you will want to hurry away to her," she added, but
without moving; and her eyes turned back from the door to rest on the
young man's face.

the drawing-rooms were beginning to fill up with after-dinner guests,
and following madame olenska's glance archer saw may welland entering
with her mother.  in her dress of white and silver, with a wreath of
silver blossoms in her hair, the tall girl looked like a diana just
alight from the chase.

"oh," said archer, "i have so many rivals; you see she's already
surrounded.  there's the duke being introduced."

"then stay with me a little longer," madame olenska said in a low tone,
just touching his knee with her plumed fan.  it was the lightest touch,
but it thrilled him like a caress.

"yes, let me stay," he answered in
 
 ___________________________
 
a wonderful new volume called "the renaissance" by
walter pater.  he talked easily of botticelli, and spoke of fra
angelico with a faint condescension.  but these pictures bewildered
him, for they were like nothing that he was accustomed to look at (and
therefore able to see) when he travelled in italy; and perhaps, also,
his powers of observation were impaired by the oddness of finding
himself in this strange empty house, where apparently no one expected
him.  he was sorry that he had not told may welland of countess
olenska's request, and a little disturbed by the thought that his
betrothed might come in to see her cousin.  what would she think if she
found him sitting there with the air of intimacy implied by waiting
alone in the dusk at a lady's fireside?

but since he had come he meant to wait; and he sank into a chair and
stretched his feet to the logs.

it was odd to have summoned him in that way, and then forgotten him;
but archer felt more curious than mortified.  the atmosphere of the
r
 
 ___________________________
 
sping and chafing it like
a child's while he murmured reassuring words; but in a moment she freed
herself, and looked up at him with wet lashes.

"does no one cry here, either?  i suppose there's no need to, in
heaven," she said, straightening her loosened braids with a laugh, and
bending over the tea-kettle.  it was burnt into his consciousness that
he had called her "ellen"--called her so twice; and that she had not
noticed it.  far down the inverted telescope he saw the faint white
figure of may welland--in new york.

suddenly nastasia put her head in to say something in her rich italian.

madame olenska, again with a hand at her hair, uttered an exclamation
of assent--a flashing "gia--gia"--and the duke of st. austrey entered,
piloting a tremendous blackwigged and red-plumed lady in overflowing
furs.

"my dear countess, i've brought an old friend of mine to see you--mrs.
struthers.  she wasn't asked to the party last night, and she wants to
know you."

the duke beamed on the group, and madame
 
 ___________________________
 
omen ought to be as free as we
are--"

it would presently be his task to take the bandage from this young
woman's eyes, and bid her look forth on the world.  but how many
generations of the women who had gone to her making had descended
bandaged to the family vault?  he shivered a little, remembering some
of the new ideas in his scientific books, and the much-cited instance
of the kentucky cave-fish, which had ceased to develop eyes because
they had no use for them.  what if, when he had bidden may welland to
open hers, they could only look out blankly at blankness?

"we might be much better off.  we might be altogether together--we
might travel."

her face lit up.  "that would be lovely," she owned: she would love to
travel.  but her mother would not understand their wanting to do things
so differently.

"as if the mere 'differently' didn't account for it!" the wooer
insisted.

"newland!  you're so original!" she exulted.

his heart sank, for he saw that he was saying all the things that young
m
 
 ___________________________
 
or
divorce.  certain papers have been placed in my hands."  he paused and
drummed on his desk.  "in view of your prospective alliance with the
family i should like to consult you--to consider the case with
you--before taking any farther steps."

archer felt the blood in his temples.  he had seen the countess olenska
only once since his visit to her, and then at the opera, in the mingott
box.  during this interval she had become a less vivid and importunate
image, receding from his foreground as may welland resumed her rightful
place in it.  he had not heard her divorce spoken of since janey's
first random allusion to it, and had dismissed the tale as unfounded
gossip.  theoretically, the idea of divorce was almost as distasteful
to him as to his mother; and he was annoyed that mr. letterblair (no
doubt prompted by old catherine mingott) should be so evidently
planning to draw him into the affair.  after all, there were plenty of
mingott men for such jobs, and as yet he was not even a mingott by
m
 
 ___________________________
 
 archer had assisted at the comedy of her reinstatement
in the van der luydens' favour, and had said to himself, with a touch
of tartness, that a lady who knew how to thank all-powerful elderly
gentlemen to such good purpose for a bunch of flowers did not need
either the private consolations or the public championship of a young
man of his small compass.  to look at the matter in this light
simplified his own case and surprisingly furbished up all the dim
domestic virtues.  he could not picture may welland, in whatever
conceivable emergency, hawking about her private difficulties and
lavishing her confidences on strange men; and she had never seemed to
him finer or fairer than in the week that followed.  he had even
yielded to her wish for a long engagement, since she had found the one
disarming answer to his plea for haste.

"you know, when it comes to the point, your parents have always let you
have your way ever since you were a little girl," he argued; and she
had answered, with her clearest 
 
 ___________________________
 
oaching the subject
at such a moment.

"i understand--that you were right," she went on a little breathlessly;
"but sometimes life is difficult ...  perplexing..."

"i know."

"and i wanted to tell you that i do feel you were right; and that i'm
grateful to you," she ended, lifting her opera-glass quickly to her
eyes as the door of the box opened and beaufort's resonant voice broke
in on them.

archer stood up, and left the box and the theatre.

only the day before he had received a letter from may welland in which,
with characteristic candour, she had asked him to "be kind to ellen" in
their absence.  "she likes you and admires you so much--and you know,
though she doesn't show it, she's still very lonely and unhappy.  i
don't think granny understands her, or uncle lovell mingott either;
they really think she's much worldlier and fonder of society than she
is.  and i can quite see that new york must seem dull to her, though
the family won't admit it.  i think she's been used to lots of things
we
 
 ___________________________
 
m more of a kaleidoscope, turned out, in the end, to be a
smaller box, with a more monotonous pattern, than the assembled atoms
of fifth avenue.


the next morning archer scoured the town in vain for more yellow roses.
in consequence of this search he arrived late at the office, perceived
that his doing so made no difference whatever to any one, and was
filled with sudden exasperation at the elaborate futility of his life.
why should he not be, at that moment, on the sands of st. augustine
with may welland?  no one was deceived by his pretense of professional
activity.  in old-fashioned legal firms like that of which mr.
letterblair was the head, and which were mainly engaged in the
management of large estates and "conservative" investments, there were
always two or three young men, fairly well-off, and without
professional ambition, who, for a certain number of hours of each day,
sat at their desks accomplishing trivial tasks, or simply reading the
newspapers.  though it was supposed to be prope
 
 ___________________________
 
eam away another year?  look at me, dear!  don't you
understand how i want you for my wife?"

for a moment she remained motionless; then she raised on him eyes of
such despairing dearness that he half-released her waist from his hold.
but suddenly her look changed and deepened inscrutably.  "i'm not sure
if i do understand," she said.  "is it--is it because you're not
certain of continuing to care for me?"

archer sprang up from his seat.  "my god--perhaps--i don't know," he
broke out angrily.

may welland rose also; as they faced each other she seemed to grow in
womanly stature and dignity.  both were silent for a moment, as if
dismayed by the unforeseen trend of their words: then she said in a low
voice: "if that is it--is there some one else?"

"some one else--between you and me?"  he echoed her words slowly, as
though they were only half-intelligible and he wanted time to repeat
the question to himself.  she seemed to catch the uncertainty of his
voice, for she went on in a deepening tone:  "
 
 ___________________________
 
e should have stood for five minutes
arguing with her across the width of the room, when just touching her
made everything so simple.

she gave him back all his kiss, but after a moment he felt her
stiffening in his arms, and she put him aside and stood up.

"ah, my poor newland--i suppose this had to be.  but it doesn't in the
least alter things," she said, looking down at him in her turn from the
hearth.

"it alters the whole of life for me."

"no, no--it mustn't, it can't.  you're engaged to may welland; and i'm
married."

he stood up too, flushed and resolute.  "nonsense!  it's too late for
that sort of thing.  we've no right to lie to other people or to
ourselves.  we won't talk of your marriage; but do you see me marrying
may after this?"

she stood silent, resting her thin elbows on the mantelpiece, her
profile reflected in the glass behind her.  one of the locks of her
chignon had become loosened and hung on her neck; she looked haggard
and almost old.

"i don't see you," she said at leng
 
 ___________________________
 
sed again, she
handed the telegram to archer.

it was dated from st. augustine, and addressed to the countess olenska.
in it he read:  "granny's telegram successful.  papa and mamma agree
marriage after easter.  am telegraphing newland.  am too happy for
words and love you dearly.  your grateful may."


half an hour later, when archer unlocked his own front-door, he found a
similar envelope on the hall-table on top of his pile of notes and
letters.  the message inside the envelope was also from may welland,
and ran as follows:  "parents consent wedding tuesday after easter at
twelve grace church eight bridesmaids please see rector so happy love
may."

archer crumpled up the yellow sheet as if the gesture could annihilate
the news it contained.  then he pulled out a small pocket-diary and
turned over the pages with trembling fingers; but he did not find what
he wanted, and cramming the telegram into his pocket he mounted the
stairs.

a light was shining through the door of the little hall-room whi
 
 ___________________________
 
low voice, a few words which their companion did
not catch.

the marchioness replied by one of her queer foreign jerks, and a "que
voulez-vous?" which deepened beaufort's frown; but he produced a good
semblance of a congratulatory smile as he glanced at archer to say:
"you know may's going to carry off the first prize."

"ah, then it remains in the family," medora rippled; and at that moment
they reached the tent and mrs. beaufort met them in a girlish cloud of
mauve muslin and floating veils.

may welland was just coming out of the tent.  in her white dress, with
a pale green ribbon about the waist and a wreath of ivy on her hat, she
had the same diana-like aloofness as when she had entered the beaufort
ball-room on the night of her engagement.  in the interval not a
thought seemed to have passed behind her eyes or a feeling through her
heart; and though her husband knew that she had the capacity for both
he marvelled afresh at the way in which experience dropped away from
her.

she had her bow 