ody knew ... but then her mother was a rushworth.

in addition to this forest of family trees, mr. sillerton jackson
carried between his narrow hollow temples, and under his soft thatch of
silver hair, a register of most of the scandals and mysteries that had
smouldered under the unruffled surface of new york society within the
last fifty years.  so far indeed did his information extend, and so
acutely retentive was his memory, that he was supposed to be the only
man who could have told you who julius beaufort, the banker, really
was, and what had become of handsome bob spicer, old mrs. manson
mingott's father, who had disappeared so mysteriously (with a large sum
of trust money) less than a year after his marriage, on the very day
that a beautiful spanish dancer who had been delighting thronged
audiences in the old opera-house on the battery had taken ship for
cuba.  but these mysteries, and many others, were closely locked in mr.
jackson's breast; for not only did his keen sense of honour forbid hi
 
 ___________________________
 
e
which, at that very moment, her case was being tried.  nothing could be
in worse taste than misplaced flippancy; and he answered somewhat
stiffly:  "yes, you have been away a very long time."

"oh, centuries and centuries; so long," she said, "that i'm sure i'm
dead and buried, and this dear old place is heaven;" which, for reasons
he could not define, struck newland archer as an even more
disrespectful way of describing new york society.



iii.

it invariably happened in the same way.

mrs. julius beaufort, on the night of her annual ball, never failed to
appear at the opera; indeed, she always gave her ball on an opera night
in order to emphasise her complete superiority to household cares, and
her possession of a staff of servants competent to organise every
detail of the entertainment in her absence.

the beauforts' house was one of the few in new york that possessed a
ball-room (it antedated even mrs. manson mingott's and the headly
chiverses'); and at a time when it was beginning to be thoug
 
 ___________________________
 
nown everybody.  let
the young man have his way, my dear; don't wait till the bubble's off
the wine.  marry them before lent; i may catch pneumonia any winter
now, and i want to give the wedding-breakfast."

these successive statements were received with the proper expressions
of amusement, incredulity and gratitude; and the visit was breaking up
in a vein of mild pleasantry when the door opened to admit the countess
olenska, who entered in bonnet and mantle followed by the unexpected
figure of julius beaufort.

there was a cousinly murmur of pleasure between the ladies, and mrs.
mingott held out ferrigiani's model to the banker.  "ha!  beaufort,
this is a rare favour!" (she had an odd foreign way of addressing men
by their surnames.)

"thanks.  i wish it might happen oftener," said the visitor in his easy
arrogant way.  "i'm generally so tied down; but i met the countess
ellen in madison square, and she was good enough to let me walk home
with her."

"ah--i hope the house will be gayer, now that ell
 
 ___________________________
 
en's here!" cried mrs.
mingott with a glorious effrontery.  "sit down--sit down, beaufort:
push up the yellow armchair; now i've got you i want a good gossip.  i
hear your ball was magnificent; and i understand you invited mrs.
lemuel struthers?  well--i've a curiosity to see the woman myself."

she had forgotten her relatives, who were drifting out into the hall
under ellen olenska's guidance.  old mrs. mingott had always professed
a great admiration for julius beaufort, and there was a kind of kinship
in their cool domineering way and their short-cuts through the
conventions.  now she was eagerly curious to know what had decided the
beauforts to invite (for the first time) mrs. lemuel struthers, the
widow of struthers's shoe-polish, who had returned the previous year
from a long initiatory sojourn in europe to lay siege to the tight
little citadel of new york.  "of course if you and regina invite her
the thing is settled.  well, we need new blood and new mone
 
 ___________________________
 
.  lawrence
lefferts occurred to him as the husband who had most completely
realised this enviable ideal.  as became the high-priest of form, he
had formed a wife so completely to his own convenience that, in the
most conspicuous moments of his frequent love-affairs with other men's
wives, she went about in smiling unconsciousness, saying that "lawrence
was so frightfully strict"; and had been known to blush indignantly,
and avert her gaze, when some one alluded in her presence to the fact
that julius beaufort (as became a "foreigner" of doubtful origin) had
what was known in new york as "another establishment."

archer tried to console himself with the thought that he was not quite
such an ass as larry lefferts, nor may such a simpleton as poor
gertrude; but the difference was after all one of intelligence and not
of standards.  in reality they all lived in a kind of hieroglyphic
world, where the real thing was never said or done or even thought, but
only represented by a set of arbitrary signs; as 
 
 ___________________________
 
mid,
in which, as yet, hardly a fissure had been made or a foothold gained.
at its base was a firm foundation of what mrs. archer called "plain
people"; an honourable but obscure majority of respectable families who
(as in the case of the spicers or the leffertses or the jacksons) had
been raised above their level by marriage with one of the ruling clans.
people, mrs. archer always said, were not as particular as they used to
be; and with old catherine spicer ruling one end of fifth avenue, and
julius beaufort the other, you couldn't expect the old traditions to
last much longer.

firmly narrowing upward from this wealthy but inconspicuous substratum
was the compact and dominant group which the mingotts, newlands,
chiverses and mansons so actively represented.  most people imagined
them to be the very apex of the pyramid; but they themselves (at least
those of mrs. archer's generation) were aware that, in the eyes of the
professional genealogist, only a still smaller number of families could
lay clai
 
 ___________________________
 
"verra--verra."  when she had gone archer stood
up and began to wander about.  should he wait any longer?  his position
was becoming rather foolish.  perhaps he had misunderstood madame
olenska--perhaps she had not invited him after all.

down the cobblestones of the quiet street came the ring of a stepper's
hoofs; they stopped before the house, and he caught the opening of a
carriage door.  parting the curtains he looked out into the early dusk.
a street-lamp faced him, and in its light he saw julius beaufort's
compact english brougham, drawn by a big roan, and the banker
descending from it, and helping out madame olenska.

beaufort stood, hat in hand, saying something which his companion
seemed to negative; then they shook hands, and he jumped into his
carriage while she mounted the steps.

when she entered the room she showed no surprise at seeing archer
there; surprise seemed the emotion that she was least addicted to.

"how do you like my funny house?" she asked.  "to me it's like heaven."

as s
 
 ___________________________
 
e was once more conscious of the curious way in
which she reversed his values, and of the need of thinking himself into
conditions incredibly different from any that he knew if he were to be
of use in her present difficulty.


nastasia opened the door, smiling mysteriously.  on the bench in the
hall lay a sable-lined overcoat, a folded opera hat of dull silk with a
gold j. b. on the lining, and a white silk muffler: there was no
mistaking the fact that these costly articles were the property of
julius beaufort.

archer was angry: so angry that he came near scribbling a word on his
card and going away; then he remembered that in writing to madame
olenska he had been kept by excess of discretion from saying that he
wished to see her privately.  he had therefore no one but himself to
blame if she had opened her doors to other visitors; and he entered the
drawing-room with the dogged determination to make beaufort feel
himself in the way, and to outstay him.

the banker stood leaning against the mantelsh
 
 ___________________________
 
it was to happen in this way, with the
whole width of the room between them, and his eyes still fixed on the
outer snow.

for a long moment she was silent; and in that moment archer imagined
her, almost heard her, stealing up behind him to throw her light arms
about his neck.  while he waited, soul and body throbbing with the
miracle to come, his eyes mechanically received the image of a
heavily-coated man with his fur collar turned up who was advancing
along the path to the house.  the man was julius beaufort.

"ah--!" archer cried, bursting into a laugh.

madame olenska had sprung up and moved to his side, slipping her hand
into his; but after a glance through the window her face paled and she
shrank back.

"so that was it?" archer said derisively.

"i didn't know he was here," madame olenska murmured.  her hand still
clung to archer's; but he drew away from her, and walking out into the
passage threw open the door of the house.

"hallo, beaufort--this way!  madame olenska was expecting you," he sa
 
 ___________________________
 
r delinquency, usually went
early.

the one thing he had not counted on, in entering madame olenska's hall,
was to find hats and overcoats there.  why had she bidden him to come
early if she was having people to dine?  on a closer inspection of the
garments besides which nastasia was laying his own, his resentment gave
way to curiosity.  the overcoats were in fact the very strangest he had
ever seen under a polite roof; and it took but a glance to assure
himself that neither of them belonged to julius beaufort.  one was a
shaggy yellow ulster of "reach-me-down" cut, the other a very old and
rusty cloak with a cape--something like what the french called a
"macfarlane." this garment, which appeared to be made for a person of
prodigious size, had evidently seen long and hard wear, and its
greenish-black folds gave out a moist sawdusty smell suggestive of
prolonged sessions against bar-room walls.  on it lay a ragged grey
scarf and an odd felt hat of semiclerical shape.

archer raised his eyebrows enquir
 
 ___________________________
 
plain to her daughter; and may answered serenely:  "no; but you see
it doesn't matter, because when there's nothing particular to do he
reads a book."

"ah, yes--like his father!" mrs. welland agreed, as if allowing for an
inherited oddity; and after that the question of newland's unemployment
was tacitly dropped.

nevertheless, as the day for the sillerton reception approached, may
began to show a natural solicitude for his welfare, and to suggest a
tennis match at the chiverses', or a sail on julius beaufort's cutter,
as a means of atoning for her temporary desertion.  "i shall be back by
six, you know, dear: papa never drives later than that--" and she was
not reassured till archer said that he thought of hiring a run-about
and driving up the island to a stud-farm to look at a second horse for
her brougham.  they had been looking for this horse for some time, and
the suggestion was so acceptable that may glanced at her mother as if
to say:  "you see he knows how to plan out his time as well as any
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to him in horrified undertones the details of the
catastrophe.  it appeared that the evening before something dreadful
and mysterious had happened.  at about eight o'clock, just after mrs.
mingott had finished the game of solitaire that she always played after
dinner, the door-bell had rung, and a lady so thickly veiled that the
servants did not immediately recognise her had asked to be received.

the butler, hearing a familiar voice, had thrown open the sitting-room
door, announcing:  "mrs. julius beaufort"--and had then closed it again
on the two ladies.  they must have been together, he thought, about an
hour.  when mrs. mingott's bell rang mrs. beaufort had already slipped
away unseen, and the old lady, white and vast and terrible, sat alone
in her great chair, and signed to the butler to help her into her room.
she seemed, at that time, though obviously distressed, in complete
control of her body and brain.  the mulatto maid put her to bed,
brought her a cup of tea as usual, laid everything s