m'ama!", with a
final burst of love triumphant, as she pressed the dishevelled daisy to
her lips and lifted her large eyes to the sophisticated countenance of
the little brown faust-capoul, who was vainly trying, in a tight purple
velvet doublet and plumed cap, to look as pure and true as his artless
victim.

newland archer, leaning against the wall at the back of the club box,
turned his eyes from the stage and scanned the opposite side of the
house.  directly facing him was the box of old mrs. manson mingott,
whose monstrous obesity had long since made it impossible for her to
attend the opera, but who was always represented on fashionable nights
by some of the younger members of the family.  on this occasion, the
front of the box was filled by her daughter-in-law, mrs. lovell
mingott, and her daughter, mrs. welland; and slightly withdrawn behind
these brocaded matrons sat a young girl in white with eyes ecstatically
fixed on the stagelovers.  as madame nilsson's "m'ama!" thrilled out
above the sil
 
 ___________________________
 
rudery from being kind (in private) to her unhappy cousin; but
to receive countess olenska in the family circle was a different thing
from producing her in public, at the opera of all places, and in the
very box with the young girl whose engagement to him, newland archer,
was to be announced within a few weeks.  no, he felt as old sillerton
jackson felt; he did not think the mingotts would have tried it on!

he knew, of course, that whatever man dared (within fifth avenue's
limits) that old mrs. manson mingott, the matriarch of the line, would
dare.  he had always admired the high and mighty old lady, who, in
spite of having been only catherine spicer of staten island, with a
father mysteriously discredited, and neither money nor position enough
to make people forget it, had allied herself with the head of the
wealthy mingott line, married two of her daughters to "foreigners" (an
italian marquis and an english banker), and put the crowning touch to
her audacities by building a large house of pale cre
 
 ___________________________
 
ened like
doors instead of sashes that pushed up.

every one (including mr. sillerton jackson) was agreed that old
catherine had never had beauty--a gift which, in the eyes of new york,
justified every success, and excused a certain number of failings.
unkind people said that, like her imperial namesake, she had won her
way to success by strength of will and hardness of heart, and a kind of
haughty effrontery that was somehow justified by the extreme decency
and dignity of her private life.  mr. manson mingott had died when she
was only twenty-eight, and had "tied up" the money with an additional
caution born of the general distrust of the spicers; but his bold young
widow went her way fearlessly, mingled freely in foreign society,
married her daughters in heaven knew what corrupt and fashionable
circles, hobnobbed with dukes and ambassadors, associated familiarly
with papists, entertained opera singers, and was the intimate friend of
mme. taglioni; and all the while (as sillerton jackson was the fir
 
 ___________________________
 
st to
proclaim) there had never been a breath on her reputation; the only
respect, he always added, in which she differed from the earlier
catherine.

mrs. manson mingott had long since succeeded in untying her husband's
fortune, and had lived in affluence for half a century; but memories of
her early straits had made her excessively thrifty, and though, when
she bought a dress or a piece of furniture, she took care that it
should be of the best, she could not bring herself to spend much on the
transient pleasures of the table.  therefore, for totally different
reasons, her food was as poor as mrs. archer's, and her wines did
nothing to redeem it.  her relatives
 
 ___________________________
 
bing new york society.



iii.

it invariably happened in the same way.

mrs. julius beaufort, on the night of her annual ball, never failed to
appear at the opera; indeed, she always gave her ball on an opera night
in order to emphasise her complete superiority to household cares, and
her possession of a staff of servants competent to organise every
detail of the entertainment in her absence.

the beauforts' house was one of the few in new york that possessed a
ball-room (it antedated even mrs. manson mingott's and the headly
chiverses'); and at a time when it was beginning to be thought
"provincial" to put a "crash" over the drawing-room floor and move the
furniture upstairs, the possession of a ball-room that was used for no
other purpose, and left for three-hundred-and-sixty-four days of the
year to shuttered darkness, with its gilt chairs stacked in a corner
and its chandelier in a bag; this undoubted superiority was felt to
compensate for whatever was regrettable in the beaufort past.

mrs. arc
 
 ___________________________
 
all very well to whisper that he had been "helped"
to leave england by the international banking-house in which he had
been employed; he carried off that rumour as easily as the rest--though
new york's business conscience was no less sensitive than its moral
standard--he carried everything before him, and all new york into his
drawing-rooms, and for over twenty years now people had said they were
"going to the beauforts'" with the same tone of security as if they had
said they were going to mrs. manson mingott's, and with the added
satisfaction of knowing they would get hot canvas-back ducks and
vintage wines, instead of tepid veuve clicquot without a year and
warmed-up croquettes from philadelphia.

mrs. beaufort, then, had as usual appeared in her box just before the
jewel song; and when, again as usual, she rose at the end of the third
act, drew her opera cloak about her lovely shoulders, and disappeared,
new york knew that meant that half an hour later the ball would begin.

the beaufort house wa
 
 ___________________________
 
eason of her
cousin's staying away; but i shall never let her see by the least sign
that i am conscious of there being a shadow of a shade on poor ellen
olenska's reputation."



iv.

in the course of the next day the first of the usual betrothal visits
were exchanged.  the new york ritual was precise and inflexible in such
matters; and in conformity with it newland archer first went with his
mother and sister to call on mrs. welland, after which he and mrs.
welland and may drove out to old mrs. manson mingott's to receive that
venerable ancestress's blessing.

a visit to mrs. manson mingott was always an amusing episode to the
young man.  the house in itself was already an historic document,
though not, of course, as venerable as certain other old family houses
in university place and lower fifth avenue.  those were of the purest
1830, with a grim harmony of cabbage-rose-garlanded carpets, rosewood
consoles, round-arched fire-places with black marble mantels, and
immense glazed book-cases of mahogan
 
 ___________________________
 
nse of firm pink and white flesh, in the centre of which
the traces of a small face survived as if awaiting excavation.  a
flight of smooth double chins led down to the dizzy depths of a
still-snowy bosom veiled in snowy muslins that were held in place by a
miniature portrait of the late mr. mingott; and around and below, wave
after wave of black silk surged away over the edges of a capacious
armchair, with two tiny white hands poised like gulls on the surface of
the billows.

the burden of mrs. manson mingott's flesh had long since made it
impossible for her to go up and down stairs, and with characteristic
independence she had made her reception rooms upstairs and established
herself (in flagrant violation of all the new york proprieties) on the
ground floor of her house; so that, as you sat in her sitting-room
window with her, you caught (through a door that was always open, and a
looped-back yellow damask portiere) the unexpected vista of a bedroom
with a huge low bed upholstered like a sofa, and
 
 ___________________________
 
"  the
gentlemen he spoke of were the other senior partners of the firm; for,
as was always the case with legal associations of old standing in new
york, all the partners named on the office letter-head were long since
dead; and mr. letterblair, for example, was, professionally speaking,
his own grandson.

he leaned back in his chair with a furrowed brow.  "for family
reasons--" he continued.

archer looked up.

"the mingott family," said mr. letterblair with an explanatory smile
and bow.  "mrs. manson mingott sent for me yesterday.  her
grand-daughter the countess olenska wishes to sue her husband for
divorce.  certain papers have been placed in my hands."  he paused and
drummed on his desk.  "in view of your prospective alliance with the
family i should like to consult you--to consider the case with
you--before taking any farther steps."

archer felt the blood in his temples.  he had seen the countess olenska
only once since his visit to her, and then at the opera, in the mingott
box.  during this 
 
 ___________________________
 
wer and drew out a packet.  "if you will run your eye over these
papers--"

archer frowned.  "i beg your pardon, sir; but just because of the
prospective relationship, i should prefer your consulting mr. skipworth
or mr. redwood."

mr. letterblair looked surprised and slightly offended.  it was unusual
for a junior to reject such an opening.

he bowed.  "i respect your scruple, sir; but in this case i believe
true delicacy requires you to do as i ask.  indeed, the suggestion is
not mine but mrs. manson mingott's and her son's.  i have seen lovell
mingott; and also mr. welland.  they all named you."

archer felt his temper rising.  he had been somewhat languidly drifting
with events for the last fortnight, and letting may's fair looks and
radiant nature obliterate the rather importunate pressure of the
mingott claims.  but this behest of old mrs. mingott's roused him to a
sense of what the clan thought they had the right to exact from a
prospective son-in-law; and he chafed at the role.

"her uncles o
 
 ___________________________
 
 was such a thing as one's profession.

he managed, however, after an exchange of telegrams with the firm, to
make his cold last a week; and it shed an ironic light on the situation
to know that mr. letterblair's indulgence was partly due to the
satisfactory way in which his brilliant young junior partner had
settled the troublesome matter of the olenski divorce.  mr. letterblair
had let mrs. welland know that mr. archer had "rendered an invaluable
service" to the whole family, and that old mrs. manson mingott had been
particularly pleased; and one day when may had gone for a drive with
her father in the only vehicle the place produced mrs. welland took
occasion to touch on a topic which she always avoided in her daughter's
presence.

"i'm afraid ellen's ideas are not at all like ours.  she was barely
eighteen when medora manson took her back to europe--you remember the
excitement when she appeared in black at her coming-out ball?  another
of medora's fads--really this time it was almost prophetic!  
 
 ___________________________
 
e and patted his knee with her puff-ball hand.

"ah, ah--so you kicked over the traces, did you?  and i suppose augusta
and welland pulled long faces, and behaved as if the end of the world
had come?  but little may--she knew better, i'll be bound?"

"i hoped she did; but after all she wouldn't agree to what i'd gone
down to ask for."

"wouldn't she indeed?  and what was that?"

"i wanted to get her to promise that we should be married in april.
what's the use of our wasting another year?"

mrs. manson mingott screwed up her little mouth into a grimace of mimic
prudery and twinkled at him through malicious lids.  "'ask mamma,' i
suppose--the usual story.  ah, these mingotts--all alike!  born in a
rut, and you can't root 'em out of it.  when i built this house you'd
have thought i was moving to california!  nobody ever had built above
fortieth street--no, says i, nor above the battery either, before
christopher columbus discovered america.  no, no; not one of them wants
to be different; they're as sca
 
 ___________________________
 
rough the church:  "the family!"

mrs. welland came first, on the arm of her eldest son.  her large pink
face was appropriately solemn, and her plum-coloured satin with pale
blue side-panels, and blue ostrich plumes in a small satin bonnet, met
with general approval; but before she had settled herself with a
stately rustle in the pew opposite mrs. archer's the spectators were
craning their necks to see who was coming after her.  wild rumours had
been abroad the day before to the effect that mrs. manson mingott, in
spite of her physical disabilities, had resolved on being present at
the ceremony; and the idea was so much in keeping with her sporting
character that bets ran high at the clubs as to her being able to walk
up the nave and squeeze into a seat.  it was known that she had
insisted on sending her own carpenter to look into the possibility of
taking down the end panel of the front pew, and to measure the space
between the seat and the front; but the result had been discouraging,
and for one an
 
 ___________________________
 
to the edge of a sliding
precipice.  the discovery that he had been excluded from a share in
these negotiations, and even from the knowledge that they were on foot,
caused him a surprise hardly dulled by the acuter wonder of what he was
learning.  he saw in a flash that if the family had ceased to consult
him it was because some deep tribal instinct warned them that he was no
longer on their side; and he recalled, with a start of comprehension, a
remark of may's during their drive home from mrs. manson mingott's on
the day of the archery meeting:  "perhaps, after all, ellen would be
happier with her husband."

even in the tumult of new discoveries archer remembered his indignant
exclamation, and the fact that since then his wife had never named
madame olenska to him.  her careless allusion had no doubt been the
straw held up to see which way the wind blew; the result had been
reported to the family, and thereafter archer had been tacitly omitted
from their counsels.  he admired the tribal discipline 
 
 ___________________________
 
n, and its
doors were likely to close before the day was over.  the ugliest things
were being said of beaufort's dastardly manoeuvre, and his failure
promised to be one of the most discreditable in the history of wall
street.

the extent of the calamity left mr. letterblair white and
incapacitated.  "i've seen bad things in my time; but nothing as bad as
this.  everybody we know will be hit, one way or another.  and what
will be done about mrs. beaufort?  what can be done about her?  i pity
mrs. manson mingott as much as anybody: coming at her age, there's no
knowing what effect this affair may have on her.  she always believed
in beaufort--she made a friend of him!  and there's the whole dallas
connection: poor mrs. beaufort is related to every one of you.  her
only chance would be to leave her husband--yet how can any one tell her
so?  her duty is at his side; and luckily she seems always to have been
blind to his private weaknesses."

there was a knock, and mr. letterblair turned his head sharply.
 
 ___________________________
 
soever provocation, was unthinkable.  he paid for
his telegram, and the two young men went out together into the street.
there archer, having regained his self-control, went on:  "mrs. mingott
is much better: the doctor feels no anxiety whatever"; and lefferts,
with profuse expressions of relief, asked him if he had heard that
there were beastly bad rumours again about beaufort....

that afternoon the announcement of the beaufort failure was in all the
papers.  it overshadowed the report of mrs. manson mingott's stroke,
and only the few who had heard of the mysterious connection between the
two events thought of ascribing old catherine's illness to anything but
the accumulation of flesh and years.

the whole of new york was darkened by the tale of beaufort's dishonour.
there had never, as mr. letterblair said, been a worse case in his
memory, nor, for that matter, in the memory of the far-off letterblair
who had given his name to the firm.  the bank had continued to take in
money for a whole day afte
 
 ___________________________
 
r its failure was inevitable; and as many of
its clients belonged to one or another of the ruling clans, beaufort's
duplicity seemed doubly cynical.  if mrs. beaufort had not taken the
tone that such misfortunes (the word was her own) were "the test of
friendship," compassion for her might have tempered the general
indignation against her husband.  as it was--and especially after the
object of her nocturnal visit to mrs. manson mingott had become
known--her cynicism was held to exceed his; and she had not the
excuse--nor her detractors the satisfaction--of pleading that she was
"a foreigner."  it was some comfort (to those whose securities were not
in jeopardy) to be able to remind themselves that beaufort was; but,
after all, if a dallas of south carolina took his view of the case, and
glibly talked of his soon being "on his feet again," the argument lost
its edge, and there was nothing to do but to accept this awful evidenc
 
 ___________________________
 
er luyden ...

"the best thing the beauforts can do," said mrs. archer, summing it up
as if she were pronouncing a diagnosis and prescribing a course of
treatment, "is to go and live at regina's little place in north
carolina.  beaufort has always kept a racing stable, and he had better
breed trotting horses.  i should say he had all the qualities of a
successful horsedealer."  every one agreed with her, but no one
condescended to enquire what the beauforts really meant to do.

the next day mrs. manson mingott was much better: she recovered her
voice sufficiently to give orders that no one should mention the
beauforts to her again, and asked--when dr. bencomb appeared--what in
the world her family meant by making such a fuss about her health.

"if people of my age will eat chicken-salad in the evening what are
they to expect?" she enquired; and, the doctor having opportunely
modified her dietary, the stroke was transformed into an attack of
indigestion.  but in spite of her firm tone old catherine di
 
 ___________________________
 
over, and a tingling wind had sprung up, that lashed his face
as he stood gazing.  suddenly he felt something stiff and cold on his
lashes, and perceived that he had been crying, and that the wind had
frozen his tears.

he thrust his hands in his pockets, and walked at a sharp pace down
fifth avenue to his own house.



xxx.

that evening when archer came down before dinner he found the
drawing-room empty.

he and may were dining alone, all the family engagements having been
postponed since mrs. manson mingott's illness; and as may was the more
punctual of the two he was surprised that she had not preceded him.  he
knew that she was at home, for while he dressed he had heard her moving
about in her room; and he wondered what had delayed her.

he had fallen into the way of dwelling on such conjectures as a means
of tying his thoughts fast to reality.  sometimes he felt as if he had
found the clue to his father-in-law's absorption in trifles; perhaps
even mr. welland, long ago, had had escapes and visi
 
 ___________________________
 
e mentioned in his presence
by any member of the family.  he did not try to see her; to do so while
she was at old catherine's guarded bedside would have been almost
impossible.  in the uncertainty of the situation he let himself drift,
conscious, somewhere below the surface of his thoughts, of a resolve
which had come to him when he had leaned out from his library window
into the icy night.  the strength of that resolve made it easy to wait
and make no sign.

then one day may told him that mrs. manson mingott had asked to see
him.  there was nothing surprising in the request, for the old lady was
steadily recovering, and she had always openly declared that she
preferred archer to any of her other grandsons-in-law.  may gave the
message with evident pleasure: she was proud of old catherine's
appreciation of her husband.

there was a moment's pause, and then archer felt it incumbent on him to
say:  "all right.  shall we go together this afternoon?"

his wife's face brightened, but she instantly answer
 
 ___________________________
 
bstone.  it was in the conservatory that stretched
its dead-black bulk down the side street that he had taken his first
kiss from may; it was under the myriad candles of the ball-room that he
had seen her appear, tall and silver-shining as a young diana.

now the house was as dark as the grave, except for a faint flare of gas
in the basement, and a light in one upstairs room where the blind had
not been lowered.  as archer reached the corner he saw that the
carriage standing at the door was mrs. manson mingott's.  what an
opportunity for sillerton jackson, if he should chance to pass!  archer
had been greatly moved by old catherine's account of madame olenska's
attitude toward mrs. beaufort; it made the righteous reprobation of new
york seem like a passing by on the other side.  but he knew well enough
what construction the clubs and drawing-rooms would put on ellen
olenska's visits to her cousin.

he paused and looked up at the lighted window.  no doubt the two women
were sitting together in that ro