william morris.  but such things were
inconceivable in new york, and unsettling to think of.  archer knew
most of the "fellows who wrote," the musicians and the painters: he met
them at the century, or at the little musical and theatrical clubs that
were beginning to come into existence.  he enjoyed them there, and was
bored with them at the blenkers', where they were mingled with fervid
and dowdy women who passed them about like captured curiosities; and
even after his most exciting talks with ned winsett he always came away
with the feeling that if his world was small, so was theirs, and that
the only way to enlarge either was to reach a stage of manners where
they would naturally merge.

he was reminded of this by trying to picture the society in which the
countess olenska had lived and suffered, and also--perhaps--tasted
mysterious joys.  he remembered with what amusement she had told him
that her grandmother mingott and the wellands objected to her living in
a "bohemian" quarter given over t
 
 ___________________________
 
 than the ingenuous may imagined.  she had
beaufort at her feet, mr. van der luyden hovering above her like a
protecting deity, and any number of candidates (lawrence lefferts among
them) waiting their opportunity in the middle distance.  yet he never
saw her, or exchanged a word with her, without feeling that, after all,
may's ingenuousness almost amounted to a gift of divination.  ellen
olenska was lonely and she was unhappy.



xiv.

as he came out into the lobby archer ran across his friend ned winsett,
the only one among what janey called his "clever people" with whom he
cared to probe into things a little deeper than the average level of
club and chop-house banter.

he had caught sight, across the house, of winsett's shabby
round-shouldered back, and had once noticed his eyes turned toward the
beaufort box.  the two men shook hands, and winsett proposed a bock at
a little german restaurant around the corner.  archer, who was not in
the mood for the kind of talk they were likely to get there
 
 ___________________________
 
, declined
on the plea that he had work to do at home; and winsett said:  "oh,
well so have i for that matter, and i'll be the industrious apprentice
too."

they strolled along together, and presently winsett said:  "look here,
what i'm really after is the name of the dark lady in that swell box of
yours--with the beauforts, wasn't she?  the one your friend lefferts
seems so smitten by."

archer, he could not have said why, was slightly annoyed.  what the
devil did ned winsett want with ellen olenska's name?  and above all,
why did he couple it with lefferts's?  it was unlike winsett to
manifest such curiosity; but after all, archer remembered, he was a
journalist.

"it's not for an interview, i hope?" he laughed.

"well--not for the press; just for myself," winsett rejoined.  "the
fact is she's a neighbour of mine--queer quarter for such a beauty to
settle in--and she's been awfully kind to my little boy, who fell down
her area chasing his kitten, and gave himself a
 
 ___________________________
 
was so sympathetic and beautiful that my wife was too
dazzled to ask her name."

a pleasant glow dilated archer's heart.  there was nothing
extraordinary in the tale: any woman would have done as much for a
neighbour's child.  but it was just like ellen, he felt, to have rushed
in bareheaded, carrying the boy in her arms, and to have dazzled poor
mrs. winsett into forgetting to ask who she was.

"that is the countess olenska--a granddaughter of old mrs. mingott's."

"whew--a countess!" whistled ned winsett.  "well, i didn't know
countesses were so neighbourly.  mingotts ain't."

"they would be, if you'd let them."

"ah, well--"  it was their old interminable argument as to the
obstinate unwillingness of the "clever people" to frequent the
fashionable, and both men knew that there was no use in prolonging it.

"i wonder," winsett broke off, "how a countess happens to live in our
slum?"

"because she doesn't care a hang about where she lives--or about any of
our little social sign-posts," said arch
 
 ___________________________
 
er, with a secret pride in his
own picture of her.

"h'm--been in bigger places, i suppose," the other commented.  "well,
here's my corner."

he slouched off across broadway, and archer stood looking after him and
musing on his last words.

ned winsett had those flashes of penetration; they were the most
interesting thing about him, and always made archer wonder why they had
allowed him to accept failure so stolidly at an age when most men are
still struggling.

archer had known that winsett had a wife and child, but he had never
seen them.  the two men always met at the century, or at some haunt of
journalists and theatrical people, such as the restaurant where winsett
had proposed to go for a bock.  he had given archer to understand that
hi
 
 ___________________________
 
plaids and stripes and bands of
plain colour disposed in a design to which the clue seemed missing.
her hair, which had tried to turn white and only succeeded in fading,
was surmounted by a spanish comb and black lace scarf, and silk
mittens, visibly darned, covered her rheumatic hands.

beside her, in a cloud of cigar-smoke, stood the owners of the two
overcoats, both in morning clothes that they had evidently not taken
off since morning.  in one of the two, archer, to his surprise,
recognised ned winsett; the other and older, who was unknown to him,
and whose gigantic frame declared him to be the wearer of the
"macfarlane," had a feebly leonine head with crumpled grey hair, and
moved his arms with large pawing gestures, as though he were
distributing lay blessings to a kneeling multitude.

these three persons stood together on the hearth-rug, their eyes fixed
on an extraordinarily large bouquet of crimson roses, with a knot of
purple pansies at their base, that lay on the sofa where madame olen
 
 ___________________________
 
e; but the tutor, who spoke the most fluent and
accomplished english, gallantly continued to pour it out to her until
the ladies, to the manifest relief of all concerned, went up to the
drawing-room.

the vicar, after a glass of port, was obliged to hurry away to a
meeting, and the shy nephew, who appeared to be an invalid, was packed
off to bed.  but archer and the tutor continued to sit over their wine,
and suddenly archer found himself talking as he had not done since his
last symposium with ned winsett.  the carfry nephew, it turned out, had
been threatened with consumption, and had had to leave harrow for
switzerland, where he had spent two years in the milder air of lake
leman.  being a bookish youth, he had been entrusted to m. riviere, who
had brought him back to england, and was to remain with him till he
went up to oxford the following spring; and m. riviere added with
simplicity that he should then have to look out for another job.

it seemed impossible, archer thought, that he should 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry that the governor of new york, coming down from albany one
evening to dine and spend the night, had turned to his host, and said,
banging his clenched fist on the table and gnashing his eye-glasses:
"hang the professional politician!  you're the kind of man the country
wants, archer.  if the stable's ever to be cleaned out, men like you
have got to lend a hand in the cleaning."

"men like you--" how archer had glowed at the phrase!  how eagerly he
had risen up at the call!  it was an echo of ned winsett's old appeal
to roll his sleeves up and get down into the muck; but spoken by a man
who set the example of the gesture, and whose summons to follow him was
irresistible.

archer, as he looked back, was not sure that men like himself were what
his country needed, at least in the active service to which theodore
roosevelt had pointed; in fact, there was reason to think it did not,
for after a year in the state assembly he had not been re-elected, and
had dropped back thankfully into obscure if us