ses (on no account to be
confused with the manson chiverses of university place), but could also
enumerate the leading characteristics of each family: as, for instance,
the fabulous stinginess of the younger lines of leffertses (the long
island ones); or the fatal tendency of the rushworths to make foolish
matches; or the insanity recurring in every second generation of the
albany chiverses, with whom their new york cousins had always refused
to intermarry--with the disastrous exception of poor medora manson,
who, as everybody knew ... but then her mother was a rushworth.

in addition to this forest of family trees, mr. sillerton jackson
carried between his narrow hollow temples, and under his soft thatch of
silver hair, a register of most of the scandals and mysteries that had
smouldered under the unruffled surface of new york society within the
last fifty years.  so far indeed did his information extend, and so
acutely retentive was his memory, that he was supposed to be the only
man who could ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ing her social philosophy into axioms,
had once said:  "we all have our pet common people--" and though the
phrase was a daring one, its truth was secretly admitted in many an
exclusive bosom.  but the beauforts were not exactly common; some
people said they were even worse.  mrs. beaufort belonged indeed to one
of america's most honoured families; she had been the lovely regina
dallas (of the south carolina branch), a penniless beauty introduced to
new york society by her cousin, the imprudent medora manson, who was
always doing the wrong thing from the right motive.  when one was
related to the mansons and the rushworths one had a "droit de cite" (as
mr. sillerton jackson, who had frequented the tuileries, called it) in
new york society; but did one not forfeit it in marrying julius
beaufort?

the question was: who was beaufort?  he passed for an englishman, was
agreeable, handsome, ill-tempered, hospitable and witty.  he had come
to america with letters of recommendation from old mrs. manson
min
 
 ___________________________
 
gott's english son-in-law, the banker, and had speedily made himself
an important position in the world of affairs; but his habits were
dissipated, his tongue was bitter, his antecedents were mysterious; and
when medora manson announced her cousin's engagement to him it was felt
to be one more act of folly in poor medora's long record of imprudences.

but folly is as often justified of her children as wisdom, and two
years after young mrs. beaufort's marriage it was admitted that she had
the most distinguished house in new york.  no one knew exactly how the
miracle was accomplished.  she was indolent, passive, the caustic even
called her dull; but dressed like an idol, hung with pearls, growing
younger and blonder an
 
 ___________________________
 
er blushed and tried to look
audacious.

"it was, at any rate, in better taste not to go to the ball," mrs.
archer continued.

a spirit of perversity moved her son to rejoin:  "i don't think it was
a question of taste with her.  may said she meant to go, and then
decided that the dress in question wasn't smart enough."

mrs. archer smiled at this confirmation of her inference.  "poor
ellen," she simply remarked; adding compassionately:  "we must always
bear in mind what an eccentric bringing-up medora manson gave her.
what can you expect of a girl who was allowed to wear black satin at
her coming-out ball?"

"ah--don't i remember her in it!" said mr. jackson; adding:  "poor
girl!" in the tone of one who, while enjoying the memory, had fully
understood at the time what the sight portended.

"it's odd," janey remarked, "that she should have kept such an ugly
name as ellen.  i should have changed it to elaine."  she glanced about
the table to see the effect of this.

her brother laughed.  "why elaine?
 
 ___________________________
 
band, who glanced back at her.

"it is the principle that i dislike," said mr. van der luyden.  "as
long as a member of a well-known family is backed up by that family it
should be considered--final."

"it seems so to me," said his wife, as if she were producing a new
thought.

"i had no idea," mr. van der luyden continued, "that things had come to
such a pass."  he paused, and looked at his wife again.  "it occurs to
me, my dear, that the countess olenska is already a sort of
relation--through medora manson's first husband.  at any rate, she will
be when newland marries."  he turned toward the young man.  "have you
read this morning's times, newland?"

"why, yes, sir," said archer, who usually tossed off half a dozen
papers with his morning coffee.

husband and wife looked at each other again.  their pale eyes clung
together in prolonged and serious consultation; then a faint smile
fluttered over mrs. van der luyden's face.  she had evidently guessed
and approved.

mr. van der luyden turned to mrs
 
 ___________________________
 
d who remarked with authority, as the soprano paused:  "no one but
patti ought to attempt the sonnambula."



viii.

it was generally agreed in new york that the countess olenska had "lost
her looks."

she had appeared there first, in newland archer's boyhood, as a
brilliantly pretty little girl of nine or ten, of whom people said that
she "ought to be painted." her parents had been continental wanderers,
and after a roaming babyhood she had lost them both, and been taken in
charge by her aunt, medora manson, also a wanderer, who was herself
returning to new york to "settle down."

poor medora, repeatedly widowed, was always coming home to settle down
(each time in a less expensive house), and bringing with her a new
husband or an adopted child; but after a few months she invariably
parted from her husband or quarrelled with her ward, and, having got
rid of her house at a loss, set out again on her wanderings.  as her
mother had been a rushworth, and her last unhappy marriage had linked
her to one 
 
 ___________________________
 
's fireside?

but since he had come he meant to wait; and he sank into a chair and
stretched his feet to the logs.

it was odd to have summoned him in that way, and then forgotten him;
but archer felt more curious than mortified.  the atmosphere of the
room was so different from any he had ever breathed that
self-consciousness vanished in the sense of adventure.  he had been
before in drawing-rooms hung with red damask, with pictures "of the
italian school"; what struck him was the way in which medora manson's
shabby hired house, with its blighted background of pampas grass and
rogers statuettes, had, by a turn of the hand, and the skilful use of a
few properties, been transformed into something intimate, "foreign,"
subtly suggestive of old romantic scenes and sentiments.  he tried to
analyse the trick, to find a clue to it in the way the chairs and
tables were grouped, in the fact that only two jacqueminot roses (of
which nobody ever bought less than a dozen) had been placed in the
slender vase at
 
 ___________________________
 
whose newly painted door the canary-coloured brougham of miss
fanny ring was frequently seen to wait.

beyond the small and slippery pyramid which composed mrs. archer's
world lay the almost unmapped quarter inhabited by artists, musicians
and "people who wrote."  these scattered fragments of humanity had
never shown any desire to be amalgamated with the social structure.  in
spite of odd ways they were said to be, for the most part, quite
respectable; but they preferred to keep to themselves.  medora manson,
in her prosperous days, had inaugurated a "literary salon"; but it had
soon died out owing to the reluctance of the literary to frequent it.

others had made the same attempt, and there was a household of
blenkers--an intense and voluble mother, and three blowsy daughters who
imitated her--where one met edwin booth and patti and william winter,
and the new shakespearian actor george rignold, and some of the
magazine editors and musical and literary critics.

mrs. archer and her group felt a ce
 
 ___________________________
 
blesome matter of the olenski divorce.  mr. letterblair
had let mrs. welland know that mr. archer had "rendered an invaluable
service" to the whole family, and that old mrs. manson mingott had been
particularly pleased; and one day when may had gone for a drive with
her father in the only vehicle the place produced mrs. welland took
occasion to touch on a topic which she always avoided in her daughter's
presence.

"i'm afraid ellen's ideas are not at all like ours.  she was barely
eighteen when medora manson took her back to europe--you remember the
excitement when she appeared in black at her coming-out ball?  another
of medora's fads--really this time it was almost prophetic!  that must
have been at least twelve years ago; and since then ellen has never
been to america.  no wonder she is completely europeanised."

"but european society is not given to divorce: countess olenska thought
she would be conforming to american ideas in asking for her freedom."
it was the first time that the young man ha
 
 ___________________________
 
e tells me she is not
thought handsome in new york--good heavens!  her portrait has been
painted nine times; the greatest artists in europe have begged for the
privilege.  are these things nothing?  and the remorse of an adoring
husband?"

as the marchioness manson rose to her climax her face assumed an
expression of ecstatic retrospection which would have moved archer's
mirth had he not been numb with amazement.

he would have laughed if any one had foretold to him that his first
sight of poor medora manson would have been in the guise of a messenger
of satan; but he was in no mood for laughing now, and she seemed to him
to come straight out of the hell from which ellen olenska had just
escaped.

"she knows nothing yet--of all this?" he asked abruptly.

mrs. manson laid a purple finger on her lips.  "nothing directly--but
does she suspect?  who can tell?  the truth is, mr. archer, i have been
waiting to see you.  from the moment i heard of the firm stand you had
taken, and of your influence over h
 
 ___________________________
 
er said nothing.  it seemed to him so natural--however tragic--that
money ill-gotten should be cruelly expiated, that his mind, hardly
lingering over mrs. beaufort's doom, wandered back to closer questions.
what was the meaning of may's blush when the countess olenska had been
mentioned?

four months had passed since the midsummer day that he and madame
olenska had spent together; and since then he had not seen her.  he
knew that she had returned to washington, to the little house which she
and medora manson had taken there: he had written to her once--a few
words, asking when they were to meet again--and she had even more
briefly replied: "not yet."

since then there had been no farther communication between them, and he
had built up within himself a kind of sanctuary in which she throned
among his secret thoughts and longings.  little by little it became the
scene of his real life, of his only rational activities; thither he
brought the books he read, the ideas and feelings which nourished him,
h
 
 ___________________________
 
efore beaufort's cropper,"
he repeated.  "if she goes now, and if he fails, it will only confirm
the general impression: which isn't by any means peculiar to lefferts,
by the way."

"oh, she won't go back now: less than ever!"  archer had no sooner said
it than he had once more the feeling that it was exactly what mr.
jackson had been waiting for.

the old gentleman considered him attentively.  "that's your opinion,
eh?  well, no doubt you know.  but everybody will tell you that the few
pennies medora manson has left are all in beaufort's hands; and how the
two women are to keep their heads above water unless he does, i can't
imagine.  of course, madame olenska may still soften old catherine,
who's been the most inexorably opposed to her staying; and old
catherine could make her any allowance she chooses.  but we all know
that she hates parting with good money; and the rest of the family have
no particular interest in keeping madame olenska here."

archer was burning with unavailing wrath: he was e
 
 ___________________________
 
ort (to those whose securities were not
in jeopardy) to be able to remind themselves that beaufort was; but,
after all, if a dallas of south carolina took his view of the case, and
glibly talked of his soon being "on his feet again," the argument lost
its edge, and there was nothing to do but to accept this awful evidence
of the indissolubility of marriage.  society must manage to get on
without the beauforts, and there was an end of it--except indeed for
such hapless victims of the disaster as medora manson, the poor old
miss lannings, and certain other misguided ladies of good family who,
if only they had listened to mr. henry van der luyden ...

"the best thing the beauforts can do," said mrs. archer, summing it up
as if she were pronouncing a diagnosis and prescribing a course of
treatment, "is to go and live at regina's little place in north
carolina.  beaufort has always kept a racing stable, and he had better
breed trotting horses.  i should say he had all the qualities of a
successful horse
 
 ___________________________
 
she should have decided to remain
under her roof--especially now that mrs. mingott had almost regained
her health--was less easy to explain.

archer was sure that madame olenska's decision had not been influenced
by the change in her financial situation.  he knew the exact figure of
the small income which her husband had allowed her at their separation.
without the addition of her grandmother's allowance it was hardly
enough to live on, in any sense known to the mingott vocabulary; and
now that medora manson, who shared her life, had been ruined, such a
pittance would barely keep the two women clothed and fed.  yet archer
was convinced that madame olenska had not accepted her grandmother's
offer from interested motives.

she had the heedless generosity and the spasmodic extravagance of
persons used to large fortunes, and indifferent to money; but she could
go without many things which her relations considered indispensable,
and mrs. lovell mingott and mrs. welland had often been heard to
deplore th
 
 ___________________________
 
 nearly full, and archer
was engaged in showing to mrs. selfridge merry a small highly-varnished
verbeckhoven "study of sheep," which mr. welland had given may for
christmas, when he found madame olenska at his side.

she was excessively pale, and her pallor made her dark hair seem denser
and heavier than ever.  perhaps that, or the fact that she had wound
several rows of amber beads about her neck, reminded him suddenly of
the little ellen mingott he had danced with at children's parties, when
medora manson had first brought her to new york.

the amber beads were trying to her complexion, or her dress was perhaps
unbecoming: her face looked lustreless and almost ugly, and he had
never loved it as he did at that minute.  their hands met, and he
thought he heard her say:  "yes, we're sailing tomorrow in the
russia--"; then there was an unmeaning noise of opening doors, and
after an interval may's voice:  "newland!  dinner's been announced.
won't you please take ellen in?"

madame olenska put her han