and were you interested?

mrs. marchmont.  [_shaking her head_.]  not in the smallest degree.

lady basildon.  what martyrs we are, dear margaret!

mrs. marchmont.  [_rising_.]  and how well it becomes us, olivia!

[_they rise and go towards the music-room_.  _the_ vicomte de nanjac, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

mason.  [_announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  mr. and
lady jane barford.  lord caversham.

[_enter_ lord caversham, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the garter_.  _a fine whig type_.  _rather like a
portrait by lawrence_.]

lord caversham.  good evening, lady chiltern!  has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  i don’t think lord goring has arrived yet.

mabel chiltern.  [_coming up to_ lord caversham.]  why do you call lord
goring good-for-nothing?

[mabel chiltern _is a perfect example of the english type of pretti
 
 ___________________________
 
ness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _she has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _there is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _she has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _to sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _but she is really like a tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

lord caversham.  because he leads such an idle life.

mabel chiltern.  how can you say such a thing?  why, he rides in the row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  you don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

lord caversham.  [_looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
you are a very charming young lady!

mabel chiltern.  how sweet of you to say that, lord caversham!  do
 
 ___________________________
 
 come
to us more often.  you know we are always at home on wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

lord caversham.  never go anywhere now.  sick of london society.
shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  but object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  never could stand lady caversham’s bonnets.

mabel chiltern.  oh, i love london society!  i think it has immensely
improved.  it is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  just what society should be.

lord caversham.  hum!  which is goring?  beautiful id
 
 ___________________________
 
iot, or the other
thing?

mabel chiltern.  [_gravely_.]  i have been obliged for the present to put
lord goring into a class quite by himself.  but he is developing
charmingly!

lord caversham.  into what?

mabel chiltern.  [_with a little curtsey_.]  i hope to let you know very
soon, lord caversham!

mason.  [_announcing guests_.]  lady markby.  mrs. cheveley.

[_enter_ lady markby _and_ mrs. cheveley.  lady markby _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
mrs. cheveley, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _gray-green eyes
that move
 
 ___________________________
 
nanjac.  i should like to, but my professor objects.  [_to_
mabel chiltern.]  may i have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, mademoiselle?

mabel chiltern.  [_looking very disappointed_.]  delighted, vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_turning to_ lord goring.]  aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

lord goring.  not if there is any music going on, miss mabel.

mabel chiltern.  [_severely_.]  the music is in german.  you would not
understand it.

[_goes out with the_ vicomte de nanjac.  lord caversham _comes up to his
son_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir! what are you doing here?  wasting your life
as usual!  you should be in bed, sir.  you keep too late hours!  i heard
of you the other night at lady rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

lord goring.  only a quarter to four, father.

lord caversham.  can’t make out how you stand london society.  the thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

lord goring.  i love talking about nothing, fath
 
 ___________________________
 
er.  it is the only thing
i know anything about.

lord caversham.  you seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

lord goring.  what else is there to live for, father?  nothing ages like
happiness.

lord caversham.  you are heartless, sir, very heartless!

lord goring.  i hope not, father.  good evening, lady basildon!

lady basildon.  [_arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  are you here?  i had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

lord goring.  i adore political parties.  they are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

lady basildon.  i delight in talking politics.  i talk them all day long.
but i can’t bear listening to them.  i don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
t shall be
withdrawn.  i will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

mrs. cheveley.  thank you.  i knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  i understood your nature from the first.  i analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  and now you can get my carriage for me, sir
robert.  i see the people coming up from supper, and englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_exit_ sir
robert chiltern.]

[_enter guests_, lady chiltern, lady markby, lord caversham, lady
basildon, mrs. marchmont, vicomte de nanjac, mr. montford.]

lady markby.  well, dear mrs. cheveley, i hope you have enjoyed yourself.
sir robert is very entertaining, is he not?

mrs. cheveley.  most entertaining!  i have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

lady markby.  he has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  and he
has married a most admirable wife.  lady chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, i am glad to say.  i am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble a
 
 ___________________________
 
it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  i am not expected at the bachelors’, so i
shall certainly go there.  well, i will make her stand by her husband.
that is the only thing for her to do.  that is the only thing for any
woman to do.  it is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  ten o’clock.  she
should be here soon.  i must tell phipps i am not in to any one else.
[_goes towards bell_]

[_enter_ phipps.]

phipps.  lord caversham.

lord goring.  oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  some
extraordinary mistake in nature, i suppose.  [_enter_ lord caversham.]
delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_goes to meet him_.]

lord caversham.  take my cloak off.

lord goring.  is it worth while, father?

lord caversham.  of course it is worth while, sir.  which is the most
comfortable chair?

lord goring.  this one, father.  it is the chair i use myself, when i
have visitors.

lord caversham.  thank ye.  no drau
 
 ___________________________
 
ght, i hope, in this room?

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  [_sitting down_.]  glad to hear it.  can’t stand
draughts.  no draughts at home.

lord goring.  good many breezes, father.

lord caversham.  eh?  eh?  don’t understand what you mean.  want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

lord goring.  my dear father!  at this hour?

lord caversham.  well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  what is your
objection to the hour?  i think the hour is an admirable hour!

lord goring.  well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  i am very sorry, but it is not my day.

lord caversham.  what do you mean, sir?

lord goring.  during the season, father, i only talk seriously on the
first tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

lord caversham.  well, make it tuesday, sir, make it tuesday.

lord goring.  but it is after sev
 
 ___________________________
 
en, father, and my doctor says i must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  it makes me talk in my
sleep.

lord caversham.  talk in your sleep, sir?  what does that matter?  you
are not married.

lord goring.  no, father, i am not married.

lord caversham.  hum!  that is what i have come to talk to you about,
sir.  you have got to get married, and at once.  why, when i was your
age, sir, i had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  you can’t be always living for pleasure.
every man of position is married nowadays.  bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  they are a damaged lot.  too much is known about them.  you
must get a wife
 
 ___________________________
 
, sir.  look where your friend robert chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  why don’t you take him for your model?

lord goring.  i think i shall, father.

lord caversham.  i wish you would, sir.  then i should be happy.  at
present i make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  you are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

lord caversham.  and it is high time for you to get married.  you are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

lord goring.  yes, father, but i only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when i have a really good buttonhole.  this buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

lord caversham.  i tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  and there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  i feel a draught, sir, i feel it
distinctly.

lord goring.  so 
 
 ___________________________
 
do i, father.  it is a dreadful draught.  i will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  we can talk over anything you like.  let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

lord caversham.  no, sir; i have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and i am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  put down my cloak, sir.

lord goring.  certainly, father.  but let us go into another room.
[_rings bell_.]  there is a dreadful draught here.  [_enter_ phipps.]
phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  come in there, father.  your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

lord caversham.  well, sir, i suppose i have a right t
 
 ___________________________
 
o sneeze when i
choose?

lord goring.  [_apologetically_.]  quite so, father.  i was merely
expressing sympathy.

lord caversham.  oh, damn sympathy.  there is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

lord goring.  i quite agree with you, father.  if there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

lord caversham.  [_going towards the smoking-room_.]  that is a paradox,
sir.  i hate paradoxes.

lord goring.  so do i, father.  everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  it is a great bore.  it makes society so obvious.

lord caversham.  [_turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  do you always really understand what you say, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  yes, father, if i listen
attentively.

lord caversham.  [_indignantly_.]  if you listen attentively! . . 
 
 ___________________________
 
 phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
you understand?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  it is a matter of the gravest importance, phipps.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.

lord goring.  no one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.  [_bell rings_.]

lord goring.  ah! that is probably the lady.  i shall see her myself.

[_just as he is going towards the door_ lord caversham _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir? am i to wait attendance on you?

lord goring.  [_considerably perplexed_.]  in a moment, father.  do
excuse me.  [lord caversham _goes back_.]  well, remember my
instructions, phipps—into that room.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

[lord goring _goes into the smoking-room_.  harold, _the footman shows_
mrs. cheveley _in_.  _lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _she
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

har
 
 ___________________________
 
old.  what name, madam?

mrs. cheveley.  [_to_ phipps, _who advances towards her_.]  is lord
goring not here?  i was told he was at home?

phipps.  his lordship is engaged at present with lord caversham, madam.

[_turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ harold, _who at once retires_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_.]  how very filial!

phipps.  his lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  his lordship will come to you there.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a look of surprise_.]  lord goring expects me?

phipps.  yes, madam.

mrs. cheveley.  are you quite sure?

phipps.  his lordship told me that if a lady called i was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [
 
 ___________________________
 
 then i am sure they will be perfectly
right.

phipps.  [_gravely_.]  thank you, madam.

[mrs. cheveley _goes into the drawing-room_.  phipps _closes the door and
retires_.  _the door is then slowly opened_, _and_ mrs. cheveley _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  mrs. cheveley _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _the voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_enter_ lord goring _and_ lord caversham.]

lord goring.  [_expostulating_.]  my dear father, if i am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
particularly the person.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  that is a matter for me, sir.  you would
probably make a very poor choice.  it is i who should be consulted, not
you.  there is property at stake.  it is not a matter for affection.
affection comes later on in married life.

lord goring.  yes.  in married life affection comes when people
thoroughly d
 
 ___________________________
 
islike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_puts on_ lord
caversham’s _cloak for him_.]

lord caversham.  certainly, sir.  i mean certainly not, air.  you are
talking very foolishly to-night.  what i say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

lord goring.  but women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  of course i only speak from hearsay.

lord caversham.  no woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  common sense is the privilege of our sex.

lord goring.  quite so.  and we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

lord caversham.  i use it, sir.  i use nothing else.

lord goring.  so my mother tells me.

lord caversham.  it is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  you are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

[_goes out for a moment_.  _then returns_, _looking rath
 
 ___________________________
 
atch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  it is a great nuisance.  i can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  and i am full of interesting information.  i feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_enter servant_.]

james.  sir robert is still at the foreign office, my lord.

lord goring.  lady chiltern not down yet?

james.  her ladyship has not yet left her room.  miss chiltern has just
come in from riding.

lord goring.  [_to himself_.]  ah! that is something.

james.  lord caversham has been waiting some time in the library for sir
robert.  i told him your lordship was here.

lord goring.  thank you!  would you kindly tell him i’ve gone?

james.  [_bowing_.]  i shall do so, my lord.

[_exit servant_.]

lord goring.  really, i don’t want to meet my father three days running.
it is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  i hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  that is the
only proper basis for family life.  mothers are di
 
 ___________________________
 
fferent.  mothers are
darlings.  [_throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_enter_ lord caversham.]

lord caversham.  well, sir, what are you doing here?  wasting your time
as usual, i suppose?

lord goring.  [_throws down paper and rises_.]  my dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

lord caversham.  have you been thinking over what i spoke to you about
last night?

lord goring.  i have been thinking about nothing else.

lord caversham.  engaged to be married yet?

lord goring.  [_genially_.]  not yet: but i hope to be before lunch-time.

lord caversham.  [_caustically_.]  you can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

lord goring.  thanks awfully, but i think i’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

lord caversham.  humph!  never know when you are serious or not.

 
 ___________________________
 

lord goring.  neither do i, father.

[_a pause_.]

lord caversham.  i suppose you have read _the times_ this morning?

lord goring.  [_airily_.]  the times?  certainly not.  i only read _the
morning post_.  all that one should know about modern life is where the
duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

lord caversham.  do you mean to say you have not read _the times_ leading
article on robert chiltern’s career?

lord goring.  good heavens!  no.  what does it say?

lord caversham.  what should it say, sir?  everything complimentary, of
course.  chiltern’s speech last night on this argentine canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the house since
canning.

lord goring.  ah!  never heard of canning.  never wanted to.  and did . . .
did chiltern uphold the scheme?

lord caversham.  uphold it, sir?  how little you know him!  why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
this speech is the turning-point in hi
 
 ___________________________
 
opens_ the times.]  ‘sir
robert chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . brilliant
orator . . . unblemished career . . . well-known integrity of character
. . . represents what is best in english public life . . . noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  they will
never say that of you, sir.

lord goring.  i sincerely hope not, father.  however, i am delighted at
what you tell me about robert, thoroughly delighted.  it shows he has got
pluck.

lord caversham.  he has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

lord goring.  ah! i prefer pluck.  it is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

lord caversham.  i wish you would go into parliament.

lord goring.  my dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
house of commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

lord caversham.  why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

lord goring.  i am far too young.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  i hate this affectation of you
 
 ___________________________
 
th, sir.  it
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

lord goring.  youth isn’t an affectation.  youth is an art.

lord caversham.  why don’t you propose to that pretty miss chiltern?

lord goring.  i am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

lord caversham.  i don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

lord goring.  i don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

lord caversham.  if she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
england.

lord goring.  that is just what i should like to marry.  a thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

lord caversham.  you don’t deserve her, sir.

lord goring.  my dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  oh! . . . how do you do, lord caversham?  i hope lady
caversham is q
 
 ___________________________
 
uite well?

lord caversham.  lady caversham is as usual, as usual.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_taking no notice at all of_ lord goring, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ lord caversham.]  and lady caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

lord caversham.  they have had a serious relapse, i am sorry to say.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_to_ lord caversham.]  i hope an operation will not be
necessary.

lord caversham.  [_smiling at her pertness_.]  if it is, we shall have to
give lady caversham a narcotic.  otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

lord goring.  [_with increased emphasis_.]  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_turning round with feigned surprise_.]  oh, are you
here?  of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
i am never going to speak to you again.

lord goring.  oh, please don’t say such a thing.  you are the one person
in london i r
 
 ___________________________
 
eally like to have to listen to me.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i never believe a single word that either
you or i say to each other.

lord caversham.  you are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, i mean.

mabel chiltern.  do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  just as a change.

lord caversham.  i regret to say, miss chiltern, that i have no influence
at all over my son.  i wish i had.  if i had, i know what i would make
him do.

mabel chiltern.  i am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

lord caversham.  he is very heartless, very heartless.

lord goring.  it seems to me that i am a little in the way here.

mabel chiltern.  it is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

lord gori
 
 ___________________________
 
ng.  i don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  it makes me far too conceited.

lord caversham.  after that, my dear, i really must bid you good morning.

mabel chiltern.  oh! i hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
lord goring?  especially at such an early hour in the day.

lord caversham.  i am afraid i can’t take him with me to downing street.
it is not the prime minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_shakes hands with_ mabel chiltern, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ lord goring.]

mabel chiltern.  [_takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  people who don’t keep their appointments in the park are
horrid.

lord goring.  detestable.

mabel chiltern.  i am glad you admit it.  but i wish 
 
 ___________________________
 
n.

[lord goring _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_going towards him_.]  arthur, i have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  i don’t know how i can repay you.
[_shakes hands with him_.]

lord goring.  my dear fellow, i’ll tell you at once.  at the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . i mean in the conservatory . . .

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  lord caversham.

lord goring.  that admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  it is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_enter_ lord caversham.  mason _goes out_.]

lord caversham.  good morning, lady chiltern!  warmest congratulations to
you, chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  i have just left the
prime minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the cabinet.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a look of joy and triumph_.]  a seat in the
cabinet
 
 ___________________________
 
?

lord caversham.  yes; here is the prime minister’s letter.  [_hands
letter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_takes letter and reads it_.]  a seat in the
cabinet!

lord caversham.  certainly, and you well deserve it too.  you have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_to_ lord goring.]  everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

lord goring.  i don’t like principles, father.  i prefer prejudices.

[sir robert chiltern _is on the brink of accepting the prime minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_he then realises that it is impossible_
 
 ___________________________
 
.]

sir robert chiltern.  i cannot accept this offer, lord caversham.  i have
made up my mind to decline it.

lord caversham.  decline it, sir!

sir robert chiltern.  my intention is to retire at once from public life.

lord caversham.  [_angrily_.]  decline a seat in the cabinet, and retire
from public life?  never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  i beg your pardon, lady chiltern.  chiltern, i beg your
pardon.  [_to_ lord goring.]  don’t grin like that, sir.

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  lady chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in london, the most sensible woman i know.  will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. .
 
 ___________________________
 
 . will you kindly do that, lady chiltern?

lady chiltern.  i think my husband in right in his determination, lord
caversham.  i approve of it.

lord caversham.  you approve of it?  good heavens!

lady chiltern.  [_taking her husband’s hand_.]  i admire him for it.  i
admire him immensely for it.  i have never admired him so much before.
he is finer than even i thought him.  [_to_ sir robert chiltern.]  you
will go and write your letter to the prime minister now, won’t you?
don’t hesitate about it, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a touch of bitterness_.]  i suppose i had
better write it at once.  such offers are not repeated.  i will ask y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou
to excuse me for a moment, lord caversham.

lady chiltern.  i may come with you, robert, may i not?

sir robert chiltern.  yes, gertrude.

[lady chiltern _goes out with him_.]

lord caversham.  what is the matter with this family?  something wrong
here, eh?  [_tapping his forehead_.]  idiocy?  hereditary, i suppose.
both of them, too.  wife as well as husband.  very sad.  very sad indeed!
and they are not an old family.  can’t understand it.

lord goring.  it is not idiocy, father, i assure you.

lord caversham.  what is it then, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  that is all.

lord caversham.  hate these
 
 ___________________________
 
 new-fangled names.  same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  shan’t stay in this house any longer.

lord goring.  [_taking his arm_.]  oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

lord caversham.  what, sir?

lord goring.  i beg your pardon, father, i forgot.  the conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there i want you to talk to.

lord caversham.  what about, sir?

lord goring.  about me, father,

lord caversham.  [_grimly_.]  not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

lord goring.  no, father; but the lady is like me.  she doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  she thinks it a little loud.

[lord caversham _goes out into the conservatory_.  lady chiltern
_enters_.]

lord goring.  lady chiltern, why are you playing mrs. cheveley’s cards?

lady chiltern.  [_startled_.]  i don’t understand you.

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  either
to drive him fro
 
 ___________________________
 
bert chiltern.  gertrude!  gertrude!

lady chiltern.  you can forget.  men easily forget.  and i forgive.  that
is how women help the world.  i see that now.

sir robert chiltern.  [_deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  my
wife! my wife!  [_to_ lord goring.]  arthur, it seems that i am always to
be in your debt.

lord goring.  oh dear no, robert.  your debt is to lady chiltern, not to
me!

sir robert chiltern.  i owe you much.  and now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as lord caversham came in.

lord goring.  robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and i want your
consent to my marriage with her.  that is all.

lady chiltern.  oh, i am so glad!  i am so glad!  [_shakes hands with_
lord goring.]

lord goring.  thank you, lady chiltern.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a troubled look_.]  my sister to be your
wife?

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  [_speaking with great firmness_.]  arthur, i am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  i have to think
of
 
 ___________________________
 
eveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  there should be a name.

lady chiltern.  let me write yours.  it is you i trust and need.  you and
none else.

lord goring.  well, really, lady chiltern, i think i should have back my
own letter.

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  no; you shall have mabel.  [_takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

lord goring.  well, i hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  it’s nearly
twenty minutes since i saw her last.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern _and_ lord caversham.]

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  i am only going to talk to lord caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

lord goring.  darling!  [_kisses her_.]

lord caversham.  [_considerably taken aback_.]  what does this mean, sir?
you don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

lord goring.  certainly, father!  and chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the se
 
 ___________________________
 
at in the cabinet.

lord caversham.  i am very glad to hear that, chiltern . . . i
congratulate you, sir.  if the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
radicals, we shall have you prime minister, some day.

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  luncheon is on the table, my lady!

[mason _goes out_.]

mabel chiltern.  you’ll stop to luncheon, lord caversham, won’t you?

lord caversham.  with pleasure, and i’ll drive you down to downing street
afterwards, chiltern.  you have a great future before you, a great
future.  wish i could say the same for you, sir.  [_to_ lord goring.]
but your career will have to be entirely domestic.

lord goring.  yes, father, i prefer it domestic.

lord caversham.  and if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
i’ll cut you off with a shilling.

mabel chiltern.  an ideal husband!  oh, i don’t think i should like that.
it sounds l
 
 ___________________________
 
ike something in the next world.

lord caversham.  what do you want him to be then, dear?

mabel chiltern.  he can be what he chooses.  all i want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

lord caversham.  upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, lady chiltern.

[_they all go out except_ sir robert chiltern.  _he sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _after a little time_ lady chiltern _returns to look
for him_.]

lady chiltern.  [_leaning over the back of the chair_.]  aren’t you
coming in, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  [_taking her hand_.]  gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

lady chiltern.  [_kisses him_.]  it is love, robert.  love, and only
