the persons of the play


the earl of caversham, k.g.

viscount goring, his son

sir robert chiltern, bart., under-secretary for foreign affairs

vicomte de nanjac, attaché at the french embassy in london

mr. montford

mason, butler to sir robert chiltern

phipps, lord goring’s servant

james   }

harold  } footmen

lady chiltern

lady markby

the countess of basildon

mrs. marchmont

miss mabel chiltern, sir robert chiltern’s sister

mrs. cheveley




the scenes of the play


act i.  _the octagon room in sir robert chiltern’s house in grosvenor
square_.

act ii.  _morning-room in sir robert chiltern’s house_.

act iii.  _the library of lord goring’s house in curzon street_.

act iv.  _same as act ii_.

time: _the present_

place: _london_.

     _the acti
 
 ___________________________
 
ckties and his anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

mason.  [_announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  mr. and
lady jane barford.  lord caversham.

[_enter_ lord caversham, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the garter_.  _a fine whig type_.  _rather like a
portrait by lawrence_.]

lord caversham.  good evening, lady chiltern!  has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  i don’t think lord goring has arrived yet.

mabel chiltern.  [_coming up to_ lord caversham.]  why do you call lord
goring good-for-nothing?

[mabel chiltern _is a perfect example of the english type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _she has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _there is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _she has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of in
 
 ___________________________
 
r; he always votes on the
right side.  but object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  never could stand lady caversham’s bonnets.

mabel chiltern.  oh, i love london society!  i think it has immensely
improved.  it is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  just what society should be.

lord caversham.  hum!  which is goring?  beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

mabel chiltern.  [_gravely_.]  i have been obliged for the present to put
lord goring into a class quite by himself.  but he is developing
charmingly!

lord caversham.  into what?

mabel chiltern.  [_with a little curtsey_.]  i hope to let you know very
soon, lord caversham!

mason.  [_announcing guests_.]  lady markby.  mrs. cheveley.

[_enter_ lady markby _and_ mrs. cheveley.  lady markby _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
mrs. cheveley, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _lips
very thin and highly-colou
 
 ___________________________
 
ley.  [_smiling_.]  intimately.  did you?

sir robert chiltern.  at one time.

mrs. cheveley.  wonderful man, wasn’t he?

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  he was very remarkable, in many
ways.

mrs. cheveley.  i often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
they would have been most interesting.

sir robert chiltern.  yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
greek.

mrs. cheveley.  without the dreadful disadvantage of having a penelope
waiting at home for him.

mason.  lord goring.

[_enter_ lord goring.  _thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_a well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _he is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _a flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _he plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _he is fond of being misunderstood_.  _it
gives him a post of vantage_.]

sir robert chiltern.  good evening, my dear arthur!  mrs. cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you lord goring, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the idlest man in london.

mrs. cheveley.  i have met lord goring before.

lord goring.  [_bowing_.]  i did not think you would remember me, mrs.
cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  my memory is under admirable control.  and are you still
a bachelor?

lord goring.  i . . . believe so.

mrs. cheveley.  how very romantic!

lord goring.  oh! i am not at all romantic.  i am not old enough.  i
leave romance to my seniors.

sir robert chiltern.  lord goring is the result of boodle’s club, mrs.
cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  he reflects every credit on the institution.

lord goring.  may i ask are you staying in london long?

mrs. cheveley.  that depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  you are not going to plunge us into a european war,
i hope?

mrs. cheveley.  there is no danger, at present!

[_she nods to_ lord goring, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ sir robe
 
 ___________________________
 
rt chiltern.  lord goring _saunters over to_ mabel
chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  you are very late!

lord goring.  have you missed me?

mabel chiltern.  awfully!

lord goring.  then i am sorry i did not stay away longer.  i like being
missed.

mabel chiltern.  how very selfish of you!

lord goring.  i am very selfish.

mabel chiltern.  you are always telling me of your bad qualities, lord
goring.

lord goring.  i have only told you half of them as yet, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  are the others very bad?

lord goring.  quite dreadful!  when i think of them at night i go to
sleep at once.

mabel chiltern.  well, i delight in your bad qualities.  i wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

lord goring.  how very nice of you!  but then you are always nice.  by
the way, i want to ask you a question, miss mabel.  who brought mrs.
cheveley here?  that woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the

 
 ___________________________
 
room with your brother?

mabel chiltern.  oh, i think lady markby brought her.  why do you ask?

lord goring.  i haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

mabel chiltern.  what an absurd reason!

lord goring.  all reasons are absurd.

mabel chiltern.  what sort of a woman is she?

lord goring.  oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

mabel chiltern.  i dislike her already.

lord goring.  that shows your admirable good taste.

vicomte de nanjac.  [_approaching_.]  ah, the english young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  quite the dragon of good taste.

lord goring.  so the newspapers are always telling us.

vicomte de nanjac.  i read all your english newspapers.  i find them so
amusing.

lord goring.  then, my dear nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

vicomte de nanjac.  i should like to, but my professor objects.  [_to_
mabel chiltern.]  may i have 
 
 ___________________________
 
the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, mademoiselle?

mabel chiltern.  [_looking very disappointed_.]  delighted, vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_turning to_ lord goring.]  aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

lord goring.  not if there is any music going on, miss mabel.

mabel chiltern.  [_severely_.]  the music is in german.  you would not
understand it.

[_goes out with the_ vicomte de nanjac.  lord caversham _comes up to his
son_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir! what are you doing here?  wasting your life
as usual!  you should be in bed, sir.  you keep too late hours!  i heard
of you the other night at lady rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

lord goring.  only a quarter to four, father.


 
 ___________________________
 
lord caversham.  can’t make out how you stand london society.  the thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

lord goring.  i love talking about nothing, father.  it is the only thing
i know anything about.

lord caversham.  you seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

lord goring.  what else is there to live for, father?  nothing ages like
happiness.

lord caversham.  you are heartless, sir, very heartless!

lord goring.  i hope not, father.  good evening, lady basildon!

lady basildon.  [_arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  are you here?  i had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

lord goring.  i adore political parties.  they are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

lady basildon.  i delight in talking politics.  i talk them all day long.
but i can’t bear listening to them.  i don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the house stand these long debates.

lord goring.  by never l
 
 ___________________________
 
istening.

lady basildon.  really?

lord goring.  [_in his most serious manner_.]  of course.  you see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  if one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

lady basildon.  ah! that accounts for so much in men that i have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

mrs. marchmont.  [_with a sigh_.]  our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  we have to go to others for that!

 
 ___________________________
 

lady basildon.  [_emphatically_.]  yes, always to others, have we not?

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  and those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in london.

mrs. marchmont.  that is exactly what we can’t stand.  my reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  he is really unendurably so, at times!
there is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

lord goring.  how terrible!  really, the thing should be more widely
known!

lady basildon.  basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

mrs. marchmont.  [_pressing_ lady basildon’s _hand_.]  my poor olivia!
we have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

lord goring.  i should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

mrs. marchmont.  [_drawing herself up_.]  oh, dear no!  they are as happy
as possible!  and as for trusting us, it is tragic how mu
 
 ___________________________
 
ch they trust
us.

lady basildon.  perfectly tragic!

lord goring.  or comic, lady basildon?

lady basildon.  certainly not comic, lord goring.  how unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

mrs. marchmont.  i am afraid lord goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  i saw him talking to that mrs. cheveley when he came in.

lord goring.  handsome woman, mrs. cheveley!

lady basildon.  [_stiffly_.]  please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  you might wait for us to do that!

lord goring.  i did wait.

mrs. marchmont.  well, we are not going to praise her.  i hear she went
to the opera on monday night, and told tommy rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, london society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

lord goring.  she is quite right, too.  the men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

mrs. marchmont.  [_after a pause_.]  oh! do you really think that is what
mrs. cheveley meant?

lord goring.  of course.  and a very sensible rema
 
 ___________________________
 
rk for mrs. cheveley to
make, too.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern.  _she joins the group_.]

mabel chiltern.  why are you talking about mrs. cheveley?  everybody is
talking about mrs. cheveley!  lord goring says—what did you say, lord
goring, about mrs. cheveley?  oh! i remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

lady basildon.  what a horrid combination!  so very unnatural!

mrs. marchmont.  [_in her most dreamy manner_.]  i like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

lord goring.  ah! that is morbid of you, mrs. marchmont!

mrs. marchmont.  [_brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  i am so
glad to hear you say that.  marchmont and i have been mar
 
 ___________________________
 
ried for seven
years, and he has never once told me that i was morbid.  men are so
painfully unobservant!

lady basildon.  [_turning to her_.]  i have always said, dear margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in london.

mrs. marchmont.  ah! but you are always sympathetic, olivia!

mabel chiltern.  is it morbid to have a desire for food?  i have a great
desire for food.  lord goring, will you give me some supper?

lord goring.  with pleasure, miss mabel.  [_moves away with her_.]

mabel chiltern.  how horrid you have been!  you have never talked to me
the whole evening!

lord goring.  how could i?  you went away with the child-diplomatist.

mabel chiltern.  you might have followed us.  pursuit would have been
only polite.  i don’t think i like you at all this evening!

lord goring.  i like you immensely.

mabel chiltern.  well, i wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_they
go downstairs_.]

mrs. marchmont. 
 
 ___________________________
 
om vienna now.  it has been a great success.  but, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

lady chiltern.  [_gently_.]  a secret?  between whom?

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  between your
husband and myself.

sir robert chiltern.  [_entering_.]  your carriage is here, mrs.
cheveley!

mrs. cheveley.  thanks!  good evening, lady chiltern!  good-night, lord
goring!  i am at claridge’s.  don’t you think you might leave a card?

lord goring.  if you wish it, mrs. cheveley!

mrs. cheveley.  oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or i shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  in england i suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  abroad, we are more civilised.  will you see me
down, sir robert?  now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, i hope!

[_sails out on_ sir robert chiltern’s _arm_.  lady chiltern _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _her
expres
 
 ___________________________
 
sion is troubled_.  _after a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

mabel chiltern.  what a horrid woman!

lord goring.  you should go to bed, miss mabel.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring!

lord goring.  my father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  i don’t see
why i shouldn’t give you the same advice.  i always pass on good advice.
it is the only thing to do with it.  it is never of any use to oneself.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
i think it most courageous of you.  especially as i am not going to bed
for hours.  [_goes over to the sofa_.]  you can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the royal academy,
mrs. cheveley, or novels in scotch dialect.  they are not improving
subjects.  [_catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  what is this?  some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  quite beautiful, is
 
 ___________________________
 
n’t it?  [_shows it to him_.]  i wish it was
mine, but gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and i am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  they make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  i wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

lord goring.  i wonder who dropped it.

mabel chiltern.  it is a beautiful brooch.

lord goring.  it is a handsome bracelet.

mabel chiltern.  it isn’t a bracelet.  it’s a brooch.

lord goring.  it can be used as a bracelet.  [_takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

mabel chiltern.  what are you doing?

lord goring.  miss mabel, i am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

mabel chiltern.  [_eagerly_.]  oh, pray do!  i have been waiting for it
all the evening.

lord goring.  [_is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  do
 
 ___________________________
 
n’t
mention to anybody that i have taken charge of this brooch.  should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

mabel chiltern.  that is a strange request.

lord goring.  well, you see i gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

mabel chiltern.  you did?

lord goring.  yes.

[lady chiltern _enters alone_.  _the other guests have gone_.]

mabel chiltern.  then i shall certainly bid you good-night.  good-night,
gertrude!  [_exit_.]

lady chiltern.  good-night, dear!  [_to_ lord goring.]  you saw whom lady
markby brought here to-night?

lord goring.  yes.  it was an unpleasant surprise.  what did she come
here for?

lady chiltern.  apparently to try and lure robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  the argentine canal, in
fact.

lord goring.  she has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

lady chiltern.  she is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

lord goring.  yes.  i should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
rober
 
 ___________________________
 
t into her toils.  it is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

lady chiltern.  i don’t call women of that kind clever.  i call them
stupid!

lord goring.  same thing often.  good-night, lady chiltern!

lady chiltern.  good-night!

[_enter_ sir robert chiltern.]

sir robert chiltern.  my dear arthur, you are not going?  do stop a
little!

lord goring.  afraid i can’t, thanks.  i have promised to look in at the
hartlocks’.  i believe they have got a mauve hungarian band that plays
mauve hungarian music.  see you soon.  good-bye!

[_exit_]

sir robert chiltern.  how beautiful you look to-night, gertrude!

lady chiltern.  robert, it is not true, is it?  you are not going to lend
your support to this argentine speculation?  you couldn’t!

sir robert chiltern.  [_starting_.]  who told you i intended to do so?

lady chiltern.  that woman wh
 
 ___________________________
 
s hands_.  _the servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  sir robert chiltern _looks up_.]

sir robert chiltern.  put out the lights, mason, put out the lights!

[_the servant puts out the lights_.  _the room becomes almost dark_.
_the only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the triumph of love_.]

                                 act drop




second act


scene


_morning-room at sir robert chiltern’s house_.

[lord goring, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  sir robert chiltern _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_he is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_as the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

lord goring.  my dear robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  you should have told your wife the whole thing.  secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  so, at
least, i am alw
 
 ___________________________
 
 have a wonderful instinct about things.
they can discover everything except the obvious.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, i couldn’t tell my wife.  when could i have
told her?  not last night.  it would have made a life-long separation
between us, and i would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
i worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  last
night it would have been quite impossible.  she would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

lord goring.  is lady chiltern as perfect as all that?

sir robert chiltern.  yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

lord goring.  [_taking off his left-hand glove_.]  what a pity!  i beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, i didn’t quite mean that.  but if what you
tell me is true, i should like to have a serious talk about life with
lady chiltern.

sir robert chiltern.  it would be quite useless.

lord goring.  may i try?

sir robert chiltern.  yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

lord goring. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

sir robert chiltern.  all such experiments are terribly dangerous.

lord goring.  everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  if it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . well, i am bound to say that i think
you should have told her years ago.

sir robert chiltern.  when?  when we were engaged?  do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that i had done
a thing that i suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

lord goring.  [_slowly_.]  yes; most 
 
 ___________________________
 
men would call it ugly names.  there
is no doubt of that.

sir robert chiltern.  [_bitterly_.]  men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

lord goring.  that is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  it distracts public attention from their own.

sir robert chiltern.  and, after all, whom did i wrong by what i did?  no
one.

lord goring.  [_looking at him steadily_.]  except yourself, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  of course i had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the government of
the day, and i acted on it.  private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

lord goring.  [_tapping his boot with his cane_.]  and public scandal
invariably the result.

sir robert chiltern.  [_pacing up and down the room_.]  arthur, do you
think that what i did nearly 
 
 ___________________________
 
ht up
against me now?  do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  i was twenty-two at the
time, and i had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that i have
worked for, all that i have built up.  is it fair, arthur?

lord goring.  life is never fair, robert.  and perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

sir robert chiltern.  every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  what this century worships is wealth.  the god of this
century is wealth.  to succeed one must have wealth.  at all costs one
must have wealth.

lord goring.  you underrate yourself, robert.  believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

sir robert chiltern.  when i was old, perhaps.  when i
 
 ___________________________
 
 had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  when i was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  i wanted my success when i was young.  youth is the time
for success.  i couldn’t wait.

lord goring.  well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  no one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
under-secretary for foreign affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, i should think.

sir robert chiltern.  and if it is all taken away from me now?  if i lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  if i am hounded from public life?

lord goring.  robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

sir robert chiltern.  [_excitedly_.]  i did not sell 
 
 ___________________________
 
myself for money.  i
bought success at a great price.  that is all.

lord goring.  [_gravely_.]  yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
but what first made you think of doing such a thing?

sir robert chiltern.  baron arnheim.

lord goring.  damned scoundrel!

sir robert chiltern.  no; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  a man of culture, charm, and distinction.  one of the most
intellectual men i ever met.

lord goring.  ah! i prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  there is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  personally i have a great
admiration for stupidity.  it is a sort of fellow-feeling, i suppose.
but how did he do it?  tell me the whole thing.

sir robert chiltern.  [_throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  one night after dinner at lord radley’s the baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  wi
 
 ___________________________
 
s, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

lord goring.  [_with great deliberation_.]  a thoroughly shallow creed.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rising_.]  i didn’t think so then.  i don’t think
so now.  wealth has given me enormous power.  it gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  you have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  you cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the baron gave me.  such a chance as few men get.

lord goring.  fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  but
tell m
 
 ___________________________
 
e definitely, how did the baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

sir robert chiltern.  when i was going away he said to me that if i ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  i was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

lord goring.  [_keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  state
documents?

sir robert chiltern.  yes.  [lord goring _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

lord goring.  i had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, robert, as to yield to such a temptation as baron arnheim
held out to you.

sir robert chiltern.  weak?  oh, i am sick of hearing that phrase.  sick
of using it about others.  weak?  do you really think, arthur, that it is
weaknes
 
 ___________________________
 
s to temptation?  i tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
to stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, i care not—there is no
weakness in that.  there is a horrible, a terrible courage.  i had that
courage.  i sat down the same afternoon and wrote baron arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  he made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

lord goring.  and you?

sir robert chiltern.  i received from the baron £110,000.

lord goring.  you were worth more, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  no; that money gave me exactly what i wanted, power
over others.  i went into the house immediately.  the baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  before five years i had almost trebled my
fortune.  since then everything that i have touched has turned out a
success.  in all things connected with money i have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes i
 
 ___________________________
 
t has made me almost afraid.  i remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

lord goring.  but tell me, robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

sir robert chiltern.  no.  i felt that i had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

lord goring.  [_sadly_.]  you thought you had won.

sir robert chiltern.  i thought so.  [_after a long pause_.]  arthur, do
you despise me for what i have told you?

lord goring.  [_with deep feeling in his voice_.]  i am very sorry for
you, robert, very sorry indeed.

sir robert chiltern.  i don’t say that i suffered any remorse.  i didn’t.
not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  but i have
paid conscience money many times.  i had a wild hope that i might disarm
destiny.  the su
 
 ___________________________
 
m baron arnheim gave me i have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

lord goring.  [_looking up_.]  in public charities?  dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, robert!

sir robert chiltern.  oh, don’t say that, arthur; don’t talk like that!

lord goring.  never mind what i say, robert!  i am always saying what i
shouldn’t say.  in fact, i usually say what i really think.  a great
mistake nowadays.  it makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  as
regards this dreadful business, i will help you in whatever way i can.
of course you know that.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you, arthur, thank you.  but what is to be
done?  what can be done?

lord goring.  [_leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  well, the
english can’t stand a man who is
 
 ___________________________
 
ward.  besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  and in england a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  there would be nothing
left for him as a profession except botany or the church.  a confession
would be of no use.  it would ruin you.

sir robert chiltern.  it would ruin me.  arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

lord goring.  [_rising from his chair_.]  i was waiting for you to say
that, robert.  it is the only thing to do now.  and you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

sir robert chiltern.  that i will not do.

lord goring.  robert, believe me, you are wrong.

sir robert chiltern.  i couldn’t do it.  it would kill her love for me.
and now about this woman, this mrs. cheveley.  how can i defend myself
against her?  you knew her before, arthur, apparently.

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.
 
 ___________________________
 
  did you know her well?

lord goring.  [_arranging his necktie_.]  so little that i got engaged to
be married to her once, when i was staying at the tenbys’.  the affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

sir robert chiltern.  why was it broken off?

lord goring.  [_airily_.]  oh, i forget.  at least, it makes no matter.
by the way, have you tried her with money?  she used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

sir robert chiltern.  i offered her any sum she wanted.  she refused.

lord goring.  then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
the rich can’t do everything, after all.

sir robert chiltern.  not everything.  i suppose you are right.  arthur,
i feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  i feel certain of it.  i
never knew what terror was before.  i know it now.  it is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  it is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

lord goring.  [_striking the table_.]  robert, you must fight
 
 ___________________________
 
 her.  you
must fight her.

sir robert chiltern.  but how?

lord goring.  i can’t tell you how at present.  i have not the smallest
idea.  but every one has some weak point.  there is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
my father tells me that even i have faults.  perhaps i have.  i don’t
know.

sir robert chiltern.  in defending myself against mrs. cheveley, i have a
right to use any weapon i can find, have i not?

lord goring.  [_still looking in the glass_.]  in your place i don’t
think i should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  she is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

sir robert chiltern.  [_sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  well, i shall send a cipher telegram to the embassy at vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  there may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

lord goring.  [_settling his buttonhole_.]  oh, i should fancy mrs.
cheveley is
 
 ___________________________
 
 one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  i am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

sir robert chiltern.  [_writing_.]  why do you say that?

lord goring.  [_turning round_.]  well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  that is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

sir robert chiltern.  [_striking a bell_.]  but it is worth while my
wiring to vienna, is it not?

lord goring.  it is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_enter_ mason.]

sir robert chiltern.  is mr. trafford in his room?

mason.  yes, sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_puts what he has written 
 
 ___________________________
 
into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  there must not be a moment’s delay.

mason.  yes, sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  oh! just give that back to me again.

[_writes something on the envelope_.  mason _then goes out with the
letter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  she must have had some curious hold over baron
arnheim.  i wonder what it was.

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  i wonder.

sir robert chiltern.  i will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

lord goring.  [_strongly_.]  oh, fight in any case—in any case.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a gesture of despair_.]  if my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  well, as soon as i hear
from vienna, i shall let you know the result.  it is a chance, just a
chance, but i believe in it.  and as i fought the age with its own
weapons, i will fight her with her wea
 
 ___________________________
 
pons.  it is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

lord goring.  most pretty women do.  but there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  perhaps mrs. cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
besides, my dear robert, i should not build too high hopes on frightening
mrs. cheveley.  i should not fancy mrs. cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  she has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

sir robert chiltern.  oh! i live on hopes now
 
 ___________________________
 
.  i clutch at every chance.
i feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  the water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  hush! i hear my wife’s voice.

[_enter_ lady chiltern _in walking dress_.]

lady chiltern.  good afternoon, lord goring!

lord goring.  good afternoon, lady chiltern!  have you been in the park?

lady chiltern.  no; i have just come from the woman’s liberal
association, where, by the way, robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now i have come in to have my tea.  [_to_ lord goring.]
you will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

lord goring.  i’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

lady chiltern.  i will be back in a moment.  i am only going to take my
hat off.

lord goring.  [_in his most earnest manner_.]  o
 
 ___________________________
 
h! please don’t.  it is
so pretty.  one of the prettiest hats i ever saw.  i hope the woman’s
liberal association received it with loud applause.

lady chiltern.  [_with a smile_.]  we have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, lord goring.

lord goring.  really?  what sort of work?

lady chiltern.  oh! dull, useful, delightful things, factory acts, female
inspectors, the eight hours’ bill, the parliamentary franchise. . . .
everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

lord goring.  and never bonnets?

lady chiltern.  [_with mock indignation_.]  never bonnets, never!

[lady chiltern _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_takes_ lord goring’s _hand_.]  you have been a
good friend
 
 ___________________________
 
 to me, arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

lord goring.  i don’t know that i have been able to do much for you,
robert, as yet.  in fact, i have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as i can see.  i am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

sir robert chiltern.  you have enabled me to tell you the truth.  that is
something.  the truth has always stifled me.

lord goring.  ah! the truth is a thing i get rid of as soon as possible!
bad habit, by the way.  makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  they call it being conceited.  perhaps it is.

sir robert chiltern.  i would to god that i had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  i’ll see you
soon again, arthur, shan’t i?

lord goring.  certainly.  whenever you like.  i’m
 
 ___________________________
 
t by any
chance, send round a note to curzon street.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you.

[_as he reaches the door_, lady chiltern _enters from her boudoir_.]

lady chiltern.  you are not going, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  i have some letters to write, dear.

lady chiltern.  [_going to him_.]  you work too hard, robert.  you seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

sir robert chiltern.  it is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_he kisses her and goes out_.]

lady chiltern.  [_to_ lord goring.]  do sit down.  i am so glad you have
called.  i want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the woman’s liberal association.  you take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

lord goring.  you want to talk to me about mrs. cheveley?

lady chiltern.  yes.  you have guessed it.  after you left last night i
found out that what she had said was really true.  of course i made
robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd goring.  so he gave me to understand.

lady chiltern.  to have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  robert must be above reproach.
he is not like other men.  he cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_she looks at_ lord goring, _who remains silent_.]  don’t you agree with
me?  you are robert’s greatest friend.  you are our greatest friend, lord
goring.  no one, except myself, knows robert better than you do.  he has
no secrets from me, and i don’t think he has any from you.

lord goring.  he certainly has no secrets from me.  at least i don’t
think so.

lady chiltern.  then am i not right in my estimate of him?  i know i am
right.  but speak to me frankly.

lord goring.  [_looking straight at her_.]  quite fr
 
 ___________________________
 
ankly?

lady chiltern.  surely.  you have nothing to conceal, have you?

lord goring.  nothing.  but, my dear lady chiltern, i think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  of which you know so little, lord goring—

lord goring.  of which i know nothing by experience, though i know
something by observation.  i think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

lady chiltern.  well?

lord goring.  he walks in the mire.  of course i am only talking
generally 
 
 ___________________________
 
about life.

lady chiltern.  [_gravely_.]  i hope so.  why do you look at me so
strangely, lord goring?

lord goring.  lady chiltern, i have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  i think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  in every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or lord merton, or robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

lady chiltern.  what do you mean by a foolish letter?

lord goring.  a letter gravely 
 
 ___________________________
 
compromising one’s position.  i am only
putting an imaginary case.

lady chiltern.  robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

lord goring.  [_after a long pause_.]  nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

lady chiltern.  are you a pessimist?  what will the other dandies say?
they will all have to go into mourning.

lord goring.  [_rising_.]  no, lady chiltern, i am not a pessimist.
indeed i am not sure that i quite know what pessimism really means.  all
i do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  it is love, and not german philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  and if you are ever in trouble, lady chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and i will help you in every way i can.  if you ever
want me, come t
 
 ___________________________
 
o me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  come at
once to me.

lady chiltern.  [_looking at him in surprise_.]  lord goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  i don’t think i ever heard you talk seriously
before.

lord goring.  [_laughing_.]  you must excuse me, lady chiltern.  it won’t
occur again, if i can help it.

lady chiltern.  but i like you to be serious.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

mabel chiltern.  dear gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to lord
goring.  seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  good afternoon
lord goring!  pray be as trivial as you can.

lord goring.  i should like to, miss mabel, but i am afraid i am . . . a
little out of practice this morning
 
 ___________________________
 
; and besides, i have to be going now.

mabel chiltern.  just when i have come in!  what dreadful manners you
have!  i am sure you were very badly brought up.

lord goring.  i was.

mabel chiltern.  i wish i had brought you up!

lord goring.  i am so sorry you didn’t.

mabel chiltern.  it is too late now, i suppose?

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  i am not so sure.

mabel chiltern.  will you ride to-morrow morning?

lord goring.  yes, at ten.

mabel chiltern.  don’t forget.

lord goring.  of course i shan’t.  by the way, lady chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _the morning post_ of to-day.  it has apparently
been crowded out by the county council, or the lambeth conference, or
something equally boring.  could you let me have a list?  i have a
particular reason for asking you.

lady chiltern.  i am sure mr. trafford will be able to give you one.

lord goring.  thanks, so much.

mabel chiltern.  tommy is the most useful person in london.

lord goring [_turning to her
 
 ___________________________
 
_.]  and who is the most ornamental?

mabel chiltern [_triumphantly_.]  i am.

lord goring.  how clever of you to guess it!  [_takes up his hat and
cane_.]  good-bye, lady chiltern!  you will remember what i said to you,
won’t you?

lady chiltern.  yes; but i don’t know why you said it to me.

lord goring.  i hardly know myself.  good-bye, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern [_with a little moue of disappointment_.]  i wish you were
not going.  i have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  you might stop and listen to some of them.

lord goring.  how very selfish of you to have four and a half!  there
won’t be any left for me.

mabel chiltern.  i don’t want you to have any.  they would not be good
for you.

lord goring.  that is the first unkind thing you have ever sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id to me.
how charmingly you said it!  ten to-morrow.

mabel chiltern.  sharp.

lord goring.  quite sharp.  but don’t bring mr. trafford.

mabel chiltern.  [_with a little toss of the head_.]  of course i shan’t
bring tommy trafford.  tommy trafford is in great disgrace.

lord goring.  i am delighted to hear it.  [_bows and goes out_.]

mabel chiltern.  gertrude, i wish you would speak to tommy trafford.

lady chiltern.  what has poor mr. trafford done this time?  robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

mabel chiltern.  well, tommy has proposed to me again.  tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  he proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when i was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  i didn’t dare to make the smallest r
 
 ___________________________
 
 markby.  going already?

mabel chiltern.  i am so sorry but i am obliged to.  i am just off to
rehearsal.  i have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

lady markby.  on your head, child?  oh! i hope not.  i believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_takes a seat on the sofa next_ lady chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  but it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
undeserving, the only people i am really interested in.  i am the
secretary, and tommy trafford is treasurer.

mrs. cheveley.  and what is lord goring?

mabel chiltern.  oh! lord goring is president.

mrs. cheveley.  the post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since i knew him first.

lady markby.  [_reflecting_.]  you are remarkably modern, mabel.  a
little too modern, perhaps.  nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
one is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  i have known many
instances of it.

mabel chiltern.  what a dreadful prospect!

lady markby.  ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  you will always be
a
 
 ___________________________
 
ed—have ruined mine!

[_he passes from the room_.  lady chiltern _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 act drop




third act


scene


_the library in lord goring’s house_.  _an adam room_.  _on the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _on the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _a pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _the fire is lit_.  _phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _the distinction of phipps is his
impassivity_. _he has been termed by enthusiasts the ideal butler_.  _the
sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _he is a mask with a manner_.  _of his
intellectual or emotion
 
 ___________________________
 
al life_, _history knows nothing_.  _he represents
the dominance of form_.

[_enter_ lord goring _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _he is
wearing a silk hat and inverness cape_.  _white-gloved_, _he carries a
louis seize cane_.  _his are all the delicate fopperies of fashion_.
_one sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _he is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

lord goring.  got my second buttonhole for me, phipps?

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

lord goring.  rather distinguished thing, phipps.  i am the only person
of the smallest importance in london at present who wears a buttonhole.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  i have observed that,

lord goring.  [_taking out old buttonhole_.]  you see, phipps, fashion is
what one wears oneself.  what is unfashionable is what other people wear.

phipps.  
 
 ___________________________
 
yes, my lord.

lord goring.  just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  [_putting in a new buttonhole_.]  and falsehoods the truths
of other people.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  other people are quite dreadful.  the only possible society
is oneself.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  to love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
phipps.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  [_looking at himself in the glass_.]  don’t think i quite
like this buttonhole, phipps.  makes me look a little too old.  makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, phipps?

phipps.  i don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

lord goring.  you don’t, phipps?

phipps.  no, my lord.

lord goring.  i am not quite sure.  for the future a more trivial
buttonhole, phipps, on thursday evenings.

phipps.  i will speak to the florist, my lord.  she has had a loss in her
fami
 
 ___________________________
 
ly lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

lord goring.  extraordinary thing about the lower classes in england—they
are always losing their relations.

phipps.  yes, my lord!  they are extremely fortunate in that respect.

lord goring.  [_turns round and looks at him_.  phipps _remains
impassive_.]  hum!  any letters, phipps?

phipps.  three, my lord.  [_hands letters on a salver_.]

lord goring.  [_takes letters_.]  want my cab round in twenty minutes.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_goes towards door_.]

lord goring.  [_holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  ahem!  phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

phipps.  it was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

lord goring.  that will do.  [_exit_ phipps.]  lady chiltern’s
handwriting on lady chiltern’s pink notepaper.  that is rather curious.
i thought robert was to write.  wonder what lady chiltern has got to say
to me
 
 ___________________________
 
 to be
expected, and not to arrive.  i am not expected at the bachelors’, so i
shall certainly go there.  well, i will make her stand by her husband.
that is the only thing for her to do.  that is the only thing for any
woman to do.  it is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  ten o’clock.  she
should be here soon.  i must tell phipps i am not in to any one else.
[_goes towards bell_]

[_enter_ phipps.]

phipps.  lord caversham.

lord goring.  oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  some
extraordinary mistake in nature, i suppose.  [_enter_ lord caversham.]
delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_goes to meet him_.]

lord caversham.  take my cloak off.

lord goring.  is it worth while, father?

lord caversham.  of course it is worth while, sir.  which is the most
comfortable chair?

lord goring.  this one, father.  it is the chair i use myself, when i
have visitors.

lord caversham.  thank ye.  no draught, i hope, i
 
 ___________________________
 
n this room?

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  [_sitting down_.]  glad to hear it.  can’t stand
draughts.  no draughts at home.

lord goring.  good many breezes, father.

lord caversham.  eh?  eh?  don’t understand what you mean.  want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

lord goring.  my dear father!  at this hour?

lord caversham.  well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  what is your
objection to the hour?  i think the hour is an admirable hour!

lord goring.  well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  i am very sorry, but it is not my day.

lord caversham.  what do you mean, sir?

lord goring.  during the season, father, i only talk seriously on the
first tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

lord caversham.  well, make it tuesday, sir, make it tuesday.

lord goring.  but it is after seven, father, and my doctor says i must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  it makes me talk in my
sleep.

lord caversh
 
 ___________________________
 
am.  talk in your sleep, sir?  what does that matter?  you
are not married.

lord goring.  no, father, i am not married.

lord caversham.  hum!  that is what i have come to talk to you about,
sir.  you have got to get married, and at once.  why, when i was your
age, sir, i had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  you can’t be always living for pleasure.
every man of position is married nowadays.  bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  they are a damaged lot.  to
 
 ___________________________
 
o much is known about them.  you
must get a wife, sir.  look where your friend robert chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  why don’t you take him for your model?

lord goring.  i think i shall, father.

lord caversham.  i wish you would, sir.  then i should be happy.  at
present i make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  you are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

lord caversham.  and it is high time for you to get married.  you are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

lord goring.  yes, father, but i only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when i have a really good buttonhole.  this buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

lord caversham.  i tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  and there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  i feel a draught, sir, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
feel it
distinctly.

lord goring.  so do i, father.  it is a dreadful draught.  i will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  we can talk over anything you like.  let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

lord caversham.  no, sir; i have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and i am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  put down my cloak, sir.

lord goring.  certainly, father.  but let us go into another room.
[_rings bell_.]  there is a dreadful draught here.  [_enter_ phipps.]
phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  come in there, father.  your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

lord caversham.  well, sir, i suppose i have a right to sneeze when i
choose?

lord goring.  [_apologetically_.]  quite so, father.  i was merely
expressing sympathy.

lord caversham.  oh, damn sympathy.  there is a great d
 
 ___________________________
 
eal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

lord goring.  i quite agree with you, father.  if there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

lord caversham.  [_going towards the smoking-room_.]  that is a paradox,
sir.  i hate paradoxes.

lord goring.  so do i, father.  everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  it is a great bore.  it makes society so obvious.

lord caversham.  [_turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  do you always really understand what you say, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  yes, father, if i listen
attentively.

lord caversham.  [_indignantly_.]  if you listen attentively! . . .
conceited young puppy!

[_goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  phipps _enters_.]

lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 goring.  phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
you understand?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  it is a matter of the gravest importance, phipps.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.

lord goring.  no one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.  [_bell rings_.]

lord goring.  ah! that is probably the lady.  i shall see her myself.

[_just as he is going towards the door_ lord caversham _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir? am i to wait attendance on you?

lord goring.  [_considerably perplexed_.]  in a moment, father.  do
excuse me.  [lord caversham _goes back_.]  well, remember my
instructions, phipps—into that room.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

[lord goring _goes into the smoking-room_.  harold, _the footman shows_
mrs. cheveley _in_.  _lam
 
 ___________________________
 
adam?

mrs. cheveley.  [_to_ phipps, _who advances towards her_.]  is lord
goring not here?  i was told he was at home?

phipps.  his lordship is engaged at present with lord caversham, madam.

[_turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ harold, _who at once retires_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_.]  how very filial!

phipps.  his lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  his lordship will come to you there.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a look of surprise_.]  lord goring expects me?

phipps.  yes, madam.

mrs. cheveley.  are you quite sure?

phipps.  his lordship told me that if a lady called i was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  his lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_]  how thoughtful of him!  to expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  ugh!  how dreary a bachelor’s drawing-r
 
 ___________________________
 
[_with a smile_.]  then i am sure they will be perfectly
right.

phipps.  [_gravely_.]  thank you, madam.

[mrs. cheveley _goes into the drawing-room_.  phipps _closes the door and
retires_.  _the door is then slowly opened_, _and_ mrs. cheveley _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  mrs. cheveley _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _the voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_enter_ lord goring _and_ lord caversham.]

lord goring.  [_expostulating_.]  my dear father, if i am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
particularly the person.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  that is a matter for me, sir.  you would
probably make a very poor choice.  it is i who should be consulted, not
you.  there is property at stake.  it is not a matter for affection.
affection comes later on in married life.

lord goring.  yes.  in married life affection comes whe
 
 ___________________________
 
n people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_puts on_ lord
caversham’s _cloak for him_.]

lord caversham.  certainly, sir.  i mean certainly not, air.  you are
talking very foolishly to-night.  what i say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

lord goring.  but women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  of course i only speak from hearsay.

lord caversham.  no woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  common sense is the privilege of our sex.

lord goring.  quite so.  and we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

lord caversham.  i use it, sir.  i use nothing else.

lord goring.  so my mother tells me.

lord caversham.  it is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

[_goes out for a moment_.  _then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ sir robert chiltern.]

sir robert chiltern.  my dear arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  your servant had just told me you were not at home.
how extraordinary!

lord goring.  the fact is, i am horribly busy to-night, robert, and i
gave orders i was not at home to any one.  even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  he complained of a draught the whole time.

sir robert chiltern.  ah! you must be at home to me, arthur.  you are my
best friend.  perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  my wife
has discovered everything.

lord goring.  ah! i guessed as much!

sir robert chiltern.  [_looking at him_.]  really!  how?

lord goring.  [_after some hesita
 
 ___________________________
 
 you came in.  who told her?

sir robert chiltern.  mrs. cheveley herself.  and the woman i love knows
that i began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that i built up my
life upon sands of shame—that i sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  i thank heaven poor
lord radley died without knowing that i betrayed him.  i would to god i
had died before i had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_burying his face in his hands_.]

lord goring.  [_after a pause_.]  you have heard nothing from vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

sir robert chiltern.  [_looking up_.]  yes; i got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

lord goring.  well?

sir robert chiltern.  nothing is absolutely known against her.  on the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  it is a sort
of open secret that baron arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  beyond that i can learn nothing.

lord gorin
 
 ___________________________
 
g.  she doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

sir robert chiltern.  oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  their profession
is over.  the newspapers do their work instead.

lord goring.  and thunderingly well they do it.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, i am parched with thirst.  may i ring for
something?  some hock and seltzer?

lord goring.  certainly.  let me.  [_rings the bell_.]

sir robert chiltern.  thanks!  i don’t know what to do, arthur, i don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  but what a friend you
are—the one friend i can trust.  i can trust you absolutely, can’t i?

[_enter_ phipps.]

lord goring.  my dear robert, of course.  oh!  [_to_ phipps.]  bring some
hock and seltzer.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  and phipps!

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  will you excuse me for a moment, ro
 
 ___________________________
 
bert?  i want to give
some directions to my servant.

sir robert chiltern.  certainly.

lord goring.  when that lady calls, tell her that i am not expected home
this evening.  tell her that i have been suddenly called out of town.
you understand?

phipps.  the lady is in that room, my lord.  you told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

lord goring.  you did perfectly right.  [_exit_ phipps.]  what a mess i
am in.  no; i think i shall get through it.  i’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  awkward thing to manage, though.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, tell me what i should do.  my life seems to
have crumbled about me.  i am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

lord goring.  robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

sir robert chiltern.  i love her more than anything in the world.  i used
to think ambition the great t
 
 ___________________________
 
hing.  it is not.  love is the great thing
in the world.  there is nothing but love, and i love her.  but i am
defamed in her eyes.  i am ignoble in her eyes.  there is a wide gulf
between us now.  she has found me out, arthur, she has found me out.

lord goring.  has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

sir robert chiltern.  my wife!  never!  she does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  i am of clay like other men.  she stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
but i love her, arthur.  we are childless, and i have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  perhaps if god had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  but
 
 ___________________________
 
 god has given us a lonely house.  and
she has cut my heart in two.  don’t let us talk of it.  i was brutal to
her this evening.  but i suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  i said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  but don’t let us
talk of that.

lord goring.  your wife will forgive you.  perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  she loves you, robert.  why should she not forgive?

sir robert chiltern.  god grant it!  god grant it!  [_buries his face in
his hands_.]  but there is something more i have to tell you, arthur.

[_enter_ phipps _with drinks_.]

phipps.  [_hands hock and seltzer to_ sir robert chiltern.]  hock and
seltzer, sir.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you.

lord goring.  is your carriage here, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  no; i
 
 ___________________________
 
 walked from the club.

lord goring.  sir robert will take my cab, phipps.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_exit_.]

lord goring.  robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  i
have made up my mind what i am going to do to-night in the house.  the
debate on the argentine canal is to begin at eleven.  [_a chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  what is that?

lord goring.  nothing.

sir robert chiltern.  i heard a chair fall in the next room.  some one
has been listening.

lord goring.  no, no; there is no one there.

sir robert chiltern.  there is some one.  there are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  arthur, what does this mean?

lord goring.  robert, you are excited, unnerved.  i tell you there is no
one in that room. sit down, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  do you give me your word that there
 
 ___________________________
 
 is no one
there?

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  your word of honour?  [_sits down_.]

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rises_.]  arthur, let me see for myself.

lord goring.  no, no.

sir robert chiltern.  if there is no one there why should i not look in
that room?  arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  arthur, you
don’t realise what i am going through.

lord goring.  robert, this must stop.  i have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rushes to the door of the room_.]  it is not
enough.  i insist on going into this room.  you have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

lord goring.  for god’s sake, don’t!  there is some one there.  some one
whom you must not see.

sir robert chiltern.  ah, i thought so!

lord goring.  i forbid you to enter that room.

sir robert chi
 
 ___________________________
 
ltern.  stand back.  my life is at stake.  and i don’t care
who is there.  i will know who it is to whom i have told my secret and my
shame.  [_enters room_.]

lord goring.  great heavens! his own wife!

[sir robert chiltern _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

sir robert chiltern.  what explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

lord goring.  robert, i swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

sir robert chiltern.  she is a vile, an infamous thing!

lord goring.  don’t say that, robert!  it was for your sake she came
here.  it was to try and save you she came here.  she loves you and no
one else.

sir robert chiltern.  you are mad.  what have i to do with her intrigues
with you?  let her remain your mistress!  you are well suited to each
other.  she, corrupt and shameful—y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

lord goring.  it is not true, robert.  before heaven, it is not true.  in
her presence and in yours i will explain all.

sir robert chiltern.  let me pass, sir.  you have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[sir robert chiltern _goes out_.  lord goring _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ mrs. cheveley _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a mock curtsey_]  good evening, lord goring!

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley!  great heavens! . . . may i ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

mrs. cheveley.  merely listening.  i have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  one always hears such wonderful things through them.

lord goring.  doesn’t that sound rather like tempting providence?

mrs. cheveley.  oh! surely providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

lord goring.  i am glad you have called.  i am going t
 
 ___________________________
 
o give you some
good advice.

mrs. cheveley.  oh! pray don’t.  one should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

lord goring.  i see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

mrs. cheveley.  far more!  i have greatly improved.  i have had more
experience.

lord goring.  too much experience is a dangerous thing.  pray have a
cigarette.  half the pretty women in london smoke cigarettes.  personally
i prefer the other half.

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  i never smoke.  my dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  what
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

lord goring.  you have come here to sell me robert chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

mrs. cheveley.  to offer it to you on conditions.  ho
 
 ___________________________
 
w did you guess
that?

lord goring.  because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  have you got it
with you?

mrs. cheveley.  [_sitting down_.]  oh, no!  a well-made dress has no
pockets.

lord goring.  what is your price for it?

mrs. cheveley.  how absurdly english you are!  the english think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  why, my dear arthur, i have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as robert chiltern
has got hold of.  money is not what i want.

lord goring.  what do you want then, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  why don’t you call me laura?

lord goring.  i don’t like the name.

mrs. cheveley.  you used to adore it.

lord goring.  yes: that’s why.  [mrs. cheveley _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _he smiles_, _and does so_.]

mrs. cheveley.  arthur, you loved me once.

lord goring.  yes.

mrs. cheveley.  and you asked me to be your wife.

lord goring.  that was the natural result of my loving you.

mrs. cheveley.  and you threw me o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old lord mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at tenby.

lord goring.  i am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

mrs. cheveley.  at that time i was poor; you were rich.

lord goring.  quite so.  that is why you pretended to love me.

mrs. cheveley.  [_shrugging her shoulders_.]  poor old lord mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  i never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  he used the
most horrible language about them both.  well, you were silly, arthur.
why, lord mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  one
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an english country
house on an en
 
 ___________________________
 
glish country sunday.  i don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an english country house.

lord goring.  yes.  i know lots of people think that.

mrs. cheveley.  i loved you, arthur.

lord goring.  my dear mrs. cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

mrs. cheveley.  i did love you.  and you loved me.  you know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  i suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_puts her hand on his_.]

lord goring.  [_taking his hand away quietly_.]  yes: except that.

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  i am tired of living abroad.  i want
to come back to lon
 
 ___________________________
 
ant to
have a salon.  if one could only teach the english how to talk, and the
irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  besides, i
have arrived at the romantic stage.  when i saw you last night at the
chilterns’, i knew you were the only person i had ever cared for, if i
ever have cared for anybody, arthur.  and so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, i will give you robert chiltern’s letter.  that is my
offer.  i will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

lord goring.  now?

mrs. cheveley.  [_smiling_.]  to-morrow.

lord goring.  are you really serious?

mrs. cheveley.  yes, quite serious.

lord goring.  i should make you a very bad husband.

mrs. cheveley.  i don’t mind bad husbands.  i have had two.  they amused
me immensely.

lord goring.  you mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

mrs. cheveley.  what do you know about my married life?

lord goring.  nothing: but i can read it like a book.

mrs. cheveley.  what book?

lord goring.  [_r
 
 ___________________________
 
ising_.]  the book of numbers.

mrs. cheveley.  do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

lord goring.  in the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

mrs. cheveley.  i suppose that is meant for a compliment.  my dear
arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  men always are.  that
is the difference between the two sexes.

lord goring.  women are never disarmed by anything, as far as i know
them.

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, robert chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  i thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, arthur.  i think you
should.  and the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

lord goring.  oh! i do that as it is.  and self-sacrifice is 
 
 ___________________________
 
a thing that
should be put down by law.  it is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  they always go to the bad.

mrs. cheveley.  as if anything could demoralise robert chiltern!  you
seem to forget that i know his real character.

lord goring.  what you know about him is not his real character.  it was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, i admit, shameful, i
admit, unworthy of him, i admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

mrs. cheveley.  how you men stand up for each other!

lord goring.  how you women war against each other!

mrs. cheveley.  [_bitterly_.]  i only war against one woman, against
gertrude chiltern.  i hate her.  i hate her now more than ever.

lord goring.  because you have brought a real tr
 
 ___________________________
 
agedy into her life, i
suppose.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a sneer_.]  oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  the fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

lord goring.  lady chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

mrs. cheveley.  a woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  you know gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  that is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . well, arthur, i suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  you admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  for the privilege of being your wife i was ready 
 
 ___________________________
 
to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  you decline.  very
well.  if sir robert doesn’t uphold my argentine scheme, i expose him.
voilà tout.

lord goring.  you mustn’t do that.  it would be vile, horrible, infamous.

mrs. cheveley.  [_shrugging her shoulders_.]  oh! don’t use big words.
they mean so little.  it is a commercial transaction.  that is all.
there is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  i offered to sell
robert chiltern a certain thing.  if he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  there is no more to be said.  i
must go.  good-bye.  won’t you shake hands?

lord goring.  with you?  no.  you
 
 ___________________________
 
 with lady markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that i lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the chilterns’.  if you don’t believe me, you
can ask lady markby.  she will tell you it is true.  the scene that
occurred happened after lady markby had left, and was really forced on me
by gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  i called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
that was the origin of the whole thing.

lord goring.  a diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  how do you know?

lord goring.  because it is found.  in point of fact, i found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as i was
leaving.  [_goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
it is in this drawer.  no, that one.  this is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_holds up the brooch_.]

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  i am so glad to get it back.  it was . . a present.

lord goring.  won’t you wear it?

mr
 
 ___________________________
 
s. cheveley.  certainly, if you pin it in.  [lord goring _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  why do you put it on as a bracelet?  i never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

lord goring.  really?

mrs. cheveley.  [_holding out her handsome arm_.]  no; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

lord goring.  yes; much better than when i saw it last.

mrs. cheveley.  when did you see it last?

lord goring.  [_calmly_.]  oh, ten years ago, on lady berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

mrs. cheveley.  [_starting_.]  what do you mean?

lord goring.  i mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, mary
berkshire, to whom i gave it when she was married.  suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  i recognised it last
night.  i determined to say nothing about it till i had found the thief.
i have found the thief now, and i have heard her own confession.

mrs. cheveley.  [_
 
 ___________________________
 
tossing her head_.]  it is not true.

lord goring.  you know it is true.  why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

mrs. cheveley.  i will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  i
will say that i have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[mrs. cheveley _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
lord goring _looks on amused_.  _her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _a curse breaks from her_.]

lord goring.  the drawback of stealing a thing, mrs. cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  you can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  and i see
you don’t know where the spring is.  it is rather difficult to find.

mrs. cheveley.  you brute!  you coward!  [_she tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

lord goring.  oh! don’t use big words.  they mean so little.

mrs. cheveley.  [_again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm 
 
 ___________________________
 
of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _then stops_, _and looks at_ lord goring.]
what are you going to do?

lord goring.  i am going to ring for my servant.  he is an admirable
servant.  always comes in the moment one rings for him.  when he comes i
will tell him to fetch the police.

mrs. cheveley.  [_trembling_.]  the police?  what for?

lord goring.  to-morrow the berkshires will prosecute you.  that is what
the police are for.

mrs. cheveley.  [_is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _her face is
distorted_.  _her mouth awry_.  _a mask has fallen from her_.  _she it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  don’t do that.  i will do
anything you want.  anything in the world you want.

lord goring.  give me robert chiltern’s letter.

mrs. cheveley.  stop! stop!  let me have time to think.

lord goring.  give me robert chiltern’
 
 ___________________________
 
s letter.

mrs. cheveley.  i have not got it with me.  i will give it to you
to-morrow.

lord goring.  you know you are lying.  give it to me at once.  [mrs.
cheveley _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _she is horribly
pale_.]  this is it?

mrs. cheveley.  [_in a hoarse voice_.]  yes.

lord goring.  [_takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  for so well-dressed a woman, mrs. cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  i congratulate you.

mrs. cheveley.  [_catches sight of_ lady chiltern’s _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  please get me a
glass of water.

lord goring.  certainly.  [_goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _while his back is turned_ mrs. cheveley _steals_
l
 
 ___________________________
 
ady chiltern’s _letter_.  _when_ lord goring _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

mrs. cheveley.  thank you.  will you help me on with my cloak?

lord goring.  with pleasure.  [_puts her cloak on_.]

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  i am never going to try to harm robert chiltern
again.

lord goring.  fortunately you have not the chance, mrs. cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  well, if even i had the chance, i wouldn’t.  on the
contrary, i am going to render him a great service.

lord goring.  i am charmed to hear it.  it is a reformation.

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  i can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an english gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

lord goring.  well?

mrs. cheveley.  i find that somehow gertrude chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

lord goring.  what do you mean?

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  i mean
that i am going to send robert chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote
 
 ___________________________
 
 to
you to-night.

lord goring.  love-letter?

mrs. cheveley.  [_laughing_.]  ‘i want you.  i trust you.  i am coming to
you.  gertrude.’

[lord goring _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

lord goring.  you wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  give me
back that letter.  i’ll take it from you by force.  you shall not leave
my room till i have got it.

[_he rushes towards her_, _but_ mrs. cheveley _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _the bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ phipps _enters_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  lord goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  good-night, lord goring!

[_goes out followed by_ phipps.  _he
 
 ___________________________
 
r face it illumined with evil
triumph_.  _there is joy in her eyes_.  _youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  lord goring _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                act drops




fourth act


scene


_same as act ii_.

[lord goring _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _he is looking rather bored_.]

lord goring.  [_pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  it is a great nuisance.  i can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  and i am full of interesting information.  i feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_enter servant_.]

james.  sir robert is still at the foreign office, my lord.

lord goring.  lady chiltern not down yet?

james.  her ladyship has not yet left her room.  miss chiltern has just
come in from riding.

lord goring.  [_to himself_.]  ah! that is 
 
 ___________________________
 
something.

james.  lord caversham has been waiting some time in the library for sir
robert.  i told him your lordship was here.

lord goring.  thank you!  would you kindly tell him i’ve gone?

james.  [_bowing_.]  i shall do so, my lord.

[_exit servant_.]

lord goring.  really, i don’t want to meet my father three days running.
it is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  i hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  that is the
only proper basis for family life.  mothers are different.  mothers are
darlings.  [_throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_enter_ lord caversham.]

lord caversham.  well, sir, what are you doing here?  wasting your time
as usual, i suppose?

lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d goring.  [_throws down paper and rises_.]  my dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

lord caversham.  have you been thinking over what i spoke to you about
last night?

lord goring.  i have been thinking about nothing else.

lord caversham.  engaged to be married yet?

lord goring.  [_genially_.]  not yet: but i hope to be before lunch-time.

lord caversham.  [_caustically_.]  you can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

lord goring.  thanks awfully, but i think i’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

lord caversham.  humph!  never know when you are serious or not.

lord goring.  neither do i, father.

[_a pause_.]

lord caversham.  i suppose you have read _the times_ this morning?

lord goring.  [_airily_.]  the times?  certainly not.  i only 
 
 ___________________________
 
read _the
morning post_.  all that one should know about modern life is where the
duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

lord caversham.  do you mean to say you have not read _the times_ leading
article on robert chiltern’s career?

lord goring.  good heavens!  no.  what does it say?

lord caversham.  what should it say, sir?  everything complimentary, of
course.  chiltern’s speech last night on this argentine canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the house since
canning.

lord goring.  ah!  never heard of canning.  never wanted to.  and did . . .
did chiltern uphold the scheme?

lord caversham.  uphold it, sir?  how little you know him!  why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern p
 
 ___________________________
 
olitical finance.
this speech is the turning-point in his career, as _the times_ points
out.  you should read this article, sir.  [_opens_ the times.]  ‘sir
robert chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . brilliant
orator . . . unblemished career . . . well-known integrity of character
. . . represents what is best in english public life . . . noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  they will
never say that of you, sir.

lord goring.  i sincerely hope not, father.  however, i am delighted at
what you tell me about robert, thoroughly delighted.  it shows he has got
pluck.

lord caversham.  he has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

lord goring.  ah! i prefer pluck.  it is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

lord caversham.  i wish you would go into parliament.

lord goring.  my dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
house of commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

lord cave
 
 ___________________________
 
rsham.  why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

lord goring.  i am far too young.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  i hate this affectation of youth, sir.  it
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

lord goring.  youth isn’t an affectation.  youth is an art.

lord caversham.  why don’t you propose to that pretty miss chiltern?

lord goring.  i am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

lord caversham.  i don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

lord goring.  i don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

lord caversham.  if she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
england.

lord goring.  that is just what i should like to marry.  a thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

lord caversham.  you don’t deserve her,
 
 ___________________________
 
 sir.

lord goring.  my dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  oh! . . . how do you do, lord caversham?  i hope lady
caversham is quite well?

lord caversham.  lady caversham is as usual, as usual.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_taking no notice at all of_ lord goring, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ lord caversham.]  and lady caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

lord caversham.  they have had a serious relapse, i am sorry to say.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_to_ lord caversham.]  i hope an operation will not be
necessary.

lord caversham.  [_smiling at her pertness_.]  if it is, we shall have to
give lady caversham a narcotic.  otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

lord goring. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 [_with increased emphasis_.]  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_turning round with feigned surprise_.]  oh, are you
here?  of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
i am never going to speak to you again.

lord goring.  oh, please don’t say such a thing.  you are the one person
in london i really like to have to listen to me.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i never believe a single word that either
you or i say to each other.

lord caversham.  you are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, i mean.

mabel chiltern.  do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  just as a change.

lord caversham.  i regret to say, miss chiltern, that i have no influence
at all over my son.  i wish i had.  if i had, i know what i would make
him do.

mabel chiltern.  i am afraid that he has one of thos
 
 ___________________________
 
e terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

lord caversham.  he is very heartless, very heartless.

lord goring.  it seems to me that i am a little in the way here.

mabel chiltern.  it is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

lord goring.  i don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  it makes me far too conceited.

lord caversham.  after that, my dear, i really must bid you good morning.

mabel chiltern.  oh! i hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
lord goring?  especially at such an early hour in the day.

lord caversham.  i am afraid i can’t take him with me to downing street.
it is not the prime minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_shakes hands with_ mabel chiltern, _takes up hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ lord goring.]

mabel chiltern.  [_takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  people who don’t keep their appointments in the park are
horrid.

lord goring.  detestable.

mabel chiltern.  i am glad you admit it.  but i wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

lord goring.  i can’t help it.  i always look pleased when i am with you.

mabel chiltern.  [_sadly_.]  then i suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

lord goring.  of course it is.

mabel chiltern.  well, my duty is a thing i never do, on principle.  it
always depresses me.  so i am afraid i must leave you.

lord goring.  please don’t, miss mabel.  i have something very particular
to say to you.

mabel chiltern.  [_rapturously_.]  oh! is it a proposal?

lord goring.  [_somewhat taken aback_.]  well
 
 ___________________________
 
, yes, it is—i am bound to
say it is.

mabel chiltern.  [_with a sigh of pleasure_.]  i am so glad.  that makes
the second to-day.

lord goring.  [_indignantly_.]  the second to-day?  what conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before i had
proposed to you?

mabel chiltern.  tommy trafford, of course.  it is one of tommy’s days
for proposing.  he always proposes on tuesdays and thursdays, during the
season.

lord goring.  you didn’t accept him, i hope?

mabel chiltern.  i make it a rule never to accept tommy.  that is why he
goes on proposing.  of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, i very
nearly said yes.  it would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if i had.  it would have taught you both better manners.

lord goring.  oh! bother tommy trafford.  tommy is a silly little ass.  i
love you.

mabel chiltern.  i know.  and i think you might have mentioned it before.
i am sure i hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e given you heaps of opportunities.

lord goring.  mabel, do be serious.  please be serious.

mabel chiltern.  ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  he never says it afterwards.

lord goring.  [_taking hold of her hand_.]  mabel, i have told you that i
love you.  can’t you love me a little in return?

mabel chiltern.  you silly arthur!  if you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that i adore you.  every one in
london knows it except you.  it is a public scandal the way i adore you.
i have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that i adore you.  i wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  i have no characte
 
 ___________________________
 
r left at all.  at least, i feel so happy that
i am quite sure i have no character left at all.

lord goring.  [_catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  dear!  do you know i was awfully afraid of being
refused!

mabel chiltern.  [_looking up at him_.]  but you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, arthur?  i can’t imagine any one refusing you.

lord goring.  [_after kissing her again_.]  of course i’m not nearly good
enough for you, mabel.

mabel chiltern.  [_nestling close to him_.]  i am so glad, darling.  i
was afraid you were.

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  and i’m . . . i’m a little over
thirty.

mabel chiltern.  dear, you look weeks younger than that.

lord goring.  [_enthusiastically_.]  how sweet of you to say so! . . .
and it is only fair to tell you frankly that i am fearfully extravagant.

mabel chiltern.  but so am i
 
 ___________________________
 
, arthur.  so we’re sure to agree.  and now i
must go and see gertrude.

lord goring.  must you really?  [_kisses her_.]

mabel chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  then do tell her i want to talk to her particularly.  i
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or robert.

mabel chiltern.  do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

lord goring.  [_triumphantly_.]  no; that was a flash of genius.

mabel chiltern.  your first.

lord goring.  [_with determination_.]  my last.

mabel chiltern.  i am delighted to hear it.  now don’t stir.  i’ll be
back in five minutes.  and don’t fall into any temptations while i am
away.

lord goring.  dear mabel, while you are away, there are none.  it makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_enter_ lady chiltern.]

lady chiltern.  good morning, dear!  how pretty you are looking!

mabel chiltern.  how pale you are looking, gertrude!  it is most
becoming!

lady chiltern.  good morning, lord gor
 
 ___________________________
 
ing!

lord goring.  [_bowing_.]  good morning, lady chiltern!

mabel chiltern.  [_aside to_ lord goring.]  i shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

lord goring.  second on the left?

mabel chiltern.  [_with a look of mock surprise_.]  yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ lady chiltern, _and goes out_.]

lord goring.  lady chiltern, i have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  mrs. cheveley gave me up robert’s letter last night, and i
burned it.  robert is safe.

lady chiltern.  [_sinking on the sofa_.]  safe!  oh! i am so glad of
that.  what a good friend you are to him—to us!

lord goring.  there is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

lady chiltern.  who is that?

lord goring.  [_sitting down beside her_.]  yourself.

lady chiltern.  i?  in danger?  what do you mea
 
 ___________________________
 
n?

lord goring.  danger is too great a word.  it is a word i should not have
used.  but i admit i have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  you wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  mrs.
cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

lady chiltern.  well, what use is it to her?  why should she not have it?

lord goring.  [_rising_.]  lady chiltern, i will be quite frank with you.
mrs. cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

lady chiltern.  but what construction could she put on it? . . . oh! not
that! not that!  if i in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  and she proposes to send
it to my husband?  tell me what happened. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 tell me all that happened.

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  i thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  robert came in unexpectedly.  a chair or
something fell in the room.  he forced his way in, and he discovered her.
we had a terrible scene.  i still thought it was you.  he left me in
anger.  at the end of everything mrs. cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, i don’t know.

lady chiltern.  at what hou
 
 ___________________________
 
r did this happen?

lord goring.  at half-past ten.  and now i propose that we tell robert
the whole thing at once.

lady chiltern.  [_looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
you want me to tell robert that the woman you expected was not mrs.
cheveley, but myself?  that it was i whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  you want me to
tell him that?

lord goring.  i think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

lady chiltern.  [_rising_.]  oh, i couldn’t, i couldn’t!

lord goring.  may i do it?

lady chiltern.  no.

lord goring.  [_gravely_.]  you are wrong, lady chiltern.

lady chiltern.  no.  the letter must be intercepted.  that is all.  but
how can i do it?  letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  his
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  i dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  it would be impossible.  o
 
 ___________________________
 
h! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

lord goring.  pray be calm, lady chiltern, and answer the questions i am
going to put to you.  you said his secretaries open his letters.

lady chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  who is with him to-day?  mr. trafford, isn’t it?

lady chiltern.  no.  mr. montford, i think.

lord goring.  you can trust him?

lady chiltern.  [_with a gesture of despair_.]  oh! how do i know?

lord goring.  he would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

lady chiltern.  i think so.

lord goring.  your letter was on pink paper.  he could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  by the colour?

lady chiltern.  i suppose so.

lord goring.  is he in the house now?

lady chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  then i will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_goes to the
doo
 
 ___________________________
 
r_, _and opens it_.]  oh! robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  it has reached him already.

lady chiltern.  [_with a cry of pain_.]  oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_enter_ sir robert chiltern.  _he has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _he comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ lord goring’s
_presence_.]

sir robert chiltern.  ‘i want you.  i trust you.  i am coming to you.
gertrude.’  oh, my love!  is this true?  do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  if so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  this letter of yours, gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  you want me, gertrude?

[lord goring, _unseen by_ sir robert chiltern, _makes an imploring sign
to_ lady chiltern _to accept the situation and_ sir rober
 
 ___________________________
 
t’s _error_.]

lady chiltern.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  you trust me, gertrude?

lady chiltern.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  ah! why did you not add you loved me?

lady chiltern.  [_taking his hand_.]  because i loved you.

[lord goring _passes into the conservatory_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_kisses her_.]  gertrude, you don’t know what i
feel.  when montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, i suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and i read it—oh! i did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, i only thought you loved me still.

lady chiltern.  there is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  mrs. cheveley has handed over to lord g
 
 ___________________________
 
oring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

sir robert chiltern.  are you sure of this, gertrude?

lady chiltern.  yes; lord goring has just told me.

sir robert chiltern.  then i am safe!  oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  for two days i have been in terror.  i am safe now.  how did
arthur destroy my letter?  tell me.

lady chiltern.  he burned it.

sir robert chiltern.  i wish i had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  how many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  is arthur still here?

lady chiltern.  yes; he is in the conservatory.

sir robe
 
 ___________________________
 
nd on her
shoulder_.]

sir robert chiltern.  and you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from london, away from public
life?  you would have no regrets?

lady chiltern.  oh! none, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_sadly_.]  and your ambition for me?  you used to
be ambitious for me.

lady chiltern.  oh, my ambition!  i have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  it was your ambition that led you astray.  let us not
talk about ambition.

[lord goring _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_going towards him_.]  arthur, i have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  i don’t know how i can repay you.
[_shakes hands with him_.]

lord goring.  my dear fellow, i’ll tell you at once.  at the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . i mean in the conservatory . . .

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  lord caversham.

 
 ___________________________
 

lord goring.  that admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  it is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_enter_ lord caversham.  mason _goes out_.]

lord caversham.  good morning, lady chiltern!  warmest congratulations to
you, chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  i have just left the
prime minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the cabinet.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a look of joy and triumph_.]  a seat in the
cabinet?

lord cavers
 
 ___________________________
 
ham.  yes; here is the prime minister’s letter.  [_hands
letter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_takes letter and reads it_.]  a seat in the
cabinet!

lord caversham.  certainly, and you well deserve it too.  you have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_to_ lord goring.]  everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

lord goring.  i don’t like principles, father.  i prefer prejudices.

[sir robert chiltern _is on the brink of accepting the prime minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_he then realises that it is impossible_.]

sir robert chiltern.  i cannot accept this offer, lord caversham.  i have
made up my mind to decline it.

lord caversham.  decline it, sir!

sir robert chiltern.  my intention is to retire at once from public life.

lord caversham.  [_angrily_.]  
 
 ___________________________
 
decline a seat in the cabinet, and retire
from public life?  never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  i beg your pardon, lady chiltern.  chiltern, i beg your
pardon.  [_to_ lord goring.]  don’t grin like that, sir.

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  lady chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in london, the most sensible woman i know.  will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . will you kindly do that, lady chiltern?

lady chiltern.  i think my husband in right in his determination, lord
caversham.  i approve of it.

lord caversham.  you approve of it?  good heavens!

lady chiltern.  [_taking her husband’s hand_.]  i admire him for it.  i
admir
 
 ___________________________
 
ce.  such offers are not repeated.  i will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, lord caversham.

lady chiltern.  i may come with you, robert, may i not?

sir robert chiltern.  yes, gertrude.

[lady chiltern _goes out with him_.]

lord caversham.  what is the matter with this family?  something wrong
here, eh?  [_tapping his forehead_.]  idiocy?  hereditary, i suppose.
both of them, too.  wife as well as husband.  very sad.  very sad indeed!
and they are not an old family.  can’t understand it.

lord goring.  it is not idiocy, father, i assure you.

lord caversham.  what is it then, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  that is all.

lord caversham.  hate these new-fangled names.  same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  shan’t stay in this house any longer.

lord goring.  [_taking his arm_.]  oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

lord caversham.  what, 
 
 ___________________________
 
sir?

lord goring.  i beg your pardon, father, i forgot.  the conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there i want you to talk to.

lord caversham.  what about, sir?

lord goring.  about me, father,

lord caversham.  [_grimly_.]  not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

lord goring.  no, father; but the lady is like me.  she doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  she thinks it a little loud.

[lord caversham _goes out into the conservatory_.  lady chiltern
_enters_.]

lord goring.  lady chiltern, why are you playing mrs. cheveley’s cards?

lady chiltern.  [_startled_.]  i don’t understand you.

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  from the latter 
 
 ___________________________
 
tragedy you saved him.  the former you are now
thrusting on him.  why should you do him the wrong mrs. cheveley tried to
do and failed?

lady chiltern.  lord goring?

lord goring.  [_pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  lady chiltern, allow
me.  you wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  you love robert.  do you want to kill his love for you?  what
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you
 
 ___________________________
 
 issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  a woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  it is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
don’t make any terrible mistake, lady chiltern.  a woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

lady chiltern.  [_troubled and hesitating_.]  but it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  he feels it is his duty.
it was he who first said so.

lord goring.  rather than lose your love, robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  he is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  take my advice, lady chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  if you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  we men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  we are not worthy of them.  besides, robert has been
punished enough.

lady chiltern.  we have both been punished.  i set him up too high.

lor
 
 ___________________________
 
s.  it is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  i have just learnt this, and much else with it, from lord
goring.  and i will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude!  gertrude!

lady chiltern.  you can forget.  men easily forget.  and i forgive.  that
is how women help the world.  i see that now.

sir robert chiltern.  [_deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  my
wife! my wife!  [_to_ lord goring.]  arthur, it seems that i am always to
be in your debt.

lord goring.  oh dear no, robert.  your debt is to lady chiltern, not to
me!

sir robert chiltern.  i owe you much.  and now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as lord caversham came in.

lord goring.  robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and i want your
consent to my marriage with her.  that is all.

lady chiltern.  oh, i am so glad!  i am so glad!  [_shakes hands with_
lord goring.]

lord goring.  thank you, lady chilt
 
 ___________________________
 
ern.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a troubled look_.]  my sister to be your
wife?

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  [_speaking with great firmness_.]  arthur, i am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  i have to think
of mabel’s future happiness.  and i don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  and i cannot have her sacrificed!

lord goring.  sacrificed!

sir robert chiltern.  yes, utterly sacrificed.  loveless marriages are
horrible.  but there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  a marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

lord goring.  but i love mabel.  no other woman has any place in my life.

lady chiltern.  robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

s
 
 ___________________________
 
ir robert chiltern.  arthur cannot bring mabel the love that she
deserves.

lord goring.  what reason have you for saying that?

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  do you really require me to
tell you?

lord goring.  certainly i do.

sir robert chiltern.  as you choose.  when i called on you yesterday
evening i found mrs. cheveley concealed in your rooms.  it was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  i do not wish to say anything more.
your relations with mrs. cheveley have, as i said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  i know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  the fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  you spoke to me last night of her as of a w
 
 ___________________________
 
oman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  that may be so.  but
i cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  it would be wrong of me.
it would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

lord goring.  i have nothing more to say.

lady chiltern.  robert, it was not mrs. cheveley whom lord goring
expected last night.

sir robert chiltern.  not mrs. cheveley!  who was it then?

lord goring.  lady chiltern!

lady chiltern.  it was your own wife.  robert, yesterday afternoon lord
goring told me that if ever i was in trouble i could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, i wrote to him telling him that i trusted
him, that i had need of him, that i was coming to him for help and
advice.  [sir robert chiltern _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
yes, that letter.  i didn’t go to lord goring’s, after all.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment i could have doubted your goodness?
gertrude, gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  arthur, you can go to mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  oh! stop a moment.  there is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  the brilliant mrs. cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  there should be a name.

lady chiltern.  let me write yours.  it is you i trust and need.  you and
none else.

lord goring.  well, really, lady chiltern, i think i should have back my
own letter.

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  no; you shall have mabel.  [_takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

lord goring.  well, i hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  it’s nearly
twenty minutes since i saw her last.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern _and_ lord caversham.]

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  i am only going to talk to lord caversham in
the
 
 ___________________________
 
 future, and always under the usual palm tree.

lord goring.  darling!  [_kisses her_.]

lord caversham.  [_considerably taken aback_.]  what does this mean, sir?
you don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

lord goring.  certainly, father!  and chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the cabinet.

lord caversham.  i am very glad to hear that, chiltern . . . i
congratulate you, sir.  if the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
radicals, we shall have you prime minister, some day.

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  luncheon is on the table, my lady!

[mason _goes out_.]

mabel chiltern.  you’ll stop to luncheon, lord caversham, won’t you?

lord caversham.  with pleasure, and i’ll drive you down to 
 
 ___________________________
 
downing street
afterwards, chiltern.  you have a great future before you, a great
future.  wish i could say the same for you, sir.  [_to_ lord goring.]
but your career will have to be entirely domestic.

lord goring.  yes, father, i prefer it domestic.

lord caversham.  and if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
i’ll cut you off with a shilling.

mabel chiltern.  an ideal husband!  oh, i don’t think i should like that.
it sounds like something in the next world.

lord caversham.  what do you want him to be then, dear?

mabel chiltern.  he can be what he chooses.  all i want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

lord caversham.  upon my word, there is a good deal of common s