love's labour's lost

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae.

  ferdinand, king of navarre
  berowne,    lord attending on the king
  longaville,  "      "      "   "   "
  dumain,      "      "      "   "   "
  boyet,   lord attending on the princess of france
  marcade,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  don adriano de armado, fantastical spaniard
  sir nathaniel, a curate
  holofernes, a schoolmaster
  dull, a constable
  costard, a clown
  moth, page to armado
  a forester

  the princess of france
  rosaline, lady attending on the princess
  maria,      "     "       "  "     "
  katharine, lady attending on the princess
  jaquenetta, a country wench

  lords, attendants, etc.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and
 
 ___________________________
 
right and wrong
    have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
    this child of fancy, that armado hight,
    for interim to our studies shall relate,
    in high-born words, the worth of many a knight
    from tawny spain lost in the world's debate.
    how you delight, my lords, i know not, i;
    but i protest i love to hear him lie,
    and i will use him for my minstrelsy.
  berowne. armado is a most illustrious wight,
    a man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
  longaville. costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
    and so to study three years is but short.

      enter dull, a constable, with a letter, and costard

  dull. which is the duke's own person?
  berowne. this, fellow. what wouldst?
  dull. i myself reprehend his own person, for i am his grace's
    farborough; but i would see his own person in flesh and
blood.
  berowne. this is he.
  dull. signior arme- arme- commends you. there's villainy
abroad;
    this letter will tell you more.
  cost
 
 ___________________________
 
ard. sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  king. a letter from the magnificent armado.
  berowne. how low soever the matter, i hope in god for high
words.
  longaville. a high hope for a low heaven. god grant us
patience!
  berowne. to hear, or forbear hearing?
  longaville. to hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or,
to
    forbear both.
  berowne. well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
climb
    in the merriness.
  costard. the matter is to me, sir, as concerning jaquenetta.
    the manner of it is, i was taken with the manner.
  berowne. in what manner?
  costard. in manner and form following, sir; all those three: i
was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the
form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together,
is in
    manner and form following. now, sir, for the manner- it is
the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. for the form- in some
form.
  berow
 
 ___________________________
 
ne. for the following, sir?
  costard. as it shall follow in my correction; and god defend
the
    right!
  king. will you hear this letter with attention?
  berowne. as we would hear an oracle.
  costard. such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the
flesh.
  king. [reads] 'great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and sole
    dominator of navarre, my soul's earth's god and body's
fost'ring
    patron'-
  costard. not a word of costard yet.
  king. [reads] 'so it is'-
  costard. it may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in
telling
    true, but so.
  king. peace!
  costard. be to me, and every man that dares not fight!
  king. no words!
  costard. of other men's secrets, i beseech you.
  king. [reads] 'so it is, besieged with sable-coloured
melancholy, i
    did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome
    physic of thy health-giving air; and, as i am a gentleman,
betook
    myself to walk. the time when? about the sixth hour; when
bea
 
 ___________________________
 
 which? which, i mean, i upon; it is ycleped thy park.
then
    for the place where? where, i mean, i did encounter that
obscene
    and most prepost'rous event that draweth from my snow-white
pen
    the ebon-coloured ink which here thou viewest, beholdest,
    surveyest, or seest. but to the place where? it standeth
    north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
    curious-knotted garden. there did i see that low-spirited
swain,
    that base minnow of thy mirth,'
  costard. me?
  king. 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
  costard. me?
  king. 'that shallow vassal,'
  costard. still me?
  king. 'which, as i remember, hight costard,'
  costard. o, me!
  king. 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established
proclaimed
    edict and continent canon; which, with, o, with- but with
this i
    passion to say wherewith-'
  costard. with a wench.
    king. 'with a child of our grandmother eve, a female; or, for
thy
    more sweet understanding, a woma
 
 ___________________________
 
 weaker vessel called, which i
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- i keep her as a vessel
of
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial. thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         don adriano de armado.'

  berowne. this is not so well as i look'd for, but the best that
    ever i heard.
  king. ay, the best for the worst. but, sirrah, what say you to
    this?
  costard. sir, i confess the wench.
  king. did you hear the proclamation?
  costard. i do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the
    marking of it.
  king. it was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with
a
    wench.
  costard. i was taken with none, sir; i was taken with a damsel.
  king. well, it was proclaimed damsel.
  costard. this was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.
  king. it is so varied too, for it was proclaimed virgin.
  costard. if it were, i deny he
 
 ___________________________
 
r virginity; i was taken with a
maid.
  king. this 'maid' not serve your turn, sir.
  costard. this maid will serve my turn, sir.
  king. sir, i will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a
week
    with bran and water.
  costard. i had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
  king. and don armado shall be your keeper.
    my lord berowne, see him delivered o'er;
    and go we, lords, to put in practice that
    which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
                             exeunt king, longaville, and dumain
  berowne. i'll lay my head to any good man's hat
    these oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
    sirrah, come on.
  costard. i suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is i was
take
 
 ___________________________
 
 the reason of white and
red.
  armado. is there not a ballad, boy, of the king and the beggar?
  moth. the world was very guilty of such a ballad some three
ages
    since; but i think now 'tis not to be found; or if it were,
it
    would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.
  armado. i will have that subject newly writ o'er, that i may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. boy, i do
love
    that country girl that i took in the park with the rational
hind
    costard; she deserves well.
  moth. [aside] to be whipt; and yet a better love than my
master.
  armado. sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  moth. and that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
  armado. i say, sing.
  moth. forbear till this company be past.

                enter dull, costard, and jaquenetta

  dull. sir, the duke's pleasure is that you keep costard safe;
and
    you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but 'a
    must fast three days a week. for t
 
 ___________________________
 
man!
  armado. i will visit thee at the lodge.
  jaquenetta. that's hereby.
  armado. i know where it is situate.
  jaquenetta. lord, how wise you are!
  armado. i will tell thee wonders.
  jaquenetta. with that face?
  armado. i love thee.
  jaquenetta. so i heard you say.
  armado. and so, farewell.
  jaquenetta. fair weather after you!
  dull. come, jaquenetta, away.             exit with jaquenetta
  armado. villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  costard. well, sir, i hope when i do it i shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  armado. thou shalt be heavily punished.
  costard. i am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are
but
    lightly rewarded.
  armado. take away this villain; shut him up.
  moth. come, you transgressing slave, away.
  costard. let me not be pent up, sir; i will fast, being loose.
  moth. no, sir; that were fast, and loose. thou shalt to prison.
  costard. well, if ever i do see the merry days of desolation
 
 ___________________________
 

that i
    have seen, some shall see.
  moth. what shall some see?
  costard. nay, nothing, master moth, but what they look upon. it
is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and
therefore
    i will say nothing. i thank god i have as little patience as
    another man, and therefore i can be quiet.
                                         exeunt moth and costard
  armado. i do affect the very ground, which is base, where her
shoe,
    which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth
tread.
    i shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood-
if i
    love. and how can that be true love which is falsely
attempted?
    love is a familiar; love is a devil. there is no evil angel
but
    love. yet was samson so tempted, and he had an excellent
    strength; yet was solomon so seduced, and he had a very good
wit.
    cupid
 
 ___________________________
 
sir, to say so:
    is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
  armado. sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    he reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    i shoot thee at the swain.
  moth. thump, then, and i flee.                            exit
  armado. a most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!
    by thy favour, sweet welkin, i must sigh in thy face;
    most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
    my herald is return'd.

                       re-enter moth with costard

  moth. a wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
  armado. some enigma, some riddle; come, thy l'envoy; begin.
  costard. no egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail,
sir.
    o, sir, plantain, a plain plantain; no l'envoy, no l'envoy;
no
    salve, sir, but a plantain!
  armado. by virtue thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought,
my
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling. o, pardon me, my stars! doth the inconsiderate take
 
 ___________________________
 
pe, and the humble-bee,
           were still at odds, being but three.
  moth.    until the goose came out of door,
           and stay'd the odds by adding four.
    now will i begin your moral, and do you follow with my
l'envoy.
           the fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           were still at odds, being but three.
  armado.  until the goose came out of door,
           staying the odds by adding four.
  moth. a good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire
more?
  costard. the boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
    sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
    to sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose;
    let me see: a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
  armado. come hither, come hither. how did this argument begin?
  moth. by saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
    then call'd you for the l'envoy.
  costard. true, and i for a plantain. thus came your argument
in;
    then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goo
 
 ___________________________
 
se that you bought;
    and he ended the market.
  armado. but tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
  moth. i will tell you sensibly.
  costard. thou hast no feeling of it, moth; i will speak that
      l'envoy.
    i, costard, running out, that was safely within,
    fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
  armado. we will talk no more of this matter.
  costard. till there be more matter in the shin.
  armado. sirrah costard. i will enfranchise thee.
  costard. o, marry me to one frances! i smell some l'envoy, some
    goose, in this.
  armado. by my sweet soul, i mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.
  costard. true, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let
me
    loose.
  armado. i give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in

    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid jaquenet
 
 ___________________________
 
ta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
    rewarding my dependents. moth, follow.                  exit
  moth. like the sequel, i. signior costard, adieu.
  costard. my sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony jew!
                                                       exit moth
    now will i look to his remuneration. remuneration! o, that's
the
    latin word for three farthings. three farthings-
remuneration.
    'what's the price of this inkle?'- 'one penny.'- 'no, i'll
give
    you a remuneration.' why, it carries it. remuneration! why,
it is
    a fairer name than french crown. i will never buy and sell
out of
    this word.

             
 
 ___________________________
 
             enter berowne

  berowne. my good knave costard, exceedingly well met!
  costard. pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy
for
    a remuneration?
  berowne. what is a remuneration?
  costard. marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
  berowne. why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
  costard. i thank your worship. god be wi' you!
  berowne. stay, slave; i must employ thee.
    as thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
    do one thing for me that i shall entreat.
  costard. when would you have it done, sir?
  berowne. this afternoon.
  costard. well, i will do it, sir; fare you well.
  berowne. thou knowest not what it is.
  costard. i shall know, sir, when i have done it.
  berowne. why, villain, thou must know first.
  costard. i will come to your worship to-morrow mor
 
 ___________________________
 
ning.
  berowne. it must be done this afternoon.
    hark, slave, it is but this:
    the princess comes to hunt here in the park,
    and in her train there is a gentle lady;
    when tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
    and rosaline they call her. ask for her,
    and to her white hand see thou do commend
    this seal'd-up counsel. there's thy guerdon; go.
                                         [giving him a shilling]
  costard. gardon, o sweet gardon! better than remuneration; a
    'leven-pence farthing better; most sweet gardon! i will do
it,
    sir, in print. gardon- remuneration!                    exit
  berowne. and i, forsooth, in love; i, that have been love's
whip;
    a very beadle to a humorous sigh;
    a critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
    a domineering pedant o'er the boy,
    than whom no mortal so magnificent!
    this wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
    this senior-junior, 
 
 ___________________________
 
uilty of detested crimes,
    when, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    we bend to that the working of the heart;
    as i for praise alone now seek to spill
    the poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
  boyet. do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
    only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    lords o'er their lords?
  princess of france. only for praise; and praise we may afford
    to any lady that subdues a lord.

                       enter costard

  boyet. here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  costard. god dig-you-den all! pray you, which is the head lady?
  princess of france. thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest
that
    have no heads.
  costard. which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  princess of france. the thickest and the tallest.
  costard. the thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is
truth.
    an your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    one o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be
 
 ___________________________
 
 fit.
    are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
  princess of france. what's your will, sir? what's your will?
  costard. i have a letter from monsieur berowne to one
    lady rosaline.
  princess of france. o, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good
friend
      of mine.
    stand aside, good bearer. boyet, you can carve.
    break up this capon.
  boyet. i am bound to serve.
    this letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    it is writ to jaquenetta.
  princess of france. we will read it, i swear.
    break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  boyet. [reads] 'by heaven, that thou art fair
 
 ___________________________
 
france. what plume of feathers is he that indited
this
      letter?
    what vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
  boyet. i am much deceived but i remember the style.
  princess of france. else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.
  boyet. this armado is a spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    a phantasime, a monarcho, and one that makes sport
    to the prince and his book-mates.
  princess of france. thou fellow, a word.
    who gave thee this letter?
  costard. i told you: my lord.
  princess of france. to whom shouldst thou give it?
  costard. from my lord to my lady.
  princess of france. from which lord to which lady?
  costard. from my lord berowne, a good master of mine,
    to a lady of france that he call'd rosaline.
  princess of france. thou hast mistaken his letter. come, lords,

      away.
    [to rosaline] here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine
another
      day.                             exeunt princess and train
  boye
 
 ___________________________
 
when king pepin of france was a little boy, as touching the
hit
    it?
  boyet. so i may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman
when
    queen guinever of britain was a little wench, as touching the
hit
    it.
  rosaline. [singing]
            thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
            thou canst not hit it, my good man.
  boyet.    an i cannot, cannot, cannot,
            an i cannot, another can.
                                   exeunt rosaline and katharine
  costard. by my troth, most pleasant! how both did fit it!
  maria. a mark marvellous well shot; for they both did hit it.
  boyet. a mark! o, mark but that mark! a mark, says my lady!
    let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
  maria. wide o' the bow-hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
  costard. indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
    clout.
  boyet. an if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
  costard. then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pi
 
 ___________________________
 
n.
  maria. come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
  costard. she's too hard for you at pricks, sir; challenge her
to
    bowl.
  boyet. i fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
                                          exeunt boyet and maria
  costard. by my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    lord, lord! how the ladies and i have put him down!
    o' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    when it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so
fit.
    armado a th' t'one side- o, a most dainty man!
    to see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    to see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    and his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    ah, heavens, it is a most pathet
 
 ___________________________
 
ical nit!
    sola, sola!                                     exit costard




scene ii.
the park

from the shooting within, enter holofernes, sir nathaniel, and
dull

  nathaniel. very reverent sport, truly; and done in the
testimony of
    a good conscience.
  holofernes. the deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
as
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of
caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab
on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
  nathaniel. truly, master holof
 
 ___________________________
 
l for it.
  nathaniel. sir, i praise the lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and
their
    daughters profit very greatly under you. you are a good
member of
    the commonwealth.
  holofernes. mehercle, if their sons be ingenious, they shall
want
    no instruction; if their daughters be capable, i will put it
to
    them; but, vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. a soul feminine
saluteth
    us.

                    enter jaquenetta and costard

  jaquenetta. god give you good morrow, master person.
  holofernes. master person, quasi pers-one. and if one should be
    pierc'd which is the one?
  costard. marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
  holofernes. piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
turf
    of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine;
'tis
    pretty; it is well.
  jaquenetta. good master parson, be so good as read me this
letter;
    it was given me by c
 
 ___________________________
 
    writing to the person written unto: 'your ladyship's in all
    desired employment, berowne.' sir nathaniel, this berowne is
one
    of the votaries with the king; and here he hath framed a
letter
    to a sequent of the stranger queen's which accidentally, or
by
    the way of progression, hath miscarried. trip and go, my
sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king; it may
    concern much. stay not thy compliment; i forgive thy duty.
adieu.
  jaquenetta. good costard, go with me. sir, god save your life!
  costard. have with thee, my girl.
                                   exeunt costard and jaquenetta
  nathaniel. sir, you have done this in the fear of god, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  holofernes. sir, tell not me of the father; i do fear
colourable
    colours. but to return to the verses: did they please you,
sir
    nathaniel?
  nathaniel. marvellous well for the pen.
  holofernes. i do dine to-day at the father's 
 
 ___________________________
 
keeping company
    with men like you, men of inconstancy.
    when shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
    or groan for joan? or spend a minute's time
    in pruning me? when shall you hear that i
    will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
    a gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
    a leg, a limb-
  king. soft! whither away so fast?
    a true man or a thief that gallops so?
  berowne. i post from love; good lover, let me go.

                 enter jaquenetta and costard

  jaquenetta. god bless the king!
  king. what present hast thou there?
  costard. some certain treason.
  king. what makes treason here?
  costard. nay, it makes nothing, sir.
  king. if it mar nothing neither,
    the treason and you go in peace away together.
  jaquenetta. i beseech your grace, let this letter be read;
    our person misdoubts it: 'twas treason, he said.
  king. berowne, read it over.        [berowne reads the letter]
    where hadst thou it?
  jaquenetta. of c
 
 ___________________________
 
ostard.
  king. where hadst thou it?
  costard. of dun adramadio, dun adramadio.
                                      [berowne tears the letter]
  king. how now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
  berowne. a toy, my liege, a toy! your grace needs not fear it.
  longaville. it did move him to passion, and therefore let's
hear
     it.
  dumain. it is berowne's writing, and here is his name.
                                       [gathering up the pieces]
  berowne. [ to costard] ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were
born
      to do me shame.
    guilty, my lord, guilty! i confess, i confess.
  king. what?
  berowne. that you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the
mess;
    he, he, and you- and you, my liege!- and i
    are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
    o, dismiss this audience, and i shall tell you more.
    dumain. now the number is even.
  berowne. true, true, we are four.
    will these turtles be gone?
  king. hence, sirs, away.
 
 ___________________________
 

  costard. walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
                                   exeunt costard and jaquenetta
  berowne. sweet lords, sweet lovers, o, let us embrace!
    as true we are as flesh and blood can be.
    the sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    young blood doth not obey an old decree.
    we cannot cross the cause why we were born,
    therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
  king. what, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
  berowne. 'did they?' quoth you. who sees the heavenly rosaline
    that, like a rude and savage man of inde
    at 
 
 ___________________________
 
ubt';
    'det' when he should pronounce 'debt'- d, e, b, t, not d, e,
t.
    he clepeth a calf 'cauf,' half 'hauf'; neighbour vocatur
    'nebour'; 'neigh' abbreviated 'ne.' this is abhominable-
which he
    would call 'abbominable.' it insinuateth me of insanie: ne
    intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
  nathaniel. laus deo, bone intelligo.
  holofernes. 'bone'?- 'bone' for 'bene.' priscian a little
    scratch'd; 'twill serve.

                 enter armado, moth, and costard

  nathaniel. videsne quis venit?
  holofernes. video, et gaudeo.
  armado. [to moth] chirrah!
  holofernes. quare 'chirrah,' not 'sirrah'?
  armado. men of peace, well encount'red.
  holofernes. most military sir, salutation.
  moth. [aside to costard] they have been at a great feast of
    languages and stol'n the scraps.
  costard. o, they have liv'd long on the alms-basket of words. i
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou
are
    not so long by the head
 
 ___________________________
 
des it: o, u.
  armado. now, by the salt wave of the mediterraneum, a sweet
touch,
    a quick venue of wit- snip, snap, quick and home. it
rejoiceth my
    intellect. true wit!
  moth. offer'd by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
  holofernes. what is the figure? what is the figure?
  moth. horns.
  holofernes. thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.
  moth. lend me your horn to make one, and i will whip about your
    infamy circum circa- a gig of a cuckold's horn.
  costard. an i had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
have it
    to buy ginger-bread. hold, there is the very remuneration i
had
    of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg
of
    discretion. o, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert
but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
  holofernes. o, i smell false latin; 'dunghill' for unguem.
  armado. arts-man, preambulate;
 
 ___________________________
 
 th' squier,
    and laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    and stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
    holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
    you put our page out. go, you are allow'd;
    die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
    you leer upon me, do you? there's an eye
    wounds like a leaden sword.
  boyet. full merrily
    hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
  berowne. lo, he is tilting straight! peace; i have done.

                          enter costard

    welcome, pure wit! thou part'st a fair fray.
  costard. o lord, sir, they would know
     whether the three worthies shall come in or no?
  berowne. what, are there but three?
  costard. no, sir; but it is vara fine,
    for every one pursents three.
  berowne. and three times thrice is nine.
  costard. not so, sir; under correction, sir,
    i hope it is not so.
    you cannot beg us, sir, i can assure you, sir; we know what
we
      know;
    i hope, sir, three times thrice
 
 ___________________________
 
, sir-
  berowne. is not nine.
  costard. under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth
amount.
  berowne. by jove, i always took three threes for nine.
  costard. o lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
by
    reck'ning, sir.
  berowne. how much is it?
  costard. o lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir,
will
    show whereuntil it doth amount. for mine own part, i am, as
they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, pompion the
great,
    sir.
  berowne. art thou one of the worthies?
  costard. it pleased them to think me worthy of pompey the
great;
    for mine own part, i know not the degree of the worthy; but i
am
    to stand for him.
  berowne. go, bid them prepare.
  costard. we will turn it finely off, sir; we 
 
 ___________________________
 
will take some
care.
                                                    exit costard
  king. berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
  berowne. we are shame-proof, my lord, and 'tis some policy
    to have one show worse than the king's and his company.
  king. i say they shall not come.
  princess of france. nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
    that sport best pleases that doth least know how;
    where zeal strives to content, and the contents
    dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
    their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
abaeus.
    and if these four worthies in their first show thrive,
    these four will change habits and present the other five.
  berowne. there is five in the first show.
  king. you are deceived, 'tis not so.
  berowne. the pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool,
and
    the boy:
    abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
    cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
  king. the ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

                   enter costard, armed for pompey

  costard. i pompey am-
  berowne. you lie, you are not he.
  costard. i pompey am-
  boyet. with libbard's head on knee.
  berowne. well said, old mocker; i must needs be friends with
thee.
  costard. i pompey am, pompey surnam'd the big-
   dumain. the great.
  costard. it is great, sir.
    pompey surnam'd the great,
    that oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    and travelling along this coast, i bere am come by chance,
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  and lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of france.

    if your ladyship would say 'thanks, pompey,' i had done.
  princess of france. great thanks, great pompey.
  costard. 'tis not so much worth; but i hope i was perfect.
    i made a little fault in great.
  berowne. my hat to a halfpenny, pompey proves the best worthy.

                 enter sir nathaniel, for alexander

  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander;
    by east, west, north, and south, i spread my conquering
might.
    my scutcheon plain declares that i am alisander-
  boyet. your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.

  berowne. your nose sme
 
 ___________________________
 
lls 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
  princess of france. the conqueror is dismay'd. proceed, good
    alexander.
  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander-
  boyet. most true, 'tis right, you were so, alisander.
  berowne. pompey the great!
  costard. your servant, and costard.
  berowne. take away the conqueror, take away alisander.
  costard. [to sir nathaniel] o, sir, you have overthrown
alisander
    the conqueror! you will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth
for
    this. your lion, that holds his poleaxe sitting on a
close-stool,
    will be given to ajax. he will be the ninth worthy. a
conqueror
    and afeard to speak! run away for shame, alisander.
    [sir nathaniel retires] there, an't shall please you, a
foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd. he is a
    marvellous good neighbour, fait
 
 ___________________________
 
 longaville. that columbine.
  armado. sweet lord longaville, rein thy tongue.
  longaville. i must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
    hector.
  dumain. ay, and hector's a greyhound.
  armado. the sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man.
but
    i will forward with my device. [to the princess] sweet
royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.

          [berowne steps forth, and speaks to costard]

  princess of france. speak, brave hector; we are much delighted.
  armado. i do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
  boyet. [aside to dumain] loves her by the foot.
  dumain. [aside to boyet] he may not by the yard.
  armado. this hector far surmounted hannibal-
  costard. the party is gone, fellow hector, she is gone; she is
two
    months on her way.
  armado. what meanest thou?
  costard. faith, unless you play the honest troyan, the poor
wench
    is cast away. she's quick; th
 
 ___________________________
 
e child brags in her belly
already;
    'tis yours.
  armado. dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
die.
  costard. then shall hector be whipt for jaquenetta that is
quick by
    him, and hang'd for pompey that is dead by him.
  dumain. most rare pompey!
  boyet. renowned pompey!
  berowne. greater than great! great, great, great pompey! pompey
the
    huge!
  dumain. hector trembles.
  berowne. pompey is moved. more ates, more ates! stir them on!
stir
    them on!
  dumain. hector will challenge him.
  berowne. ay, if 'a have no more man's blood in his belly than
will
    sup a flea.
  arma
 
 ___________________________
 
do. by the north pole, i do challenge thee.
  costard. i will not fight with a pole, like a northern man;
i'll
    slash; i'll do it by the sword. i bepray you, let me borrow
my
    arms again.
  dumain. room for the incensed worthies!
  costard. i'll do it in my shirt.
  dumain. most resolute pompey!
  moth. master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. do you not
see
    pompey is uncasing for the combat? what mean you? you will
lose
    your reputation.
  armado. gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; i will not combat in
my
    shirt.
  dumain. you may not deny it: pompey hath made the challenge.
  armado. sweet bloods, i both may and will.
  berowne. what reason have you for 't?
  armado. the naked truth of it is: i have no