   "   "   "
  dumain,      "      "      "   "   "
  boyet,   lord attending on the princess of france
  marcade,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  don adriano de armado, fantastical spaniard
  sir nathaniel, a curate
  holofernes, a schoolmaster
  dull, a constable
  costard, a clown
  moth, page to armado
  a forester

  the princess of france
  rosaline, lady attending on the princess
  maria,      "     "       "  "     "
  katharine, lady attending on the princess
  jaquenetta, a country wench

  lords, attendants, etc.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
 
 ___________________________
 
contempts thereof are as touching me.
  king. a letter from the magnificent armado.
  berowne. how low soever the matter, i hope in god for high
words.
  longaville. a high hope for a low heaven. god grant us
patience!
  berowne. to hear, or forbear hearing?
  longaville. to hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or,
to
    forbear both.
  berowne. well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
climb
    in the merriness.
  costard. the matter is to me, sir, as concerning jaquenetta.
    the manner of it is, i was taken with the manner.
  berowne. in what manner?
  costard. in manner and form following, sir; all those three: i
was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the
form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together,
is in
    manner and form following. now, sir, for the manner- it is
the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. for the form- in some
form.
  berowne. for the following, sir?
  costard. as it shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
anon; which, with, o, with- but with
this i
    passion to say wherewith-'
  costard. with a wench.
    king. 'with a child of our grandmother eve, a female; or, for
thy
    more sweet understanding, a woman. him i, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet grace's officer, antony dull, a man
of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
  dull. me, an't shall please you; i am antony dull.
  king. 'for jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which i
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- i keep her as a vessel
of
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial. thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         don adriano de armado.'

  berowne. this is not so well as i look'd for, but the best that
    ever i heard.
  king. ay, the best for the worst. but, sirrah, what say you to
  
 
 ___________________________
 
er pray a month with mutton and porridge.
  king. and don armado shall be your keeper.
    my lord berowne, see him delivered o'er;
    and go we, lords, to put in practice that
    which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
                             exeunt king, longaville, and dumain
  berowne. i'll lay my head to any good man's hat
    these oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
    sirrah, come on.
  costard. i suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is i was
taken
    with jaquenetta, and jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! affliction may one day
smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.
                                                          exeunt




scene ii.
the park

enter armado and moth, his page

  armado. boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows
    melancholy?
  moth. a great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
  armado. why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.

 
 ___________________________
 
 subject newly writ o'er, that i may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. boy, i do
love
    that country girl that i took in the park with the rational
hind
    costard; she deserves well.
  moth. [aside] to be whipt; and yet a better love than my
master.
  armado. sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  moth. and that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
  armado. i say, sing.
  moth. forbear till this company be past.

                enter dull, costard, and jaquenetta

  dull. sir, the duke's pleasure is that you keep costard safe;
and
    you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but 'a
    must fast three days a week. for this damsel, i must keep her
at
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman. fare you well.
  armado. i do betray myself with blushing. maid!
  jaquenetta. man!
  armado. i will visit thee at the lodge.
  jaquenetta. that's hereby.
  armado. i know where it is situate.
  jaquenetta. lord, how wise you are!
  
 
 ___________________________
 
armado. i will tell thee wonders.
  jaquenetta. with that face?
  armado. i love thee.
  jaquenetta. so i heard you say.
  armado. and so, farewell.
  jaquenetta. fair weather after you!
  dull. come, jaquenetta, away.             exit with jaquenetta
  armado. villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  costard. well, sir, i hope when i do it i shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  armado. thou shalt be heavily punished.
  costard. i am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are
but
    lightly rewarded.
  armado. take away this villain; shut him up.
  moth. come, you transgressing slave, away.
  costard. let me not be pent up, sir; i will fast, being loose.
  moth. no, sir; that were fast, and lo
 
 ___________________________
 
 costard. o, marry me to one frances! i smell some l'envoy, some
    goose, in this.
  armado. by my sweet soul, i mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.
  costard. true, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let
me
    loose.
  armado. i give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in

    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid jaquenetta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
    rewarding my dependents. moth, follow.                  exit
  moth. like the sequel, i. signior costard, adieu.
  costard. my sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony jew!
                                                       exit moth
    now will i look to his remuneration. remuneration! o, that's
the
    latin word for three farthings. three farthings-
remuneration.
    'what's the price of this inkle?'- 'one penny.
 
 ___________________________
 
for your waist should be fit.
    are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
  princess of france. what's your will, sir? what's your will?
  costard. i have a letter from monsieur berowne to one
    lady rosaline.
  princess of france. o, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good
friend
      of mine.
    stand aside, good bearer. boyet, you can carve.
    break up this capon.
  boyet. i am bound to serve.
    this letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    it is writ to jaquenetta.
  princess of france. we will read it, i swear.
    break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  boyet. [reads] 'by heaven, that thou art fair is most
infallible;
    true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art
lovely.
    more fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than
truth
    itself, have commiseration on thy heroical vassal. the
    magnanimous and most illustrate king cophetua set eye upon
the
    pernicious and indubitate beggar zenelophon; a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i am thankful for it.
  nathaniel. sir, i praise the lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and
their
    daughters profit very greatly under you. you are a good
member of
    the commonwealth.
  holofernes. mehercle, if their sons be ingenious, they shall
want
    no instruction; if their daughters be capable, i will put it
to
    them; but, vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. a soul feminine
saluteth
    us.

                    enter jaquenetta and costard

  jaquenetta. god give you good morrow, master person.
  holofernes. master person, quasi pers-one. and if one should be
    pierc'd which is the one?
  costard. marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
  holofernes. piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
turf
    of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine;
'tis
    pretty; it is well.
  jaquenetta. good master parson, be so good as read me this
letter;
    it was g
 
 ___________________________
 
find not the apostrophas, and so miss the
accent:
    let me supervise the canzonet. here are only numbers
ratified;
    but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy,
    caret. ovidius naso was the man. and why, indeed, 'naso' but
for
    smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of
    invention? imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master,
the
    ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. but, damosella
virgin,
    was this directed to you?
  jaquenetta. ay, sir, from one monsieur berowne, one of the
strange
    queen's lords.
  holofernes. i will overglance the superscript: 'to the
snow-white
    hand of the most beauteous lady rosaline.' i will look again
on
    the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party
    writing to the person written unto: 'your ladyship's in all
    desired employment, berowne.' sir nathaniel, this berowne is
one
    of the votaries with the king; and here he hath framed a
letter
    to a 
 
 ___________________________
 
sequent of the stranger queen's which accidentally, or
by
    the way of progression, hath miscarried. trip and go, my
sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king; it may
    concern much. stay not thy compliment; i forgive thy duty.
adieu.
  jaquenetta. good costard, go with me. sir, god save your life!
  costard. have with thee, my girl.
                                   exeunt costard and jaquenetta
  nathaniel. sir, you have done this in the fear of god, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  holofernes. sir, tell not me of the father; i do fear
colourable
    colours. but to return to the verses: did they please you,
sir
    nathaniel?
  nathaniel. marvellous well for the pen.
  holofernes. i do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil
of
    mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please you to
gratify
    the table with a grace, i will, on my privil
 
 ___________________________
 
am betrayed by keeping company
    with men like you, men of inconstancy.
    when shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
    or groan for joan? or spend a minute's time
    in pruning me? when shall you hear that i
    will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
    a gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
    a leg, a limb-
  king. soft! whither away so fast?
    a true man or a thief that gallops so?
  berowne. i post from love; good lover, let me go.

                 enter jaquenetta and costard

  jaquenetta. god bless the king!
  king. what present hast thou there?
  costard. some certain treason.
  king. what makes treason here?
  costard. nay, it makes nothing, sir.
  king. if it mar nothing neither,
    the treason and you go in peace away together.
  jaquenetta. i beseech your grace, let this letter be read;
    our person misdoubts it: 'twas treason, he said.
  king. berowne, read it over.        [berowne reads the letter]
    where hadst thou it?
  jaqu
 
 ___________________________
 

  king. what?
  berowne. that you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the
mess;
    he, he, and you- and you, my liege!- and i
    are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
    o, dismiss this audience, and i shall tell you more.
    dumain. now the number is even.
  berowne. true, true, we are four.
    will these turtles be gone?
  king. hence, sirs, away.
  costard. walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
                                   exeunt costard and jaquenetta
  berowne. sweet lords, sweet lovers, o, let us embrace!
    as true we are as flesh and blood can be.
    the sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    young blood doth not obey an old decree.
    we cannot cross the cause why we were born,
    therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
  king. what, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
  berowne. 'did they?' quoth you. who sees the heavenly rosaline
    that, like a rude and savage man of inde
    at the first op'ni
 
 ___________________________
 
ot.
  dumain. [aside to boyet] he may not by the yard.
  armado. this hector far surmounted hannibal-
  costard. the party is gone, fellow hector, she is gone; she is
two
    months on her way.
  armado. what meanest thou?
  costard. faith, unless you play the honest troyan, the poor
wench
    is cast away. she's quick; the child brags in her belly
already;
    'tis yours.
  armado. dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
die.
  costard. then shall hector be whipt for jaquenetta that is
quick by
    him, and hang'd for pompey that is dead by him.
  dumain. most rare pompey!
  boyet. renowned pompey!
  berowne. greater than great! great, great, great pompey! pompey
the
    huge!
  dumain. hector trembles.
  berowne. pompey is moved. more ates, more ates! stir them on!
stir
    them on!
  dumain. hector will challenge him.
  berowne. ay, if 'a have no more man's blood in his belly than
will
    sup a flea.
  armado. by the north pole, i do challenge thee.
 
 ___________________________
 
 you? you will
lose
    your reputation.
  armado. gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; i will not combat in
my
    shirt.
  dumain. you may not deny it: pompey hath made the challenge.
  armado. sweet bloods, i both may and will.
  berowne. what reason have you for 't?
  armado. the naked truth of it is: i have no shirt; i go
woolward
    for penance.
  boyet. true, and it was enjoined him in rome for want of linen;
    since when, i'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
    jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.

                 enter as messenger, monsieur marcade

  marcade. god save you, madam!
  princess of france. welcome, marcade;
    but that thou interruptest our merriment.
  marcade. i am sorry, madam; for the news i bring
    is heavy in my tongue. the king your father-
  princess of france. dead, for my life!
  marcade. even so; my tale is told.
  berowne. worthies away; the scene begins to cloud.
  armado. for mine own part, i b
 
 ___________________________
 
d like an old play:
    jack hath not jill. these ladies' courtesy
    might well have made our sport a comedy.
  king. come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
    and then 'twill end.
  berowne. that's too long for a play.

                          re-enter armado

  armado. sweet majesty, vouchsafe me-
  princess of france. was not that not hector?
  dumain. the worthy knight of troy.
  armado. i will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. i am a
    votary: i have vow'd to jaquenetta to hold the plough for her
    sweet love three year. but, most esteemed greatness, will you
    hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in
    praise of the owl and the cuckoo? it should have followed in
the
    end of our show.
  king. call them forth quickly; we will do so.
  armado. holla! approach.

                            enter all

    this side is hiems, winter; this ver, the spring- the one
    maintained by the owl, th' other by the cuckoo. ver, begin.