love's labour's lost

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae.

  ferdinand, king of navarre
  berowne,    lord attending on the king
  longaville,  "      "      "   "   "
  dumain,      "      "      "   "   "
  boyet,   lord attending on the princess of france
  marcade,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  don adriano de armado, fantastical spaniard
  sir nathaniel, a curate
  holofernes, a schoolmaster
  dull, a constable
  costard, a clown
  moth, page to armado
  a forester

  the princess of france
  rosaline, lady attending on the princess
  maria,      "     "       "  "     "
  katharine, lady attending on the princess
  jaquenetta, a country wench

  lords, attendants, etc.


 
 ___________________________
 
ided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene ii.
the park

enter the princess of france, with three attending ladies,
rosaline, maria, katharine, boyet, and two other lords

  boyet. now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
    consider who the king your father sends,
    to whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
    yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
    to parley with the sole inheritor
    of all perfections that a man may owe,
    matchless navarre; the plea of no less weight
    than aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
    be now as prodigal of all dear grace
    as nature was in making graces dear,
    when she did
 
 ___________________________
 
 starve the general world beside
    and prodigally gave them all to you.
  princess of france. good lord boyet, my beauty, though but
mean,
    needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
    beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;
    i am less proud to hear you tell my worth
    than you much willing to be counted wise
    in spending your wit in the praise of mine.
    but now to task the tasker: good boyet,
    you are not ignorant all-telling fame
    doth noise abroad navarre hath made a vow,
    till painful study shall outwear three years,
    no woman may approach his silent court.
    therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
    before we enter his forbidden gates,
    to know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
    bold of your worthiness, we single you
    as our best-moving fair solicitor.
    tell him the daughter of the king of france,
    on serious business, craving quick
 
 ___________________________
 
 dispatch,
    importunes personal conference with his grace.
    haste, signify so much; while we attend,
    like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.
  boyet. proud of employment, willingly i go.
  princess of france. all pride is willing pride, and yours is
so.
                                                      exit boyet
    who are the votaries, my loving lords,
    that are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
  first lord. lord longaville is one.
  princess of france. know you the man?
  maria. i know him, madam; at a marriage feast,
    between lord perigort and the beauteous heir
    of jaques falconbridge, solemnized
    in normandy, saw i this longaville.
    a man of sovereign parts, peerless esteem'd,
    well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
    nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
 
 ___________________________
 
   for every object that the one doth catch
    the other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    delivers in such apt and gracious words
    that aged ears play truant at his tales,
    and younger hearings are quite ravished;
    so sweet and voluble is his discourse.
  princess of france. god bless my ladies! are they all in love,
    that every one her own hath garnished
    with such bedecking ornaments of praise?
  first lord. here comes boyet.

                       re-enter boyet

  princess of france. now, what admittance, lord?
  boyet. navarre had notice of your fair approach,
    and he and his competitors in oath
    were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
    before i came. marry, thus much i have learnt:
    he rather means to lodge you in the field,
    like one that comes here to besiege his court,
    than seek a dispensation for his oath,
    to let you enter his unpeopled house.
                      
 
 ___________________________
 
on's yielding, your fair self should make
    a yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
    and go well satisfied to france again.
  princess of france. you do the king my father too much wrong,
    and wrong the reputation of your name,
    in so unseeming to confess receipt
    of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
  king. i do protest i never heard of it;
    and, if you prove it, i'll repay it back
    or yield up aquitaine.
  princess of france. we arrest your word.
    boyet, you can produce acquittances
    for such a sum from special officers
    of charles his father.
  king. satisfy me so.
  boyet. so please your grace, the packet is not come,
    where that and other specialties are bound;
    to-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
  king. it shall suffice me; at which interview
    all liberal reason i will yield unto.
    meantime receive such welcome at my hand
    as honour, without breach of honour, may
    make tender of to thy true worthin
 
 ___________________________
 
ee it.
  berowne. i would you heard it groan.
  rosaline. is the fool sick?
  berowne. sick at the heart.
  rosaline. alack, let it blood.
  berowne. would that do it good?
  rosaline. my physic says 'ay.'
  berowne. will you prick't with your eye?
  rosaline. no point, with my knife.
  berowne. now, god save thy life!
  rosaline. and yours from long living!
  berowne. i cannot stay thanksgiving.                [retiring]
  dumain. sir, i pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
  boyet. the heir of alencon, katharine her name.
  dumain. a gallant lady! monsieur, fare you well.          exit
  longaville. i beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
  boyet. a woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
  longaville. perchance light in the light. i desire her name.
  boyet. she hath but one for herself; to desire that were a
shame.
  longaville. pray you, sir, whose daughter?
  boyet. her mother's, i have heard.
  longaville. god's blessing on your beard!
  boye
 
 ___________________________
 
t. good sir, be not offended;
    she is an heir of falconbridge.
  longaville. nay, my choler is ended.
    she is a most sweet lady.
  boyet. not unlike, sir; that may be.           exit longaville
  berowne. what's her name in the cap?
  boyet. rosaline, by good hap.
  berowne. is she wedded or no?
  boyet. to her will, sir, or so.
  berowne. you are welcome, sir; adieu!
  boyet. farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
                                     exit berowne. ladies unmask
  maria. that last is berowne, the merry mad-cap lord;
    not a word with him but a jest.
  boyet. and every jest but a word.
  princess of france. it was well done of you to take him at his
    word.
  boyet. i was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
  katharine. two hot sheeps, marry!
  boyet. and wherefore not ships?
    no sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  katharine. you sheep and i pasture- shall that finish the jest?
  boyet. so you grant pasture for me.     [offering to kiss her]
  katharine. not so, gentle beast;
    my lips are no common, though several they be.
  boyet. belonging to whom?
  katharine. to my fortunes and me.
  princess of france. good wits will be jangling; but, gentles,
      agree;
    this civil war of wits were much better used
    on navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
  boyet. if my observation, which very seldom lies,
    by the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
    deceive me not now, navarre is infected.
  princess of france. with what?
  boyet. with that which we lovers entitle 'affected.'
  princess of france. your reason?
  boyet. why, all his behaviours did make their retire
    to the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
    his heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
    proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
   
 
 ___________________________
 
ng on fairest of fair.
    methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
    as jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
    who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
    his face's own margent did quote such amazes
    that all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
    i'll give you aquitaine and all that is his,
    an you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
  princess of france. come, to our pavilion. boyet is dispos'd.
  boyet. but to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
    i only have made a mouth of his eye,
    by adding a tongue which i know will not lie.
  maria. thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.
  katharine. he is cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
  rosaline. then was venus like her mother; for her father is but
    grim.
  boyet. do you hear, my mad wenches?
  maria. no.
  boyet. what, then; do you see?
  maria. ay, our way to be gone.
 
 ___________________________
 

  boyet. you are too hard for me.                         exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution inclu
 
 ___________________________
 
1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
the park

enter the princess, rosaline, maria, katharine, boyet, lords,
attendants,
and a forester

  princess of france. was that the king that spurr'd his horse so
      hard
    against the steep uprising of the hill?
  boyet. i know not; but i think it was not he.
  princess of france. whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.
    well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
    on saturday we will return to france.
    then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    that we must stand and play the murderer in?
  forester. hereby, upon
 
 ___________________________
 
d ill;
    thus will i save my credit in the shoot:
    not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
    if wounding, then it was to show my skill,
    that more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
    and, out of question, so it is sometimes:
    glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
    when, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    we bend to that the working of the heart;
    as i for praise alone now seek to spill
    the poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
  boyet. do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
    only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    lords o'er their lords?
  princess of france. only for praise; and praise we may afford
    to any lady that subdues a lord.

                       enter costard

  boyet. here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  costard. god dig-you-den all! pray you, which is the head lady?
  princess of france. thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest
that
    have no heads.
  costard. which is
 
 ___________________________
 
rd. the thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is
truth.
    an your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    one o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
  princess of france. what's your will, sir? what's your will?
  costard. i have a letter from monsieur berowne to one
    lady rosaline.
  princess of france. o, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good
friend
      of mine.
    stand aside, good bearer. boyet, you can carve.
    break up this capon.
  boyet. i am bound to serve.
    this letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    it is writ to jaquenetta.
  princess of france. we will read it, i swear.
    break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  boyet. [reads] 'by heaven, that thou art fair is most
infallible;
    true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art
lovely.
    more fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than
truth
    itself, have commis
 
 ___________________________
 
                         don adriano de armado.

    'thus dost thou hear the nemean lion roar
    'gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
    submissive fall his princely feet before,
    and he from forage will incline to play.
    but if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
    food for his rage, repasture for his den.'
  princess of france. what plume of feathers is he that indited
this
      letter?
    what vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
  boyet. i am much deceived but i remember the style.
  princess of france. else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.
  boyet. this armado is a spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    a phantasime, a monarcho, and one that makes sport
    to the prince and his book-mates.
  princess of france. thou fellow, a word.
    who gave thee this letter?
  costard. i told you: my lord.
  princess of france. to whom shouldst thou give it?
  costard. from my lord to my lady.
  princess of fra
 
 ___________________________
 
nce. from which lord to which lady?
  costard. from my lord berowne, a good master of mine,
    to a lady of france that he call'd rosaline.
  princess of france. thou hast mistaken his letter. come, lords,

      away.
    [to rosaline] here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine
another
      day.                             exeunt princess and train
  boyet. who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
  rosaline. shall i teach you to know?
  boyet. ay, my continent of beauty.
  rosaline. why, she that bears the bow.
    finely put off!
  boyet. my lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
    hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
    finely put on!
  rosaline. well then, i am the shooter.
  boyet. and who is your deer?
  rosaline. if we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
    finely put on indeed!
  maria. you still wrangle with her, boyet, and she strikes at
the
    brow.
  boyet. but she herself is 
 
 ___________________________
 
hit lower. have i hit her now?
  rosaline. shall i come upon thee with an old saying, that was a
man
    when king pepin of france was a little boy, as touching the
hit
    it?
  boyet. so i may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman
when
    queen guinever of britain was a little wench, as touching the
hit
    it.
  rosaline. [singing]
            thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
            thou canst not hit it, my good man.
  boyet.    an i cannot, cannot, cannot,
            an i cannot, another can.
                                   exeunt rosaline and katharine
  costard. by my troth, most pleasant! how both did fit it!
  maria. a mark marvellous well shot; for they both did hit it.
  boyet. a mark! o, mark but that mark! a mark, says my lady!
    let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
  maria. wide o' the bow-hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
  costard. indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'l
 
 ___________________________
 
l ne'er hit the
    clout.
  boyet. an if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
  costard. then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
  maria. come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
  costard. she's too hard for you at pricks, sir; challenge her
to
    bowl.
  boyet. i fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
                                          exeunt boyet and maria
  costard. by my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    lord, lord! how the ladies and i have put him down!
    o' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    when it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so
fit.
    armado a th' t'one side- o, a most dainty man!
    to see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    to see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    and his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    ah, heavens
 
 ___________________________
 
ey are
      catch'd,
    as wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
    hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    and wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
  rosaline. the blood of youth burns not with such excess
    as gravity's revolt to wantonness.
  maria. folly in fools bears not so strong a note
    as fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
    since all the power thereof it doth apply
    to prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

                          enter boyet

  princess of france. here comes boyet, and mirth is in his face.
  boyet. o, i am stabb'd with laughter! where's her grace?
  princess of france. thy news, boyet?
  boyet. prepare, madam, prepare!
    arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
    against your peace. love doth approach disguis'd,
    armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.
    muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
    or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
  princess of france. saint dennis to saint
 
 ___________________________
 
 cupid! what are they
    that charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
  boyet. under the cool shade of a sycamore
    i thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
    when, lo, to interrupt my purpos'd rest,
    toward that shade i might behold addrest
    the king and his companions; warily
    i stole into a neighbour thicket by,
    and overheard what you shall overhear-
    that, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
    their herald is a pretty knavish page,
    that well by heart hath conn'd his embassage.
    action and accent did they teach him the
 
 ___________________________
 
er speech was never spoke before.
    another with his finger and his thumb
    cried 'via! we will do't, come what will come.'
    the third he caper'd, and cried 'all goes well.'
    the fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
    with that they all did tumble on the ground,
    with such a zealous laughter, so profound,
    that in this spleen ridiculous appears,
    to check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
  princess of france. but what, but what, come they to visit us?
  boyet. they do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    like muscovites or russians, as i guess.
    their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
    and every one his love-feat will advance
    unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    by favours several which they did bestow.
  princess of france. and will they so? the gallants shall be
task'd,
    for, ladies, we will every one be mask'd;
    and not a man of them shall have the grace,
    despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
irs.
    they do it but in mocking merriment,
    and mock for mock is only my intent.
    their several counsels they unbosom shall
    to loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
    upon the next occasion that we meet
    with visages display'd to talk and greet.
  rosaline. but shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  princess of france. no, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
    but while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
  boyet. why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
    and quite divorce his memory from his part.
  princess of france. therefore i do it; and i make no doubt
    the rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.
    there's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
    to make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    so shall we stay, mocking intended game,
    and they well mock'd depart away with shame.
                                         [trumpet sounds within]
  boyet. the tru
 
 ___________________________
 
mpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
                                               [the ladies mask]

          enter blackamoors music, moth as prologue, the
     king and his lords as maskers, in the guise of russians

  moth. all hail, the richest heauties on the earth!
  boyet. beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
  moth. a holy parcel of the fairest dames
                            [the ladies turn their backs to him]
    that ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views!
  berowne. their eyes, villain, their eyes.
  moth. that ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
    out-
  boyet. true; out indeed.
  moth. out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
    not to behold-
  berowne. once to behold, rogue.
  moth. once to behold with your sun-beamed ey
 
 ___________________________
 
es- with your
    sun-beamed eyes-
  boyet. they will not answer to that epithet;
    you were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
  moth. they do not mark me, and that brings me out.
  berowne. is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue.
                                                       exit moth
  rosaline. what would these strangers? know their minds, boyet.
    if they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    that some plain man recount their purposes.
    know what they would.
  boyet. what would you with the princess?
  berowne. nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  rosaline. what would they, say they?
  boyet. nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  rosaline. why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
  boyet. she says you have it, and you may be gone.
  king. say to her we have measur'd many miles
    to tread a measure 
 
 ___________________________
 
with her on this grass.
  boyet. they say that they have measur'd many a mile
    to tread a measure with you on this grass.
  rosaline. it is not so. ask them how many inches
    is in one mile? if they have measured many,
    the measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.
  boyet. if to come hither you have measur'd miles,
    and many miles, the princess bids you tell
    how many inches doth fill up one mile.
  berowne. tell her we measure them by weary steps.
  boyet. she hears herself.
  rosaline. how many weary steps
    of many weary miles you have o'ergone
    are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
  berowne. we number nothing that we spend for you;
    our duty is so rich, so infinite,
    that we may do it still without accompt.
    vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
    that we, like savages, may worship it.
  rosaline. my face is but a moon, and clouded too.
  king. blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
    vouchsafe, br
 
 ___________________________
 
 a fair lord calf.
  longaville. let's part the word.
  katharine. no, i'll not be your half.
    take all and wean it; it may prove an ox.
  longaville. look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
    will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
  katharine. then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
  longaville. one word in private with you ere i die.
  katharine. bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
                                           [they converse apart]
  boyet. the tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
    as is the razor's edge invisible,
    cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
    above the sense of sense; so sensible
    seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
  rosaline. not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
  berowne. by heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
  king. farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
                             
 
 ___________________________
 
exeunt king, lords, and blackamoors
  princess of france. twenty adieus, my frozen muscovits.
    are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
  boyet. tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
  rosaline. well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
  princess of france. o poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
    will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
    or ever but in vizards show their faces?
    this pert berowne was out of count'nance quite.
  rosaline. they were all in lamentable cases!
    the king was weeping-ripe for a good word.
  princess of france. berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
harine. lord longaville said i came o'er his heart;
    and trow you what he call'd me?
  princess of france. qualm, perhaps.
  katharine. yes, in good faith.
  princess of france. go, sickness as thou art!
  rosaline. well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
    but will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
  princess of france. and quick berowne hath plighted faith to
me.
  katharine. and longaville was for my service born.
  maria. dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
  boyet. madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
    immediately they will again be here
    in their own shapes; for it can never be
    they will digest this harsh indignity.
  princess of france. will they return?
  boyet. they will, they will, god knows,
    and leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
    blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
  princess of france. how blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
  boyet. fair lad
 
 ___________________________
 
of france. avaunt, perplexity! what shall we do
    if they return in their own shapes to woo?
  rosaline. good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,
    let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    let us complain to them what fools were here,
    disguis'd like muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    and wonder what they were, and to what end
    their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    and their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    should be presented at our tent to us.
  boyet. ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
  princess of france. whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
                 exeunt princess, rosaline, katharine, and maria

         re-enter the king, berowne, longaville, and dumain,
                        in their proper habits

  king. fair sir, god save you! where's the princess?
  boyet. gone to her tent. please it your majesty
    command me any service to her thither?
  king. that she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
  bo
 
 ___________________________
 
is hand away in courtesy;
    this is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
    that, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
    in honourable terms; nay, he can sing
    a mean most meanly; and in ushering,
    mend him who can. the ladies call him sweet;
    the stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
    this is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
    to show his teeth as white as whales-bone;
    and consciences that will not die in debt
    pay him the due of 'honey-tongued boyet.'
  king. a blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
    that put armado's page out of his part!

        re-enter the princess, ushered by boyet; rosaline,
                      maria, and katharine

  berowne. see where it comes! behaviour, what wert thou
    till this man show'd thee? and what art thou now?
  king. all hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
  princess of france. 'fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as i
conceive.
  king. construe my speeches better, if you may.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
omedy.
    some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
    some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some dick,
    that smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    to make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd,
    told our intents before; which once disclos'd,
    the ladies did change favours; and then we,
    following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
    now, to our perjury to add more terror,
    we are again forsworn in will and error.
    much upon this it is; [to boyet] and might not you
    forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
    do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
    and laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    and stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
    holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
    you put our page out. go, you are allow'd;
    die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
    you leer upon me, do you? there's an eye
    wounds like a leaden sword.
  boyet. full merrily
    hath this brave manage, this caree
 
 ___________________________
 
 other five.
  berowne. there is five in the first show.
  king. you are deceived, 'tis not so.
  berowne. the pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool,
and
    the boy:
    abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
    cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
  king. the ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

                   enter costard, armed for pompey

  costard. i pompey am-
  berowne. you lie, you are not he.
  costard. i pompey am-
  boyet. with libbard's head on knee.
  berowne. well said, old mocker; i must needs be friends with
thee.
  costard. i pompey am, pompey surnam'd the big-
   dumain. the great.
  costard. it is great, sir.
    pompey surnam'd the great,
    that oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    and travelling along this coast, i bere am come by chance,
    and lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of france.

    if your ladyship would say 'thanks, pompey,' 
 
 ___________________________
 
i had done.
  princess of france. great thanks, great pompey.
  costard. 'tis not so much worth; but i hope i was perfect.
    i made a little fault in great.
  berowne. my hat to a halfpenny, pompey proves the best worthy.

                 enter sir nathaniel, for alexander

  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander;
    by east, west, north, and south, i spread my conquering
might.
    my scutcheon plain declares that i am alisander-
  boyet. your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.

  berowne. your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
  princess of france. the conqueror is dismay'd. proceed, good
    alexander.
  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander-
  boyet. most true, 'tis right, you were so, alisander.
  berowne. pompey the great!
  costard. your servant, and costard.
  berowne. take away the conqueror, take away alisander.
  costard. [to sir nathani
 
 ___________________________
 
id he strangle serpents in his manus.
    quoniam he seemeth in minority,
    ergo i come with this apology.
    keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.      [moth retires]
    judas i am-
  dumain. a judas!
  holofernes. not iscariot, sir.
    judas i am, ycliped maccabaeus.
  dumain. judas maccabaeus clipt is plain judas.
  berowne. a kissing traitor. how art thou prov'd judas?
  holofernes. judas i am-
  dumain. the more shame for you, judas!
  holofernes. what mean you, sir?
  boyet. to make judas hang himself.
  holofernes. begin, sir; you are my elder.
  berowne. well followed: judas was hanged on an elder.
  holofernes. i will not be put out of countenance.
  berowne. because thou hast no face.
  holofernes. what is this?
  boyet. a cittern-head.
  dumain. the head of a bodkin.
  berowne. a death's face in a ring.
  longaville. the face of an old roman coin, scarce seen.
  boyet. the pommel of coesar's falchion.
  dumain. the carv'd-bone face on a flask.
  b
 
 ___________________________
 
erowne. saint george's half-cheek in a brooch.
  dumain. ay, and in a brooch of lead.
  berowne. ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer. and now,
    forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
  holofernes. you have put me out of countenance.
  berowne. false: we have given thee faces.
  holofernes. but you have outfac'd them all.
  berowne. an thou wert a lion we would do so.
  boyet. therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
    and so adieu, sweet jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
  dumain. for the latter end of his name.
  berowne. for the ass to the jude; give it him- jud-as, away.
  holofernes. this is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
  boyet. a light for monsieur judas! it grows dark, he may
stumble.
                                            [holofernes retires]
  princess of france. alas, poor maccabaeus, how hath he been
baited!

                   ente
 
 ___________________________
 
r armado, for hector

  berowne. hide thy head, achilles; here comes hector in arms.
  dumain. though my mocks come home by me, i will now be merry.
  king. hector was but a troyan in respect of this.
  boyet. but is this hector?
  dumain. i think hector was not so clean-timber'd.
  longaville. his leg is too big for hector's.
  dumain. more calf, certain.
  boyet. no; he is best indued in the small.
  berowne. this cannot be hector.
  dumain. he's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
  armado. the armipotent mars, of lances the almighty,
    gave hector a gift-
  dumain. a gilt nutmeg.
  berowne. a lemon.
  longaville. stuck with cloves.
  dumain. no, cloven.
  armado. peace!
    the armipotent mars, of lances the almighty,
    gave hector a gift, the heir of ilion;
    a man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
    from morn till
 
 ___________________________
 
 it runs against
    hector.
  dumain. ay, and hector's a greyhound.
  armado. the sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man.
but
    i will forward with my device. [to the princess] sweet
royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.

          [berowne steps forth, and speaks to costard]

  princess of france. speak, brave hector; we are much delighted.
  armado. i do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
  boyet. [aside to dumain] loves her by the foot.
  dumain. [aside to boyet] he may not by the yard.
  armado. this hector far surmounted hannibal-
  costard. the party is gone, fellow hector, she is gone; she is
two
    months on her way.
  armado. what meanest thou?
  costard. faith, unless you play the honest troyan, the poor
wench
    is cast away. she's quick; the child brags in her belly
already;
    'tis yours.
  armado. dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
die.
  c
 
 ___________________________
 
ostard. then shall hector be whipt for jaquenetta that is
quick by
    him, and hang'd for pompey that is dead by him.
  dumain. most rare pompey!
  boyet. renowned pompey!
  berowne. greater than great! great, great, great pompey! pompey
the
    huge!
  dumain. hector trembles.
  berowne. pompey is moved. more ates, more ates! stir them on!
stir
    them on!
  dumain. hector will challenge him.
  berowne. ay, if 'a have no more man's blood in his belly than
will
    sup a flea.
  armado. by the north pole, i do challenge thee.
  costard. i will not fight with a pole, like a northern man;
i'll
    slash; i'll do it by the sword. i 
 
 ___________________________
 
solute pompey!
  moth. master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. do you not
see
    pompey is uncasing for the combat? what mean you? you will
lose
    your reputation.
  armado. gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; i will not combat in
my
    shirt.
  dumain. you may not deny it: pompey hath made the challenge.
  armado. sweet bloods, i both may and will.
  berowne. what reason have you for 't?
  armado. the naked truth of it is: i have no shirt; i go
woolward
    for penance.
  boyet. true, and it was enjoined him in rome for want of linen;
    since when, i'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
    jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.

                 enter as messenger, monsieur marcade

  marcade. god save you, madam!
  princess of france. welcome, marcade;
    but that thou interruptest our merriment.
  marcade. i am sorry, madam; for the news i bring
    is heavy in my tongue. the king your father-
  princess of france. dead, 
 
 ___________________________
 
for my life!
  marcade. even so; my tale is told.
  berowne. worthies away; the scene begins to cloud.
  armado. for mine own part, i breathe free breath. i have seen
the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and i
will
    right myself like a soldier.                 exeunt worthies
  king. how fares your majesty?
  princess of france. boyet, prepare; i will away to-night.
  king. madam, not so; i do beseech you stay.
  princess of france. prepare, i say. i thank you, gracious
lords,
    for all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
    out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
    in your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
    the liberal opposition of our spirits,
    if over-boldly we have borne ourselves
    in the converse of breath- your gentleness
    was guilty of it. farewell, worthy lord.
    a heavy heart bears not a 