love's labour's lost

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae.

  ferdinand, king of navarre
  berowne,    lord attending on the king
  longaville,  "      "      "   "   "
  dumain,      "      "      "   "   "
  boyet,   lord attending on the princess of france
  marcade,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  don adriano de armado, fantastical spaniard
  sir nathaniel, a curate
  holofernes, a schoolmaster
  dull, a constable
  costard, a clown
  moth, page to armado
  a forester

  the princess of france
  rosaline, lady attending on the princess
  maria,      "     "       "  "     "
  katharine, lady attending on the princess
  jaquenetta, a country wench

  lords, attendants, etc.




<<this electronic version of the comple
 
 ___________________________
 
lliam
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene ii.
the park

enter the princess of france, with three attending ladies,
rosaline, maria, katharine, boyet, and two other lords

  boyet. now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
    consider who the king your father sends,
    to whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
    yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
    to parley with the sole inheritor
    of all perfections that a man may owe,
    matchless navarre; the plea of no less weight
    than aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
    be now as prodigal of all dear 
 
 ___________________________
 
grace
    as nature was in making graces dear,
    when she did starve the general world beside
    and prodigally gave them all to you.
  princess of france. good lord boyet, my beauty, though but
mean,
    needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
    beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;
    i am less proud to hear you tell my worth
    than you much willing to be counted wise
    in spending your wit in the praise of mine.
    but now to task the tasker: good boyet,
    you are not ignorant all-telling fame
    doth noise abroad navarre hath made a vow,
    till painful study 
 
 ___________________________
 
 seemeth it a needful course,
    before we enter his forbidden gates,
    to know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
    bold of your worthiness, we single you
    as our best-moving fair solicitor.
    tell him the daughter of the king of france,
    on serious business, craving quick dispatch,
    importunes personal conference with his grace.
    haste, signify so much; while we attend,
    like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.
  boyet. proud of employment, willingly i go.
  princess of france. all pride is willing pride, and yours is
so.
                                                      exit boyet
    who are the votaries, my loving lords,
    that are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
  first lord. lord longaville is one.
  princess of france. know you the man?
  maria. i know him, madam; at a marriage feast,
    between lord perigort and the beauteous heir
    of jaques falconbridge, solemnized
    in normandy, saw i this longaville.
    a man of sovereign parts,
 
 ___________________________
 
 peerless esteem'd,
    well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
    nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
    the only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
    if virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
    is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will,
    whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
    it should none spare that come within his power.
  princess of france. some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
  maria. they say so most that most his humours know.
  princess of france. such short-liv'd wits do wither as they
grow.
    who are the rest?
  katharine. the young dumain, a well-accomplish'd youth,
    of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
    most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
    for he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
    and shape to win grace though he had no wit.
    i saw him at the duke alencon's once;
    and much too little of that good i saw
    is my report to his great worthiness.
  rosaline. another of these students at 
 
 ___________________________
 
th.
    berowne they call him; but a merrier man,
    within the limit of becoming mirth,
    i never spent an hour's talk withal.
    his eye begets occasion for his wit,
    for every object that the one doth catch
    the other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    delivers in such apt and gracious words
    that aged ears play truant at his tales,
    and younger hearings are quite ravished;
    so sweet and voluble is his discourse.
  princess of france. god bless my ladies! are they all in love,
    that every one her own hath garnished
    with such bedecking ornaments of praise?
  first lord. here comes boyet.

                       re-enter boyet

  princess of france. now, what admittance, lord?
  boyet. navarre had notice of your fair approach,
    and he and his competitors in oath
    were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
    before i came. marry, thus much i have learnt:
    he rather means to lodge you in the fiel
 
 ___________________________
 
d,
    like one that comes here to besiege his court,
    than seek a dispensation for his oath,
    to let you enter his unpeopled house.
                                    [the ladies-in-waiting mask]

             enter king, longaville, dumain, berowne,
                         and attendants

    here comes navarre.
  king. fair princess, welcome to the court of navarre.
  princess of france. 'fair' i give you back again; and 'welcome'
i
    have not yet. the roof of this court is too high to be yours,
and
    welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
  king. you shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
  princess of france. i will be welcome then; conduct me thither.
  king. hear me, dear lady: i have sworn an oath-
  princess of france. our lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
  king. not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
  princess of france. why, will shall b
 
 ___________________________
 
reak it; will, and nothing
    else.
  king. your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
  princess of france. were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
    where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
    i hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping.
    'tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
    and sin to break it.
    but pardon me, i am too sudden bold;
    to teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
    vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
    and suddenly resolve me in my suit.         [giving a paper]
  king. madam, i will, if suddenly i may.
  princess of france. you will the
 
 ___________________________
 
e he doth demand to have repaid
    a hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
    on payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
    to have his title live in aquitaine;
    which we much rather had depart withal,
    and have the money by our father lent,
    than aquitaine so gelded as it is.
    dear princess, were not his requests so far
    from reason's yielding, your fair self should make
    a yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
    and go well satisfied to france again.
  princess of france. you do the king my father too much wrong,
    and wrong the reputation of your name,
    in so unseeming to confess receipt
    of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
  king. i do protest i never heard of it;
    and, if you prove it, i'll repay it back
    or yield up aquitaine.
  princess of france. we arrest your word.
    boyet, you can produce acquittances
    for such a sum from special officers
    of charles his father.
  king. satisfy me so.
  boyet. so please your gr
 
 ___________________________
 
e; at which interview
    all liberal reason i will yield unto.
    meantime receive such welcome at my hand
    as honour, without breach of honour, may
    make tender of to thy true worthiness.
    you may not come, fair princess, within my gates;
    but here without you shall be so receiv'd
    as you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart,
    though so denied fair harbour in my house.
    your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
    to-morrow shall we visit you again.
  princess of france. sweet health and fair desires consort your
    grace!
  king. thy own wish wish i thee in every place.
                                            exit with attendants
  berowne. lady, i will commend you to mine own heart.
  rosaline. pray you, do my commendations;
    i would be glad to see it.
  berowne. i would you heard it groan.
  rosaline. is the fool sick?
  berowne. sick at the heart.
  rosaline. alack, let it blood.
  berowne. would that do it good?
  rosaline. my physic s
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  boyet. not unlike, sir; that may be.           exit longaville
  berowne. what's her name in the cap?
  boyet. rosaline, by good hap.
  berowne. is she wedded or no?
  boyet. to her will, sir, or so.
  berowne. you are welcome, sir; adieu!
  boyet. farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
                                     exit berowne. ladies unmask
  maria. that last is berowne, the merry mad-cap lord;
    not a word with him but a jest.
  boyet. and every jest but a word.
  princess of france. it was well done of you to take him at his
    word.
  boyet. i was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
  katharine. two hot sheeps, marry!
  boyet. and wherefore not ships?
    no sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
  katharine. you sheep and i pasture- shall that finish the jest?
  boyet. so you grant pasture for me.     [offering to kiss her]
  katharine. not so, gentle beast;
    my lips are no common, though several they be.
  boyet. belonging to whom?
  katha
 
 ___________________________
 
rine. to my fortunes and me.
  princess of france. good wits will be jangling; but, gentles,
      agree;
    this civil war of wits were much better used
    on navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
  boyet. if my observation, which very seldom lies,
    by the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
    deceive me not now, navarre is infected.
  princess of france. with what?
  boyet. with that which we lovers entitle 'affected.'
  princess of france. your reason?
  boyet. why, all his behaviours did make their retire
    to the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
    his heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
    proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
    his tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
    did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
    all senses to that sense did make their repair,
    to feel only looking on fairest of fair.
    methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
    
 
 ___________________________
 
as jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
    who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
    his face's own margent did quote such amazes
    that all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
    i'll give you aquitaine and all that is his,
    an you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
  princess of france. come, to our pavilion. boyet is dispos'd.
  boyet. but to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
    i only have made a mouth of his eye,
    by adding a tongue which i know will not lie.
  maria. thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.
  katharine. he is cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
  rosaline. then was venus like her mother; for her father is but
    grim.
  boyet. do you hear, my mad wenches?
  maria. no.
  boyet. what, then; do you see?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
 project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
the park

enter the princess, rosaline, maria, katharine, boyet, lords,
attendants,
and a forester

  princess of france. was that the king that spurr'd his horse so
      hard
    against the steep uprising of the hill?
  boyet. i know not; but i think it was not he.
  princess of france. whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.
    well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
    on saturday we will return to france.
    then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    that we must stand and play the murderer in?
  forester. hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
    a stand where you may make 
 
 ___________________________
 
the fairest shoot.
  princess of france. i thank my beauty i am fair that shoot,
    and thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
  forester. pardon me, madam, for i meant not so.
  princess of france. what, what? first praise me, and again say
no?
    o short-liv'd pride! not fair? alack for woe!
  forester. yes, madam, fair.
  princess of france. nay, never paint me now;
    where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
    here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
                                             [ giving him money]
    fair payment for foul words is more than due.
  forester. nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
  princess of france. see, see, my beauty will be sav'd by merit.
    o heresy in fair, fit for these days!
    a giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
    but come, the bow. n
 
 ___________________________
 
ow my skill,
    that more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
    and, out of question, so it is sometimes:
    glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
    when, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    we bend to that the working of the heart;
    as i for praise alone now seek to spill
    the poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
  boyet. do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
    only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    lords o'er their lords?
  princess of france. only for praise; and praise we may afford
    to any lady that subdues a lord.

                       enter costard

  boyet. here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  costard. god dig-you-den all! pray you, which is the head lady?
  princess of france. thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest
that
    have no heads.
  costard. which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  princess of france. the thickest and the tallest.
  costard. the thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is

 
 ___________________________
 
truth.
    an your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    one o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
  princess of france. what's your will, sir? what's your will?
  costard. i have a letter from monsieur berowne to one
    lady rosaline.
  princess of france. o, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good
friend
      of mine.
    stand aside, good bearer. boyet, you can carve.
    break up this capon.
  boyet. i am bound to serve.
    this letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    it is writ to jaquenetta.
  princess of france. we will read it, i swear.
    break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  boyet. [reads] 'by heaven, that thou art fair is most
infallible;
    true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art
lov
 
 ___________________________
 
oot,
my
    eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
                  thine in the dearest design of industry,
                                           don adriano de armado.

    'thus dost thou hear the nemean lion roar
    'gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
    submissive fall his princely feet before,
    and he from forage will incline to play.
    but if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
    food for his rage, repasture for his den.'
  princess of france. what plume of feathers is he that indited
this
      letter?
    what vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
  boyet. i am much deceived but i remember the style.
  princess of france. else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.
  boyet. this armado is a spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    a phantasime, a monarcho, and one that makes sport
    to the prince and his book-mates.
  princess of france. thou fellow, a word.
    who gave thee this letter?
  costar
 
 ___________________________
 
d. i told you: my lord.
  princess of france. to whom shouldst thou give it?
  costard. from my lord to my lady.
  princess of france. from which lord to which lady?
  costard. from my lord berowne, a good master of mine,
    to a lady of france that he call'd rosaline.
  princess of france. thou hast mistaken his letter. come, lords,

      away.
    [to rosaline] here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine
another
      day.                             exeunt princess and train
  boyet. who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
  rosaline. shall i teach you to know?
  boyet. ay, my continent of beauty.
  rosaline. why, she that bears the bow.
    finely put off!
  boyet. my lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
    hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
 
 ___________________________
 

  holofernes. via, goodman dull! thou has spoken no word all this
    while.
  dull. nor understood none neither, sir.
  holofernes. allons! we will employ thee.
  dull. i'll make one in a dance, or so, or i will play
    on the tabor to the worthies, and let them dance the hay.
  holofernes. most dull, honest dull! to our sport, away.
                                                          exeunt




scene ii.
the park

enter the princess, maria, katharine, and rosaline

  princess of france. sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we
depart,
    if fairings come thus plentifully in.
    a lady wall'd about with diamonds!
    look you what i have from the loving king.
  rosaline. madam, came nothing else along with that?
  princess of france. nothing but this! yes, as much love in
rhyme
    as would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper
    writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
    that he was fain to seal on cupid's name.
  rosaline. that was the way to make his godhead 
 
 ___________________________
 
 light condition in a beauty dark.
  rosaline. we need more light to find your meaning out.
  katharine. you'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
    therefore i'll darkly end the argument.
  rosaline. look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
  katharine. so do not you; for you are a light wench.
  rosaline. indeed, i weigh not you; and therefore light.
  katharine. you weigh me not? o, that's you care not for me.
  rosaline. great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
  princess of france. well bandied both; a set of wit well
play'd.
    but, rosaline, you have a favour too?
    who sent it? and what is it?
  rosaline. i would you knew.
    an if my face were but as fair as yours,
    my favour were as great: be witness this.
    nay, i have verses too, i thank berowne;
    the numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    i were the fairest goddess on the ground.
    i am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs.
    o, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
  princess o
 
 ___________________________
 
f france. anything like?
  rosaline. much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
  princess of france. beauteous as ink- a good conclusion.
  katharine. fair as a text b in a copy-book.
  rosaline. ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,
    my red dominical, my golden letter:
    o that your face were not so full of o's!
  katharine. a pox of that jest! and i beshrew all shrows!
  princess of france. but, katharine, what was sent to you from
fair
    dumain?
  katharine. madam, this glove.
  princess of france. did he not send you twain?
  katharine. yes, madam; and, moreover,
    some thousand verses of a faithful lover;
    a huge translation of hypocrisy,
    vilely compil'd, profound simplicity.
  maria. this, and these pearl, to me sent longaville;
    the letter is too long by half a mile.
  princess of france. i think no less. dost thou not wish in
heart
    the chain w
 
 ___________________________
 
ere longer and the letter short?
  maria. ay, or i would these hands might never part.
  princess of france. we are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
  rosaline. they are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
    that same berowne i'll torture ere i go.
    o that i knew he were but in by th' week!
    how i would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
    and wait the season, and observe the times,
    and spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
    and shape his service wholly to my hests,
    and make him proud to make me proud that jests!
    so pertaunt-like would i o'ersway his state
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 that he should be my fool, and i his fate.
  princess of france. none are so surely caught, when they are
      catch'd,
    as wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
    hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    and wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
  rosaline. the blood of youth burns not with such excess
    as gravity's revolt to wantonness.
  maria. folly in fools bears not so strong a note
    as fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
    since all the power thereof it doth apply
    to prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
 
 ___________________________
 


                          enter boyet

  princess of france. here comes boyet, and mirth is in his face.
  boyet. o, i am stabb'd with laughter! where's her grace?
  princess of france. thy news, boyet?
  boyet. prepare, madam, prepare!
    arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
    against your peace. love doth approach disguis'd,
    armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.
    muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
    or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
  princess of france. saint dennis to saint cupid! what are they
    that charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
  boyet. under the cool shade of a sycamore
    i thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
    when, lo, to interrupt my purpos'd rest,
    toward that shade i might behold addrest
    the king and his companions; warily
    i stole into a neighbour thicket by,
    and overheard what you shall overhear-
    that, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
    their herald is a prett
 
 ___________________________
 
    one rubb'd his elbow, thus, and fleer'd, and swore
    a better speech was never spoke before.
    another with his finger and his thumb
    cried 'via! we will do't, come what will come.'
    the third he caper'd, and cried 'all goes well.'
    the fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
    with that they all did tumble on the ground,
    with such a zealous laughter, so profound,
    that in this spleen ridiculous appears,
    to check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
  princess of france. but what, but what, come they to visit us?
  boyet. they do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    like muscovites or russians, as i guess.
    their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
    and every one his love-feat will advance
    unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    by favours several which they did bestow.
  princess of france. and will they so? the gallants shall be
task'd,
    for, ladies, we will every one be mask'd;
    and not a man of them shall have the 
 
 ___________________________
 
grace,
    despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
    hold, rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
    and then the king will court thee for his dear;
    hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
    so shall berowne take me for rosaline.
    and change you favours too; so shall your loves
    woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.
  rosaline. come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.
  katharine. but, in this changing, what is your intent?
  princess of france. the effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
    they do it but in mocking merriment,
    and mock for mock is only my intent.
    their several counsels they unbosom shall
    to loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
    upon the next occasion that we meet
    with visages display'd to talk and greet.
  rosaline. but shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  princess of france. no, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
    but whil
 
 ___________________________
 
e 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
  boyet. why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
    and quite divorce his memory from his part.
  princess of france. therefore i do it; and i make no doubt
    the rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.
    there's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
    to make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    so shall we stay, mocking intended game,
    and they well mock'd depart away with shame.
                                         [trumpet sounds within]
  boyet. the trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
                                               [the ladies mask]

          e
 
 ___________________________
 
asure; be not nice.
  rosaline. we can afford no more at such a price.
  king. price you yourselves. what buys your company?
  rosaline. your absence only.
  king. that can never be.
  rosaline. then cannot we be bought; and so adieu-
    twice to your visor and half once to you.
  king. if you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
  rosaline. in private then.
  king. i am best pleas'd with that.       [they converse apart]
  berowne. white-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
  princess of france. honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
  berowne. nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
    metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run dice!
    there's half a dozen sweets.
  princess of france. seventh sweet, adieu!
    since you can cog, i'll play no more with you.
  berowne. one word in secret.
  princess of france. let it not be sweet.
  berowne. thou grievest my gall.
  princess of france. gall! bitter.
  berowne. therefore meet.                 [they converse apart]

 
 ___________________________
 
 keen
    as is the razor's edge invisible,
    cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
    above the sense of sense; so sensible
    seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
  rosaline. not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
  berowne. by heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
  king. farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
                             exeunt king, lords, and blackamoors
  princess of france. twenty adieus, my frozen muscovits.
    are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
  boyet. tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
  rosaline. well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
  princess of france. o poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
    will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
    or ever but in vizards show their faces?
    this pert berowne was out of count'nance quite.
  rosaline. they were all in lamentable cases!
    the king was wee
 
 ___________________________
 
ping-ripe for a good word.
  princess of france. berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
  maria. dumain was at my service, and his sword.
    'no point' quoth i; my servant straight was mute.
  katharine. lord longaville said i came o'er his heart;
    and trow you what he call'd me?
  princess of france. qualm, perhaps.
  katharine. yes, in good faith.
  princess of france. go, sickness as thou art!
  rosaline. well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
    but will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
  princess of france. and quick berowne hath plighted faith to
me.
  katharine. and longaville was for my service born.
  maria. dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
  boyet. madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
    immediately they will again be here
    in their own shapes; for it can never be
    they will digest this harsh indignity.
  pr
 
 ___________________________
 
incess of france. will they return?
  boyet. they will, they will, god knows,
    and leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
    blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
  princess of france. how blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
  boyet. fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
    dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
    are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
  princess of france. avaunt, perplexity! what shall we do
    if they return in their own shapes to woo?
  rosaline. good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,
    let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    let us complain to them what fools were here,
    disguis'd like muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    and wonder what they were, and to what end
    their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    and their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    should be presented at our tent to us.
  boyet. la
 
 ___________________________
 
dies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
  princess of france. whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
                 exeunt princess, rosaline, katharine, and maria

         re-enter the king, berowne, longaville, and dumain,
                        in their proper habits

  king. fair sir, god save you! where's the princess?
  boyet. gone to her tent. please it your majesty
    command me any service to her thither?
  king. that she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
  boyet. i will; and so will she, i know, my lord.          exit
  ber
 
 ___________________________
 
th as white as whales-bone;
    and consciences that will not die in debt
    pay him the due of 'honey-tongued boyet.'
  king. a blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
    that put armado's page out of his part!

        re-enter the princess, ushered by boyet; rosaline,
                      maria, and katharine

  berowne. see where it comes! behaviour, what wert thou
    till this man show'd thee? and what art thou now?
  king. all hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
  princess of france. 'fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as i
conceive.
  king. construe my speeches better, if you may.
  princess of france. then wish me better; i will give you leave.
  king. we came to visit you, and purpose now
    to lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
  princess of france. this field shall hold me, and so hold your
vow:
    nor god, nor i, delights in perjur'd men.
  king. rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
    the virtue of your eye must break my oath.
  princess of franc
 
 ___________________________
 
e. you nickname virtue: vice you should have
      spoke;
    for virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
    now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
    as the unsullied lily, i protest,
    a world of torments though i should endure,
    i would not yield to be your house's guest;
    so much i hate a breaking cause to be
    of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
  king. o, you have liv'd in desolation here,
    unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
  princess of france. not so, my lord; it is not so, i swear;
    we have had pastimes here, and pleasant game;
    a mess of russians left us but of late.
  king. how, madam! russians!
  princess of france. ay, in truth, my lord;
    trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
  rosaline. madam, speak true. it is not so, my lord.
    my lady, to the manner of the days,
    in courtesy gives undeserving praise.
    we four indeed confronted were with four
    in russian habit; here they stayed an hour
 
 ___________________________
 
e a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
  berowne. o, i am yours, and all that i possess.
  rosaline. all the fool mine?
  berowne. i cannot give you less.
  rosaline. which of the vizards was it that you wore?
  berowne. where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
  rosaline. there, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    that hid the worse and show'd the better face.
  king. we were descried; they'll mock us now downright.
  dumain. let us confess, and turn it to a jest.
  princess of france. amaz'd, my lord? why looks your highness
sad?
  rosaline. help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! why look you pale?
    sea-sick, i think, coming from muscovy.
  berowne. thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
    can any face of brass hold longer out?
    here stand i, lady- dart thy skill at me,
    bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
    thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
    cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
    and i will wish thee never more t
 
 ___________________________
 
gin, wench- so god help me, law!-
    my love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
  rosaline. sans 'sans,' i pray you.
  berowne. yet i have a trick
    of the old rage; bear with me, i am sick;
    i'll leave it by degrees. soft, let us see-
    write 'lord have mercy on us' on those three;
    they are infected; in their hearts it lies;
    they have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
    these lords are visited; you are not free,
    for the lord's tokens on you do i see.
  princess of france. no, they are free that gave these tokens to
us.
  berowne. our states are forfeit; seek not to undo us.
  rosaline. it is not so; for how can this be true,
    that you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
  berowne. peace; for i will not have to do with you.
  rosaline. nor shall not, if i do as i intend.
  berowne. speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
  king. teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
    some fair excuse.
  princess of france. the fairest is confessio
 
 ___________________________
 
n.
    were not you here but even now, disguis'd?
  king. madam, i was.
  princess of france. and were you well advis'd?
  king. i was, fair madam.
  princess of france. when you then were here,
    what did you whisper in your lady's ear?
  king. that more than all the world i did respect her.
  princess of france. when she shall challenge this, you will
reject
    her.
  king. upon mine honour, no.
  princess of france. peace, peace, forbear;
    your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
  king. despise me when i break this oath of mine.
  princess of france. i will; and therefore keep it. rosaline,
    what did the russian whisper in your ear?
  rosaline. madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
    as precious eyesight, and did value me
    above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
    that he would wed me, or else die my lover.
  princess of france. god give thee joy of him! the noble lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d
     most honourably doth uphold his word.
  king. what mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
    i never swore this lady such an oath.
  rosaline. by heaven, you did; and, to confirm it plain,
    you gave me this; but take it, sir, again.
  king. my faith and this the princess i did give;
    i knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
  princess of france. pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
    and lord berowne, i thank him, is my dear.
    what, will you have me, or your pearl again?
 berowne. neither of either; i remit both twain.
    i see the trick on't: here was a consent,
    knowing aforehand of our merriment,
    to dash it like a christmas comedy.
    some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
    some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some dick,
    that smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    to mak
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
great;
    for mine own part, i know not the degree of the worthy; but i
am
    to stand for him.
  berowne. go, bid them prepare.
  costard. we will turn it finely off, sir; we will take some
care.
                                                    exit costard
  king. berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
  berowne. we are shame-proof, my lord, and 'tis some policy
    to have one show worse than the king's and his company.
  king. i say they shall not come.
  princess of france. nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
    that sport best pleases that doth least know how;
    where zeal strives to content, and the contents
    dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
    their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
    when great things labouring perish in their birth.
  berowne. a right description of our sport, my lord.

                        enter armado

  armado. anointed, i implore so much expense of thy royal sweet
    breath as will utter
 
 ___________________________
 
 a brace of words.
           [converses apart with the king, and delivers a paper]
  princess of france. doth this man serve god?
  berowne. why ask you?
  princess of france. 'a speaks not like a man of god his making.
  armado. that is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, i
    protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too too
vain,
    too too vain; but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de
la
    guerra. i wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
                                                     exit armado
  king. here is like to be a good presence of worthies. he
presents
    hector of troy; the swain, pompey the g
 
 ___________________________
 
s head on knee.
  berowne. well said, old mocker; i must needs be friends with
thee.
  costard. i pompey am, pompey surnam'd the big-
   dumain. the great.
  costard. it is great, sir.
    pompey surnam'd the great,
    that oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    and travelling along this coast, i bere am come by chance,
    and lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of france.

    if your ladyship would say 'thanks, pompey,' i had done.
  princess of france. great thanks, great pompey.
  costard. 'tis not so much worth; but i hope i was perfect.
    i made a little fault in great.
  berowne. my hat to a halfpenny, pompey proves the best worthy.

                 enter sir nathaniel, for alexander

  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander;
    by east, west, north, and south, i spread my conquering
might.
    my scutcheon plain declares that i am alisander-
  boyet. your nose says, no, you are not; for it stan
 
 ___________________________
 
ds to right.

  berowne. your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
  princess of france. the conqueror is dismay'd. proceed, good
    alexander.
  nathaniel. when in the world i liv'd, i was the world's
commander-
  boyet. most true, 'tis right, you were so, alisander.
  berowne. pompey the great!
  costard. your servant, and costard.
  berowne. take away the conqueror, take away alisander.
  costard. [to sir nathaniel] o, sir, you have overthrown
alisander
    the conqueror! you will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth
for
    this. your lion, that holds his poleaxe s
 
 ___________________________
 
g on a
close-stool,
    will be given to ajax. he will be the ninth worthy. a
conqueror
    and afeard to speak! run away for shame, alisander.
    [sir nathaniel retires] there, an't shall please you, a
foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd. he is a
    marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler; but
for
    alisander- alas! you see how 'tis- a little o'erparted. but
there
    are worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other
sort.
  princess of france. stand aside, good pompey.

         enter holofernes, for judas; and moth, for hercules

  holofernes. great hercules is presented by this imp,
    whose club kill'd cerberus, that three-headed canus;
    and when be was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
    thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
    quoniam he seemeth in minority,
    ergo i come with this apology.
    keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.      [moth retires]
    judas i am-
  dumain. a judas!
  holofernes. not 
 
 ___________________________
 
ernes. but you have outfac'd them all.
  berowne. an thou wert a lion we would do so.
  boyet. therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
    and so adieu, sweet jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
  dumain. for the latter end of his name.
  berowne. for the ass to the jude; give it him- jud-as, away.
  holofernes. this is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
  boyet. a light for monsieur judas! it grows dark, he may
stumble.
                                            [holofernes retires]
  princess of france. alas, poor maccabaeus, how hath he been
baited!

                   enter armado, for hector

  berowne. hide thy head, achilles; here comes hector in arms.
  dumain. though my mocks come home by me, i will now be merry.
  king. hector was but a troyan in respect of this.
  boyet. but is this hector?
  dumain. i think hector was not so clean-timber'd.
  longaville. his leg is too big for hector's.
  dumain. more calf, certain.
  boyet. no; he is best indued in the small.
  berowne
 
 ___________________________
 
hat columbine.
  armado. sweet lord longaville, rein thy tongue.
  longaville. i must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
    hector.
  dumain. ay, and hector's a greyhound.
  armado. the sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man.
but
    i will forward with my device. [to the princess] sweet
royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.

          [berowne steps forth, and speaks to costard]

  princess of france. speak, brave hector; we are much delighted.
  armado. i do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
  boyet. [aside to dumain] loves her by the foot.
  dumain. [aside to boyet] he may not by the yard.
  armado. this hector far surmounted hannibal-
  costard. the party is gone, fellow hector, she is gone; she is
two
    months on her way.
  armado. what meanest thou?
  costard. faith, unless you play the honest troyan, the poor
wench
    is cast away. she's quick; the child brags in her bell
 
 ___________________________
 
: pompey hath made the challenge.
  armado. sweet bloods, i both may and will.
  berowne. what reason have you for 't?
  armado. the naked truth of it is: i have no shirt; i go
woolward
    for penance.
  boyet. true, and it was enjoined him in rome for want of linen;
    since when, i'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
    jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.

                 enter as messenger, monsieur marcade

  marcade. god save you, madam!
  princess of france. welcome, marcade;
    but that thou interruptest our merriment.
  marcade. i am sorry, madam; for the news i bring
    is heavy in my tongue. the king your father-
  princess of france. dead, for my life!
  marcade. even so; my tale is told.
  berowne. worthies away; the scene begins to cloud.
  armado. for mine own part, i breathe free breath. i have seen
the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and i
will
    right myself like a soldier.                 exeunt w
 
 ___________________________
 
orthies
  king. how fares your majesty?
  princess of france. boyet, prepare; i will away to-night.
  king. madam, not so; i do beseech you stay.
  princess of france. prepare, i say. i thank you, gracious
lords,
    for all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
    out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
    in your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
    the liberal opposition of our spirits,
    if over-boldly we have borne ourselves
    in the converse of breath- your gentleness
    was guilty of it. farewell, worthy lord.
    a heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.
    excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
    for my great suit so easily obtain'
 
 ___________________________
 
s to the purpose of his speed;
    and often at his very loose decides
    that which long process could not arbitrate.
    and though the mourning brow of progeny
    forbid the smiling courtesy of love
    the holy suit which fain it would convince,
    yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
    let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
    from what it purpos'd; since to wail friends lost
    is not by much so wholesome-profitable
    as to rejoice at friends but newly found.
  princess of france. i understand you not; my griefs are double.
  berowne. honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
    and by these badges understand the king.
    for your fair sakes have we neglected time,
    play'd foul play with our oaths; your beauty, ladies,
    hath much deformed us, fashioning our humours
    even to the opposed end of our intents;
    and what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,
    as love is full of unbefitting strains,
    all wanton as a child, skipping and vain;
    fo
 
 ___________________________
 
f loose love
    put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes
    have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities,
    those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
    suggested us to make. therefore, ladies,
    our love being yours, the error that love makes
    is likewise yours. we to ourselves prove false,
    by being once false for ever to be true
    to those that make us both- fair ladies, you;
    and even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
    thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
  princess of france. we have receiv'd your letters, full of
love;
    your favours, the ambassadors of love;
    and, in our maiden council, rated them
    at courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
    as bombast and as lining to the time;
    but more devout than this in our respects
    have we not been; and therefore met your loves
    in their own fashion, like a merriment.
  dumain. our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.
  longaville. so did our looks.
  rosaline. we did not quote them so
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  king. now, at the latest minute of the hour,
    grant us your loves.
  princess of france. a time, methinks, too short
    to make a world-without-end bargain in.
    no, no, my lord, your grace is perjur'd much,
    full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
    if for my love, as there is no such cause,
    you will do aught- this shall you do for me:
    your oath i will not trust; but go with speed
    to some forlorn and naked hermitage,
    remote from all the pleasures of the world;
    there stay until the twelve celestial signs
    have brought about the annual 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ear
    of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    and i will have you and that fault withal.
    but if they will not, throw away that spirit,
    and i shall find you empty of that fault,
    right joyful of your reformation.
  berowne. a twelvemonth? well, befall what will befall,
    i'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
  princess of france. [ to the king] ay, sweet my lord, and so i
take
    my leave.
  king. no, madam; we will bring you on your way.
  berowne. our wooing doth not end like an old play:
    jack hath not jill. these ladies' courtesy
    might well have made our sport a comedy.
  king. come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
    and then 'twill end.
  berowne. that's too long for a play.

                          re-enter armado

  armado. sweet majesty, vouchsafe me-
  princess of france. was n