love's labour's lost

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae.

  ferdinand, king of navarre
  berowne,    lord attending on the king
  longaville,  "      "      "   "   "
  dumain,      "      "      "   "   "
  boyet,   lord attending on the princess of france
  marcade,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  don adriano de armado, fantastical spaniard
  sir nathaniel, a curate
  holofernes, a schoolmaster
  dull, a constable
  costard, a clown
  moth, page to armado
  a forester

  the princess of france
  rosaline, lady attending on the princess
  maria,      "     "       "  "     "
  katharine, lady attending on the princess
  jaquenetta, a country wench

  lords, attendants, etc.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with per
 
 ___________________________
 
  for interim to our studies shall relate,
    in high-born words, the worth of many a knight
    from tawny spain lost in the world's debate.
    how you delight, my lords, i know not, i;
    but i protest i love to hear him lie,
    and i will use him for my minstrelsy.
  berowne. armado is a most illustrious wight,
    a man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
  longaville. costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
    and so to study three years is but short.

      enter dull, a constable, with a letter, and costard

  dull. which is the duke's own person?
  berowne. this, fellow. what wouldst?
  dull. i myself reprehend his own person, for i am his grace's
    farborough; but i would see his own person in flesh and
blood.
  berowne. this is he.
  dull. signior arme- arme- commends you. there's villainy
abroad;
    this letter will tell you more.
  costard. sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  king. a letter from the magnificent armado.
  be
 
 ___________________________
 
ber, hight costard,'
  costard. o, me!
  king. 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established
proclaimed
    edict and continent canon; which, with, o, with- but with
this i
    passion to say wherewith-'
  costard. with a wench.
    king. 'with a child of our grandmother eve, a female; or, for
thy
    more sweet understanding, a woman. him i, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet grace's officer, antony dull, a man
of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
  dull. me, an't shall please you; i am antony dull.
  king. 'for jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which i
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- i keep her as a vessel
of
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial. thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         don adriano de armado.'

  berowne.
 
 ___________________________
 
o. i will have that subject newly writ o'er, that i may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. boy, i do
love
    that country girl that i took in the park with the rational
hind
    costard; she deserves well.
  moth. [aside] to be whipt; and yet a better love than my
master.
  armado. sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  moth. and that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
  armado. i say, sing.
  moth. forbear till this company be past.

                enter dull, costard, and jaquenetta

  dull. sir, the duke's pleasure is that you keep costard safe;
and
    you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but 'a
    must fast three days a week. for this damsel, i must keep her
at
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman. fare you well.
  armado. i do betray myself with blushing. maid!
  jaquenetta. man!
  armado. i will visit thee at the lodge.
  jaquenetta. that's hereby.
  armado. i know where it is situate.
  jaquenetta. lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd, how wise you are!
  armado. i will tell thee wonders.
  jaquenetta. with that face?
  armado. i love thee.
  jaquenetta. so i heard you say.
  armado. and so, farewell.
  jaquenetta. fair weather after you!
  dull. come, jaquenetta, away.             exit with jaquenetta
  armado. villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  costard. well, sir, i hope when i do it i shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  armado. thou shalt be heavily punished.
  costard. i am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are
but
    lightly rewarded.
  armado. take away this villain; shut him up.
  moth. come, you transgressing slave, away.
  costard. let me not be pent up, sir; i will f
 
 ___________________________
 
se three.
  moth. and three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
  armado. fetch hither the swain; he must carry me a letter.
  moth. a message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for
an
    ass.
  armado. ha, ha, what sayest thou?
  moth. marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he
is
    very slow-gaited. but i go.
  armado. the way is but short; away.
  moth. as swift as lead, sir.
  armado. the meaning, pretty ingenious?
    is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
  moth. minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
  armado. i say lead is slow.
  moth. you are too swift, sir, to say so:
    is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
  armado. sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    he reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    i shoot thee at the swain.
  moth. thump, then, and i flee.                            exit
  armado. a most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!
    by thy favour, sweet welkin, i must sigh in thy face;
 
 ___________________________
 
t comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so
fit.
    armado a th' t'one side- o, a most dainty man!
    to see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    to see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    and his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
    sola, sola!                                     exit costard




scene ii.
the park

from the shooting within, enter holofernes, sir nathaniel, and
dull

  nathaniel. very reverent sport, truly; and done in the
testimony of
    a good conscience.
  holofernes. the deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
as
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of
caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab
on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
  nathaniel. truly, master holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
    varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, i assure ye it
w
 
 ___________________________
 
as
    a buck of the first head.
  holofernes. sir nathaniel, haud credo.
  dull. 'twas not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  holofernes. most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
insinuation,
    as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it
were,
    replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
    inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated,
    unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest
    unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a
deer.
  dull. i said the deer was not a haud credo; 'twas a pric
 
 ___________________________
 
ket.
  holofernes. twice-sod simplicity, bis coctus!
    o thou monster ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
  nathaniel. sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
in
      a book;
    he hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink; his
    intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only
sensible
    in the duller parts;
    and such barren plants are set before us that we thankful
should
      be-
    which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do
      fructify in us more than he.
    for as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a
fool,
    so, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a
school.
    but, omne bene, say i, being of an old father's mind:
    many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
  dull. you two are book-men: can you tell me by yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ur wit
    what was a month old at cain's birth that's not five weeks
old as
      yet?
  holofernes. dictynna, goodman dull; dictynna, goodman dull.
  dull. what is dictynna?
  nathaniel. a title to phoebe, to luna, to the moon.
  holofernes. the moon was a month old when adam was no more,
    and raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score.
    th' allusion holds in the exchange.
  dull. 'tis true, indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
  holofernes. god comfort thy capacity! i say th' allusion holds
in
    the exchange.
  dull. and i say the polusion holds in the exchange; for the
moon is
    never but a month old; and i say, beside, that 'twas a
pricket
    that the princess kill'd.
  holofernes. sir nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
on
    the death of the deer? and, to humour the ignorant, call the
deer
    the princess kill'd a pricket.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
g affect the letter, for it argues
    facility.

    the preyful princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing
      pricket.
    some say a sore; but not a sore till now made sore with
shooting.
    the dogs did yell; put el to sore, then sorel jumps from
thicket-
    or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
    if sore be sore, then l to sore makes fifty sores o' sorel.
    of one sore i an hundred make by adding but one more l.

  nathaniel. a rare talent!
  dull. [aside] if a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with
a
    talent.
  holofernes. this is a gift that i have, simple, simple; a
foolish
    extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects,
    ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions. these are begot
in
    the ventricle of memory, nourish'd in the womb of pia mater,
and
    delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. but the gift is
good in
    those in whom it is acute, and i am thankful for it.
  nathaniel. sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
efore repast, it shall please you to
gratify
    the table with a grace, i will, on my privilege i have with
the
    parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben
    venuto; where i will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
    neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention. i beseech
your
    society.
  nathaniel. and thank you too; for society, saith the text, is
the
    happiness of life.
  holofernes. and certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
    [to dull] sir, i do invite you too; you shall not say me nay:
    pauca verba. away; the gentles are at their game, and we will
to
    our recreation.                                       exeunt




scene iii.
the park

enter berowne, with a paper his band, alone

  berowne. the king he is hunting the deer: i am coursing myself.
    they have pitch'd a toil: i am tolling in a pitch- pitch that
    defiles. defile! a foul word. well, 'set thee down, sorrow!'
for
    so they say the fool
 
 ___________________________
 
yright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the park

enter holofernes, sir nathaniel, and dull

  holofernes. satis quod sufficit.
  nathaniel. i praise god for you, sir. your reasons at dinner
have
    been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility,
witty
    without affection, audacious without impudency, learned
without
    opinion, and strange without heresy. i did converse this
quondam
    day with a companion of the king's who is intituled,
nominated,
    or called, don adriano de armado.
  holofernes. novi hominem tanquam te. his humour is lofty, his
    di
 
 ___________________________
 
llent device! so, if any of the audience hiss, you
may
    cry 'well done, hercules; now thou crushest the snake!' that
is
    the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the
grace to
    do it.
  armado. for the rest of the worthies?
  holofernes. i will play three myself.
  moth. thrice-worthy gentleman!
  armado. shall i tell you a thing?
  holofernes. we attend.
  armado. we will have, if this fadge not, an antic. i beseech
you,
    follow.
  holofernes. via, goodman dull! thou has spoken no word all this
    while.
  dull. nor understood none neither, sir.
  holofernes. allons! we will employ thee.
  dull. i'll make one in a dance, or so, or i will play
    on the tabor to the worthies, and let them dance the hay.
  holofernes. most dull, honest dull! to our sport, away.
                                                          exeunt




scene ii.
the park

enter the princess, maria, katharine, and rosaline

  princess of france. sweet hearts,