ly right in so thinking,” said the man; “i
came here direct from the castle of st. angelo, and i had an immense
deal of trouble before i could get a chance to speak to beppo.”

“and who is beppo?”

“oh, beppo is employed in the prison, and i give him so much a year to
let me know what is going on within his holiness’s castle.”

“indeed! you are a provident person, i see.”

“why, you see, no one knows what may happen. perhaps some of these days
i may be entrapped, like poor peppino and may be very glad to have some
little nibbling mouse to gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help me out
of prison.”

“briefly, what did you learn?”

“that two executions of considerable interest will take place the day
after tomorrow at two o’clock, as is customary at rome at the
commencement of all great festivals. one of the culprits will be
_mazzolato_; [*] he is an atrocious villain, who murdered the priest who
brought him up, and deserves not the smallest pity. the other suffere
 
 ___________________________
 
r
is sentenced to be _decapitato_; [**] and he, your excellency, is poor
peppino.”


* knocked on the head.

** beheaded.

“the fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontifical government,
but also the neighboring states, with such extreme fear, that they are
glad of all opportunity of making an example.”

“but peppino did not even belong to my band: he was merely a poor
shepherd, whose only crime consisted in furnishing us with provisions.”

“which makes him your accomplice to all intents and purposes. but mark
the distinction with which he is treated; instead of being knocked on
the head as you would be if once they caught hold of you, he is simply
sentenced to be guillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the
day are diversified, and there is a spectacle to please every
spectator.”

“witho
 
 ___________________________
 
 to me precisely in the mood to commit some wild or extravagant
act.”

“perhaps i am; but one thing i have resolved on, and that is, to stop at
nothing to restore a poor devil to liberty, who has got into this scrape
solely from having served me. i should hate and despise myself as a
coward did i desert the brave fellow in his present extremity.”

“and what do you mean to do?”

“to surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who, at a signal
from me, will rush forward directly peppino is brought for execution,
and, by the assistance of their stilettos, drive back the guard, and
carry off the prisoner.”

“that seems to me as hazardous as uncertain, and convinces me that my
scheme is far better than yours.”

“and what is your excellency’s project?”

“just this. i will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres, that the
person receiving them shall obtain a respite till next year for peppino;
and during that year, another skilfully placed 1,000 piastres will
afford h
 
 ___________________________
 
ixed for the day after tomorrow, and that
you have but one day to work in.”

“and what of that? is not a day divided into twenty-four hours, each
hour into sixty minutes, and every minute sub-divided into sixty
seconds? now in 86,400 seconds very many things can be done.”

“and how shall i know whether your excellency has succeeded or not.”

“oh, that is very easily arranged. i have engaged the three lower
windows at the café rospoli; should i have obtained the requisite pardon
for peppino, the two outside windows will be hung with yellow damasks,
and the centre with white, having a large cross in red marked on it.”

“and whom will you employ to carry the reprieve to the officer directing
the execution?”

“send one of your men, disguised as a penitent friar, and i will give it
to him. his dress will procure him the means of approaching the scaffold
itself, and he will deliver the official order to the officer, who, in
his turn, will hand it to the executioner; in the mean
 
 ___________________________
 
time, it will be
as well to acquaint peppino with what we have determined on, if it be
only to prevent his dying of fear or losing his senses, because in
either case a very useless expense will have been incurred.”

“your excellency,” said the man, “you are fully persuaded of my entire
devotion to you, are you not?”

“nay, i flatter myself that there can be no doubt of it,” replied the
cavalier in the cloak.

“well, then, only fulfil your promise of rescuing peppino, and
henceforward you shall receive not only devotion, but the most absolute
obedience from myself and those under me that one human being can render
to another.”

“have a care how far you pledge yourself, my good friend, for i may
remind you of your promise at some, perhaps, not very distant period,
when i, in my turn, may require your aid and influence.”

“let that day come sooner or later, your excellency will find me what i
have found you in this my heavy trouble; and if from the ot
 
 ___________________________
 
sier than to comply with your excellency’s wish,” said
the landlord, opening the door of the chamber; “i have caused one to be
placed on the landing, close by your apartment.” then, taking the tablet
from the wall, he handed it to franz, who read as follows:

“‘the public is informed that on wednesday, february 23d, being the
first day of the carnival, executions will take place in the piazza del
popolo, by order of the tribunal of the rota, of two persons, named
andrea rondolo, and peppino, otherwise called rocca priori; the former
found guilty of the murder of a venerable and exemplary priest, named
don césar torlini, canon of the church of st. john lateran; and the
latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrocious and sanguinary
bandit, luigi vampa, and his band. the first-named malefactor will be
_mazzolato_, the second culprit _decapitato_. the prayers of all good
christians are entreated for these unfortunate men, that it may please
god to awaken them to a sense of t
 
 ___________________________
 
all; on the contrary, you will give me great pleasure. you will,
one or other of you, perhaps both, return it to me at paris. m.
bertuccio, lay covers for three.” he then took franz’s tablets out of
his hand. “‘we announce,’ he read, in the same tone with which he would
have read a newspaper, ‘that today, the 23d of february, will be
executed andrea rondolo, guilty of murder on the person of the respected
and venerated don césar torlini, canon of the church of st. john
lateran, and peppino, called rocca priori, convicted of complicity with
the detestable bandit luigi vampa, and the men of his band.’ hum! ‘the
first will be _mazzolato_, the second _decapitato_.’ yes,” continued the
count, “it was at first arranged in this way; but i think since
yesterday some change has taken place in the order of the ceremony.”

“really?” said franz.

“yes, i passed the evening at the cardinal rospigliosi’s, and there
mention was made of something like a pardon for one of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
two men.”

“for andrea rondolo?” asked franz.

“no,” replied the count, carelessly; “for the other (he glanced at the
tablets as if to recall the name), for peppino, called rocca priori. you
are thus deprived of seeing a man guillotined; but the _mazzuola_ still
remains, which is a very curious punishment when seen for the first
time, and even the second, while the other, as you must know, is very
simple. the _mandaïa_ [*] never fails, never trembles, never strikes
thirty times ineffectually, like the soldier who beheaded the count of
chalais, and to whose tender mercy richelieu had doubtless recommended
the sufferer. ah,” added the count, in a contempt
 
 ___________________________
 
way; and he who pours out
vengeance runs the risk of tasting a bitter draught.”

“yes, if he be poor and inexperienced, not if he be rich and skilful;
besides, the worst that could happen to him would be the punishment of
which we have already spoken, and which the philanthropic french
revolution has substituted for being torn to pieces by horses or broken
on the wheel. what matters this punishment, as long as he is avenged? on
my word, i almost regret that in all probability this miserable peppino
will not be beheaded, as you might have had an opportunity then of
seeing how short a time the punishment lasts, and whether it is worth
even mentioning; but, really this is a most singular conversation for
the carnival, gentlemen; how did it arise? ah, i recollect, you asked
for a place at my window; you shall have it; but let us first sit down
to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that breakfast is
ready.” as he spoke, a servant opened one of the four doors of the
apartment, say
 
 ___________________________
 
for the eyes, and holding in their hands lighted
tapers, appeared first; the chief marched at the head.


behind the penitents came a man of vast stature and proportions. he was
naked, with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which
hung a large knife in a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a
heavy iron sledge-hammer. this man was the executioner. he had,
moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords. behind the executioner
came, in the order in which they were to die, first peppino and then
andrea. each was accompanied by two priests. neither had his eyes
bandaged. peppino walked with a firm step, doubtless aware of what
awaited him. andrea was supported by two priests. each of them, from
time to time, kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them. at this
sight alone franz felt his legs tremble under him. he looked at albert--
he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his cigar,
although he had not half smoked it. the count alone seemed unmoved--nay,
mo
 
 ___________________________
 
re, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale cheeks. his
nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey, and
his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and sharp like
those of a jackal. and yet his features wore an expression of smiling
tenderness, such as franz had never before witnessed in them; his black
eyes especially were full of kindness and pity. however, the two
culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces became visible.
peppino was a handsome young man of four or five and twenty, bronzed by
the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed on the watch to see on
which side his liberator would appear. andrea was short and fat; his
visage, marked with brutal cruelty, did not indicate age; he might be
thirty. in prison he had suffered his beard to grow; his head fell on
his shoulder, his legs bent beneath him, and his movements were
apparently automatic and unconscious.


* dr. guillotin got the idea of his famous machine f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom witnessing an
execution in italy.

“i thought,” said franz to the count, “that you told me there would be
but one execution.”

“i told you true,” replied he coldly.

“and yet here are two culprits.”

“yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many
years to live.”

“if the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose.”

“and see, here it is,” said the count. at the moment when peppino
reached the foot of the _mandaïa_, a priest arrived in some haste,
forced his way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the
brotherhood, gave him a folded paper. the piercing eye of peppino had
noticed all. the chief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his
hand, “heaven be praised, and his holiness also,” said he in a loud
voice; “here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!”

“a pardon!” cried the people with one voice--“a pardon!” at this cry
andrea raised 
 
 ___________________________
 
his head. “pardon for whom?” cried he.

peppino remained breathless. “a pardon for peppino, called rocca
priori,” said the principal friar. and he passed the paper to the
officer commanding the carbineers, who read and returned it to him.

“for peppino!” cried andrea, who seemed roused from the torpor in which
he had been plunged. “why for him and not for me? we ought to die
together. i was promised he should die with me. you have no right to put
me to death alone. i will not die alone--i will not!” and he broke from
the priests struggling and raving like a wild beast, and striving
desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. the executioner
made a sign, and his two assistants leaped from the scaffold and seized
him. “what is 
 
 ___________________________
 
the count, “what has, then,
happened?”

“nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the carnival has
commenced. make haste and dress yourself.”

“in fact,” said franz, “this horrible scene has passed away like a
dream.”

“it is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you.”

“yes, that i have suffered; but the culprit?”

“that is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, while you have
awakened; and who knows which of you is the most fortunate?”

“but peppino--what has become of him?”

“peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are happy in
proportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see that the general
attention was directed towards his companion. he profited by this
distraction to slip away among the crowd, without even thanking the
worthy priests who accompanied him. decidedly man is an ungrateful and
egotistical animal. but dress yourself; see, m. de morcerf sets you the
example.” albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he. “the postscript is explicit.”

“i think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you could
find a way of simplifying the negotiation,” said franz.

“how so?” returned the count, with surprise.

“if we were to go together to luigi vampa, i am sure he would not refuse
you albert’s freedom.”

“what influence can i possibly have over a bandit?”

“have you not just rendered him a service that can never be forgotten?”

“what is that?”

“have you not saved peppino’s life?”

“well, well,” said the count, “who told you that?”

“no matter; i know it.” the count knit his brows, and remained silent an
instant.

“and if i went to seek vampa, would you accompany me?”

“if my society would not be disagreeable.”

“be it so. it is a lovely night, and a walk without rome will do us both
good.”

“shall i take any arms?”

“for what purpose?”

“any money?”

“it is useless. where is the man who brought the letter?”

“in the
 
 ___________________________
 
ount went to the window of the apartment that
looked on to the street, and whistled in a peculiar manner. the man in
the mantle quitted the wall, and advanced into the middle of the street.
“_salite!_” said the count, in the same tone in which he would have
given an order to his servant. the messenger obeyed without the least
hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and, mounting the steps at a
bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwards he was at the door of
the room.

“ah, it is you, peppino,” said the count. but peppino, instead of
answering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count’s hand, and
covered it with kisses. “ah,” said the count, “you have, then, not
forgotten that i saved your life; that is strange, for it is a week
ago.”


“no, excellency; and never shall i forget it,” returned peppino, with an
accent of profound gratitude.

“never? that is a long time; but it is something that you believe so.
rise and answer.” peppino glanced anxiously at franz
 
 ___________________________
 
. “oh, you may speak
before his excellency,” said he; “he is one of my friends. you allow me
to give you this title?” continued the count in french, “it is necessary
to excite this man’s confidence.”

“you can speak before me,” said franz; “i am a friend of the count’s.”

“good!” returned peppino. “i am ready to answer any questions your
excellency may address to me.”

“how did the viscount albert fall into luigi’s hands?”

“excellency, the frenchman’s carriage passed several times the one in
which was teresa.”

“the chief’s mistress?”

“yes. the frenchman threw her a bouquet; teresa returned it--all this
with the consent of the chief, who was in the carriage.”

“what?” cried franz, “was luigi vampa in the carriage with the roman
peasants?”

“it was h
 
 ___________________________
 
e who drove, disguised as the coachman,” replied peppino.

“well?” said the count.

“well, then, the frenchman took off his mask; teresa, with the chief’s
consent, did the same. the frenchman asked for a rendezvous; teresa gave
him one--only, instead of teresa, it was beppo who was on the steps of
the church of san giacomo.”

“what!” exclaimed franz, “the peasant girl who snatched his _mocoletto_
from him----”

“was a lad of fifteen,” replied peppino. “but it was no disgrace to your
friend to have been deceived; beppo has taken in plenty of others.”

“and beppo led him outside the walls?” said the count.

“exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the via macello. beppo
got in, inviting the frenchman to follow him, and he did not wait to be
asked twice. he gallantly offered the right-hand seat to beppo, and sat
by him. beppo told him he was going to take him to a villa a league from
rome; the frenchman assured him he would 
 
 ___________________________
 
he noise of wheels was
heard, and the carriage stopped at the door. the count took out his
watch. “half-past twelve,” he said. “we might start at five o’clock and
be in time, but the delay may cause your friend to pass an uneasy night,
and therefore we had better go with all speed to extricate him from the
hands of the infidels. are you still resolved to accompany me?”

“more determined than ever.”

“well, then, come along.”

franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by peppino. at the door
they found the carriage. ali was on the box, in whom franz recognized
the dumb slave of the grotto of monte cristo. franz and the count got
into the carriage. peppino placed himself beside ali, and they set off
at a rapid pace. ali had received his instructions, and went down the
corso, crossed the campo vaccino, went up the strada san gregorio, and
reached the gates of st. sebastian. then the porter raised some
difficulties, but the count of monte cristo produced a permit from the
 
 ___________________________
 
of rome, allowing him to leave or enter the city at any hour of
the day or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a
louis for his trouble, and they went on their way.

the road which the carriage now traversed was the ancient appian way,
and bordered with tombs. from time to time, by the light of the moon,
which began to rise, franz imagined that he saw something like a
sentinel appear at various points among the ruins, and suddenly retreat
into the darkness on a signal from peppino.

a short time before they reached the baths of caracalla the carriage
stopped, peppino opened the door, and the count and franz alighted.

“in ten minutes,” said the count to his companion, “we shall be there.”

he then took peppino aside, gave him an order in a low voice, and
peppino went away, taking with him a torch, brought with them in the
carriage. five minutes elapsed, during which franz saw the shepherd
going along a narrow path that led over the irregular and broken surface
of
 
 ___________________________
 
nally he disappeared in the midst of the tall red
herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of an enormous lion.

“now,” said the count, “let us follow him.”

franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the same path,
which, at the distance of a hundred paces, led them over a declivity to
the bottom of a small valley. they then perceived two men conversing in
the obscurity.

“ought we to go on?” asked franz of the count; “or shall we wait
awhile?”

“let us go on; peppino will have warned the sentry of our coming.” one
of the two men was peppino, and the other a bandit on the lookout. franz
and the count advanced, and the bandit saluted them. “your excellency,”
 said peppino, addressing the count, “if you will follow me, the opening
of the catacombs is close at hand.”

“go on, then,” replied the count. they came to an opening behind a clump
of bushes and in the midst of a pile of rocks, by which a man could
scarcely pass. peppino glided first into 
 
 ___________________________
 
this crevice; after they got
along a few paces the passage widened. peppino passed, lighted his
torch, and turned to see if they came after him. the count first reached
an open space and franz followed him closely. the passageway sloped in a
gentle descent, enlarging as they proceeded; still franz and the count
were compelled to advance in a stooping posture, and were scarcely able
to proceed abreast of one another. they went on a hundred and fifty
paces in this way, and then were stopped by, “who comes there?” at the
same time they saw the reflection of a torch on
 
 ___________________________
 
 a carbine barrel.

“a friend!” responded peppino; and, advancing alone towards the sentry,
he said a few words to him in a low tone; and then he, like the first,
saluted the nocturnal visitors, making a sign that they might proceed.

behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps. franz and the
count descended these, and found themselves in a mortuary chamber. five
corridors diverged like the rays of a star, and the walls, dug into
niches, which were arranged one above the other in the shape of coffins,
showed that they were at last in
 
 ___________________________
 
 the catacombs. down one of the
corridors, whose extent it was impossible to determine, rays of light
were visible. the count laid his hand on franz’s shoulder.

“would you like to see a camp of bandits in repose?” he inquired.

“exceedingly,” replied franz.

“come with me, then. peppino, put out the torch.” peppino obeyed, and
franz and the count were in utter darkness, except that fifty paces in
advance of them a reddish glare, more evident since peppino had put out
his torch, was visible along the wall.

they advanced silently, the count guiding franz as if he had the
singular faculty of seeing in the dark. franz himself, however, saw his
way more plainly in proportion as he went on towards the light, which
served in some manner as a guide. three arcades were before them, and
the middle one was used as a door. these arcades opened on one side into
the corridor where the count and franz were, and on the other into a
large square chamber, entire
 
 ___________________________
 
ed like a gentleman.”

“you are decidedly right, and we may reach the palazzo by two o’clock.
signor luigi,” continued albert, “is there any formality to fulfil
before i take leave of your excellency?”

“none, sir,” replied the bandit, “you are as free as air.”

“well, then, a happy and merry life to you. come, gentlemen, come.”

and albert, followed by franz and the count, descended the staircase,
crossed the square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.

“peppino,” said the brigand chief, “give me the torch.”

“what are you going to do?” inquired the count.

“i will show you the way back myself,” said the captain; “that is the
least honor that i can render to your excellency.” and taking the
lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he preceded his guests,
not as a servant who performs an act of civility, but like a king who
precedes ambassadors. on reaching the door, he bowed. “and now, your
excellency,” added he, “allow me 
 
 ___________________________
 
tto of the _thousand and one nights_. he recounted, with
circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of the supper, the
hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his awakening, there
remained no proof or trace of all these events, save the small yacht,
seen in the distant horizon driving under full sail toward porto-
vecchio. then he detailed the conversation overheard by him at the
colosseum, between the count and vampa, in which the count had promised
to obtain the release of the bandit peppino,--an engagement which, as
our readers are aware, he most faithfully fulfilled. at last he arrived
at the adventure of the preceding night, and the embarrassment in which
he found himself placed by not having sufficient cash by six or seven
hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and finally of his
application to the count and the picturesque and satisfactory result
that followed. albert listened with the most profound attention. “well,”
 said he, when franz had concluded, “what do y
 
 ___________________________
 
 so much simplicity that it was evident he spoke the truth, or that
he was mad. however, the sight of the emerald made them naturally
incline to the former belief. “and what did these two sovereigns give
you in exchange for these magnificent presents?” asked debray.

“the sultan, the liberty of a woman,” replied the count; “the pope, the
life of a man; so that once in my life i have been as powerful as if
heaven had brought me into the world on the steps of a throne.”

“and it was peppino you saved, was it not?” cried morcerf; “it was for
him that you obtained pardon?”

“perhaps,” returned the count, smiling.

“my dear count, you have no idea what pleasure it gives me to hear you
speak thus,” said morcerf. “i had announced you beforehand to my friends
as an enchanter of the _arabian nights_, a wizard of the middle ages;
but the parisians are so subtle in paradoxes that they mistake for
caprices of the imagination the most incontestable truths, when these
truths d
 
 ___________________________
 
, maximilian.”

“when do you leave?”

“immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour i shall be far from you.
will you accompany me to the harbor, maximilian?”


“i am entirely yours, count.” morrel accompanied the count to the
harbor. the white steam was ascending like a plume of feathers from the
black chimney. the steamer soon disappeared, and in an hour afterwards,
as the count had said, was scarcely distinguishable in the horizon
amidst the fogs of the night.



chapter 114. peppino

at the same time that the steamer disappeared behind cape morgion, a man
travelling post on the road from florence to rome had just passed the
little town of aquapendente. he was travelling fast enough to cover a
great deal of ground without exciting suspicion. this man was dressed in
a greatcoat, or rather a surtout, a little worse for the journey, but
which exhibited the ribbon of the legion of honor still fresh and
brilliant, a decoration which also ornamented the under coat. he might
be re
 
 ___________________________
 
nce?” said the attendant.

“baron danglars.”

“follow me,” said the man. a door opened, through which the attendant
and the baron disappeared. the man who had followed danglars sat down on
a bench. the clerk continued to write for the next five minutes; the man
preserved profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. then the
pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; he raised his head, and
appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy,--“ah, ha,” he said, “here you
are, peppino!”

“yes,” was the laconic reply. “you have found out that there is
something worth having about this large gentleman?”

“there is no great merit due to me, for we were informed of it.”

“you know his business here, then.”

“_pardieu_, he has come to draw, but i don’t know how much!”

“you will know presently, my friend.”

“very well, only do not give me false information as you did the other
day.”


“what do you mean?--of whom do you speak? was it the englishma
 
 ___________________________
 
n who
carried off 3,000 crowns from here the other day?”

“no; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. i mean the russian
prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we only found 22,000.”

“you must have searched badly.”

“luigi vampa himself searched.”

“indeed? but you must let me make my observations, or the frenchman will
transact his business without my knowing the sum.” peppino nodded, and
taking a rosary from his pocket began to mutter a few prayers while the
clerk disappeared through the same door by which danglars and the
attendant had gone out. at the expiration of ten minutes the clerk
returned with a beaming countenance. “well?” asked peppino of his
friend.

“joy, joy--the sum is large!”

“five or six millions, is it not?”

“yes, you know the amount.”

“on the receipt of the count of monte cristo?”

“why, how came you to be so well acquaint
 
 ___________________________
 
ed with all this?”

“i told you we were informed beforehand.”

“then why do you apply to me?”

“that i may be sure i have the right man.”

“yes, it is indeed he. five millions--a pretty sum, eh, peppino?”

“hush--here is our man!” the clerk seized his pen, and peppino his
beads; one was writing and the other praying when the door opened.
danglars looked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the
door. peppino followed danglars.

according to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door. the
guide held the door open. guides are useful people, who will turn their
hands to anything. danglars leaped into the carriage like a young man of
twenty. the _cicerone_ reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of
the coachman. peppino mounted the seat behind.

“will your excellency visit saint peter’s?” asked the _cicerone_.

“i did not come to rome to see,” said danglars aloud; then he add
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
softly, with an avaricious smile, “i came to touch!” and he rapped his
pocket-book, in which he had just placed a letter.

“then your excellency is going----”

“to the hotel.”


“casa pastrini!” said the _cicerone_ to the coachman, and the carriage
drove rapidly on. ten minutes afterwards the baron entered his
apartment, and peppino stationed himself on the bench outside the door
of the hotel, after having whispered something in the ear of one of the
descendants of marius and the gracchi whom we noticed at the beginning
of the chapter, who immediately ran down the road leading to the capitol
at his fullest speed. danglars was tired and sleepy; he therefore went
to bed, placing his pocketbook under his pillow. peppino had a little
spare time, so he had a game of _morra_ with the facchini, lost three
crowns, and then to cons
 
 ___________________________
 
elf between a hillock and a clump of high weeds;
three men, standing silent, formed a triangle, of which he was the
centre. he wished to speak, but his tongue refused to move. “_avanti!_”
 said the same sharp and imperative voice.

this time danglars had double reason to understand, for if the word and
gesture had not explained the speaker’s meaning, it was clearly
expressed by the man walking behind him, who pushed him so rudely that
he struck against the guide. this guide was our friend peppino, who
dashed into the thicket of high weeds, through a path which none but
lizards or polecats could have imagined to be an open road. peppino
stopped before a pit overhung by thick hedges; the pit, half open,
afforded a passage to the young man, who disappeared like the evil
spirits in the fairy tales. the voice and gesture of the man who
followed danglars ordered him to do the same. there was no longer any
doubt, the bankrupt was in the hands of roman banditti. danglars
acquitted himself like 
 
 ___________________________
 
a man placed between two dangerous positions, and
who is rendered brave by fear. notwithstanding his large stomach,
certainly not intended to penetrate the fissures of the campagna, he
slid down like peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet. as he
touched the ground, he opened his eyes.

the path was wide, but dark. peppino, who cared little for being
recognized now that he was in his own territories, struck a light and
lit a torch. two other men descended after danglars forming the
rearguard, and pushing danglars whenever he happened to stop, they came
by a gentle declivity to the intersection of two corridors. the walls
were hollowed out in sepulchres, one above the other, and which seemed
in contrast with the white stones to open their large dark eyes, like
those which we see on the faces of the dead. a sentine
 
 ___________________________
 
l struck the rings
of his carbine against his left hand. “who comes there?” he cried.


“a friend, a friend!” said peppino; “but where is the captain?”

“there,” said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to a spacious
crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights from which shone into the
passage through the large arched openings. “fine spoil, captain, fine
spoil!” said peppino in italian, and taking danglars by the collar of
his coat he dragged him to an opening resembling a door, through which
they entered the apartment which the captain appeared to have made his
dwelling-place.

“is this the man?” asked the captain, who was attentively reading
plutarch’s _life of alexander_.

“himself, captain--himself.”

“very well, show him to me.”

at this rather impertinent order, peppino raised his torch to the face
of danglars, who hastily withdrew that he might
 
 ___________________________
 
thout answering,
went on with his dinner. danglars’ feelings were hurt, and not wishing
to put himself under obligations to the brute, the banker threw himself
down again on his goat-skin and did not breathe another word.

four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another bandit.
danglars, who really began to experience sundry gnawings at the stomach,
arose softly, again applied his eye to the crack of the door, and
recognized the intelligent countenance of his guide. it was, indeed,
peppino who was preparing to mount guard as comfortably as possible by
seating himself opposite to the door, and placing between his legs an
earthen pan, containing chick-peas stewed with bacon. near the pan he
also placed a pretty little basket of villetri grapes and a flask of
orvieto. peppino was decidedly an epicure. danglars watched these
preparations and his mouth watered. “come,” he said to himself, “let me
try if he will be more tractable than the other;” and he tapped gently
at the doo
 
 ___________________________
 
r. “_on y va_,” (coming) exclaimed peppino, who from
frequenting the house of signor pastrini understood french perfectly in
all its idioms.

danglars immediately recognized him as the man who had called out in
such a furious manner, “put in your head!” but this was not the time for
recrimination, so he assumed his most agreeable manner and said with a
gracious smile,--“excuse me, sir, but are they not going to give me any
dinner?”

“does your excellency happen to be hungry?”

“happen to be hungry,--that’s pretty good, w
 
 ___________________________
 
hen i haven’t eaten for
twenty-four hours!” muttered danglars. then he added aloud, “yes, sir, i
am hungry--very hungry.”

“what would your excellency like?” and peppino placed his pan on the
ground, so that the steam rose directly under the nostrils of danglars.
“give your orders.”

“have you kitchens here?”

“kitchens?--of course--complete ones.”

“and cooks?”

“excellent!”

“well, a fowl, fish, game,--it signifies little, so that i eat.”

“as your excellency pleases. you mentioned a fowl, i think?”

“yes, a fowl.” peppino, turning around, shouted, “a fowl for his
excellency!” his voice yet echoed in the archway when a hand
 
 ___________________________
 
some,
graceful, and half-naked young man appeared, bearing a fowl in a silver
dish on his head, without the assistance of his hands. “i could almost
believe myself at the café de paris,” murmured danglars.

“here, your excellency,” said peppino, taking the fowl from the young
bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table, which with the stool and
the goat-skin bed formed the entire furniture of the cell. danglars
asked for a knife and fork. “here, excellency,” said peppino, offering
him a little blunt knife and a boxwood fork. danglars took the knife in
one hand and the fork in the other, and was about to cut up the fowl.
“pardon me, excellency,” said peppino, placing his hand on the banker’s
shoulder; “people pay here before they eat. they might not be satisfied,
and----”

“ah, ha,” thought danglars, “this is not so much like paris, except that
i shall probably be skinned! never mind, i’ll fix that all right. i have
always heard how cheap poult
 
 ___________________________
 
ry is in italy; i should think a fowl is
worth about twelve sous at rome.--there,” he said, throwing a louis
down. peppino picked up the louis, and danglars again prepared to carve
the fowl. “stay a moment, your excellency,” said peppino, rising; “you
still owe me something.”

“i said they would skin me,” thought danglars; but resolving to resist
the extortion, he said, “come, how much do i owe you for this fowl?”

“your excellency has given me a louis on account.”

“a louis on account for a fowl?”

“certainly; and your excellency now owes me 4,999 louis.” danglars
opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic joke. “come, come,
this is very droll--very amusing--i allow; but, as i am very hungry,
p
 
 ___________________________
 
ray allow me to eat. stay, here is another louis for you.”

“then that will make only 4,998 louis more,” said peppino with the same
indifference. “i shall get them all in time.”

“oh, as for that,” said danglars, angry at this prolongation of the
jest,--“as for that you won’t get them at all. go to the devil! you do
not know with whom you have to deal!”

peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl. danglars
threw himself upon his goat-skin, and peppino, reclosing the door, again
began eating his peas and bacon. though danglars could not see peppino,
the noise of his teeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. he was
certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man. “brute!” said
danglars. peppino pretended not to hear him, and without even turning
his head continued to eat slowly. danglars’ stomach felt so empty, that
it seemed as if it would be impossible ever to fill it again; still he
had patience for another half-hour, which
 
 ___________________________
 
 appeared to him like a
century. he again arose and went to the door. “come, sir, do not keep me
starving here any longer, but tell me what they want.”

“nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you want. give
your orders, and we will execute them.”

“then open the door directly.” peppino obeyed. “now look here, i want
something to eat! to eat--do you hear?”

“are you hungry?”

“come, you understand me.”

“what would your excellency like to eat?”

“a piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in this
accursed place.”

“bread? very well. hallo, there, some bread!” he called. the youth
brought a small loaf. “how much?” asked danglars.

“four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis,” said peppino; “you
have paid two louis in adva
 
 ___________________________
 
nce.”


“what? one hundred thousand francs for a loaf?”

“one hundred thousand francs,” repeated peppino.

“but you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!”

“we have a fixed price for all our provisions. it signifies nothing
whether you eat much or little--whether you have ten dishes or one--it
is always the same price.”

“what, still keeping up this silly jest? my dear fellow, it is perfectly
ridiculous--stupid! you had better tell me at once that you intend
starving me to death.”

“oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit suicide. pay
and eat.”

“and what am i 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs, enraged. “do you
suppose i carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?”

“your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will be fifty
fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for the 50,000.”

danglars shuddered. the bandage fell from his eyes, and he understood
the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid as he had done just
before. “come,” he said, “if i pay you the 100,000 francs, will you be
satisfied, and allow me to eat at my ease?”

“certainly,” said peppino.

“but how can i pay them?”

“oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with messrs. thomson &
french, via dei banchi, rome; give me a draft for 4,998 louis on these
gentlemen, and our banker shall take it.” danglars thought it as well to
comply with a good grace, so he took the pen, ink, and paper peppino
offered him, wrote the draft, and signed it. “here,” he said, “here is a
draft at sight.”

“and here is your fowl.” danglars sighed while he carved the fowl; it
appeare
 
 ___________________________
 
d very thin for the price it had cost. as for peppino, he
examined the paper attentively, put it into his pocket, and continued
eating his peas.



chapter 116. the pardon

the next day danglars was again hungry; certainly the air of that
dungeon was very provocative of appetite. the prisoner expected that he
would be at no expense that day, for like an economical man he had
concealed half of his fowl and a piece of the bread in the corner of his
cell. but he had no sooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten
that. he struggled against his
 
 ___________________________
 
 thirst till his tongue clave to the roof
of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out. the
sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. he thought it would be
better to transact business with his old acquaintance, so he sent for
peppino. “here i am, your excellency,” said peppino, with an eagerness
which danglars thought favorable to him. “what do you want?”

“something to drink.”

“your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near rome.”

“then give me water,” cried danglars, endeavoring to parry the blow.

“oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,--there has
been such a drought.”

“come,” thought danglars, “it is the same old story.” and while he
smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, he felt his
temp
 
 ___________________________
 
les get moist with perspiration.

“come, my friend,” said danglars, seeing that he made no impression on
peppino, “you will not refuse me a glass of wine?”

“i have already told you that we do not sell at retail.”

“well, then, let me have a bottle of the least expensive.”

“they are all the same price.”

“and what is that?”

“twenty-five thousand francs a bottle.”

“tell me,” cried danglars, in a tone whose bitterness harpagon [*] alone
has been capable of revealing--“tell me that you wish to despoil me of
all; it will be sooner over than devouring me piecemeal.”


* the m
 
 ___________________________
 
ally he prayed that this sum might be
preserved to him, and as he prayed he wept. three days passed thus,
during which his prayers were frequent, if not heartfelt. sometimes he
was delirious, and fancied he saw an old man stretched on a pallet; he,
also, was dying of hunger.

on the fourth, he was no longer a man, but a living corpse. he had
picked up every crumb that had been left from his former meals, and was
beginning to eat the matting which covered the floor of his cell. then
he entreated peppino, as he would a guardian angel, to give him food; he
offered him 1,000 francs for a mouthful of bread. but peppino did not
answer. on the fifth day he dragged himself to the door of the cell.

“are you not a christian?” he said, falling on his knees. “do you wish
to assassinate a man who, in the eyes of heaven, is a brother? oh, my
former friends, my former friends!” he murmured, and fell with his face
to the ground. then rising in despair, he exclaimed, “the chief, the
chief!”

“h