 be able to
hear every word they uttered. again the abbé had been obliged to swallow
a draught of water to calm the emotions that threatened to overpower
him. when he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, “it appears,
then, that the miserable old man you were telling me of was forsaken by
everyone. surely, had not such been the case, he would not have perished
by so dreadful a death.”

“why, he was not altogether forsaken,” continued caderousse, “for
mercédès the catalan and monsieur morrel were very kind to him; but
somehow the poor old man had contracted a profound hatred for fernand--
the very person,” added caderousse with a bitter smile, “that you named
just now as being one of dantès’ faithful and attached friends.”

“and was he not so?” asked the abbé.

“gaspard, gaspard!” murmured the woman, from her seat on the stairs,
“mind what you are saying!” caderousse made no reply to these words,
though evidently irritated and annoyed by the interruption, but,
 
 ___________________________
 
it all before me this moment.”

“was it not his betrothal feast?”

“it was and the feast that began so gayly had a very sorrowful ending; a
police commissary, followed by four soldiers, entered, and dantès was
arrested.”

“yes, and up to this point i know all,” said the priest. “dantès himself
only knew that which personally concerned him, for he never beheld again
the five persons i have named to you, or heard mention of anyone of
them.”

“well, when dantès was arrested, monsieur morrel hastened to obtain the
particulars, and they were very sad. the old man returned alone to his
home, folded up his wedding suit with tears in his eyes, and paced up
and down his chamber the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for
i was underneath him and heard him walking the whole night; and for
myself, i assure you i could not sleep either, for the grief of the poor
father gave me great uneasiness, and every step he took went to my heart
as really as if his foot had pressed against my b
 
 ___________________________
 
ou find this purse?”

“in a house in the allées de meillan, no. 15, on the corner of a
mantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor.”

“but,” cried morrel, “this purse is not yours!” julie handed to her
father the letter she had received in the morning.

“and did you go alone?” asked morrel, after he had read it.

“emmanuel accompanied me, father. he was to have waited for me at the
corner of the rue de musée, but, strange to say, he was not there when i
returned.”

“monsieur morrel!” exclaimed a voice on the stairs.--“monsieur morrel!”

“it is his voice!” said julie. at this moment emmanuel entered, his
countenance full of animation and joy. “the _pharaon_!” he cried; “the
_pharaon_!”

“what--what--the _pharaon_! are you mad, emmanuel? you know the vessel
is lost.”

“the _pharaon_, sir--they signal the _pharaon_! the _pharaon_ is
entering the harbor!” morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was
failing him; his understanding weakened by such 
 
 ___________________________
 
morrel lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of
valentine and himself--an intervention which had saved them from
despair. morrel then cast on the invalid an interrogative look as to the
new favor which he designed to bestow on him. valentine was sitting at a
little distance from them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should
be obliged to speak. noirtier fixed his eyes on her. “am i to say what
you told me?” asked valentine. noirtier made a sign that she was to do
so.

“monsieur morrel,” said valentine to the young man, who was regarding
her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, m. noirtier, had a
thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; and now, he has
sent for you, that i may repeat them to you. i will repeat them, then;
and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, i will be faithful to the
trust, and will not alter a word of his intentions.”

“oh, i am listening with the greatest impatience,” replied the young
man; “speak, i beg of 