as opened; a lady entered to whom franz had been
introduced in paris, where indeed, he had imagined she still was. the
quick eye of albert caught the involuntary start with which his friend
beheld the new arrival, and, turning to him, he said hastily, “do you
know the woman who has just entered that box?”

“yes; what do you think of her?”

“oh, she is perfectly lovely--what a complexion! and such magnificent
hair! is she french?”

“no; a venetian.”

“and her name is----”

“countess g----.”

“ah, i know her by name!” exclaimed albert; “she is said to possess as
much wit and cleverness as beauty. i was to have been presented to her
when i met her at madame villefort’s ball.”

“shall i assist you in repairing your negligence?” asked franz.

“my dear fellow, are you really on such good terms with her as to
venture to take me to her box?”

“why, i have only had the honor of being in her society and conversing
with her three or four times in my life; but you k
 
 ___________________________
 
he least regard to them, but on the contrary ate like a man who
for the last four or five months had been condemned to partake of
italian cookery--that is, the worst in the world. as for the count, he
just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil the duties of a host by
sitting down with his guests, and awaited their departure to be served
with some strange or more delicate food. this brought back to franz, in
spite of himself, the recollection of the terror with which the count
had inspired the countess g----, and her firm conviction that the man in
the opposite box was a vampire. at the end of the breakfast franz took
out his watch. “well,” said the count, “what are you doing?”

“you must excuse us, count,” returned franz, “but we have still much to
do.”

“what may that be?”

“we have no masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procure them.”

“do not concern yourself about that; we have, i think, a private room in
the piazza del popolo; i will have whatever costumes you
 
 ___________________________
 
hat the carriage was to remain at their lordships’ orders all
day, and they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
indiscretion.”


they resolved to profit by the count’s courtesy, and ordered the horses
to be harnessed, while they substituted evening dress for that which
they had on, and which was somewhat the worse for the numerous combats
they had sustained.

this precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
themselves in the count’s box. during the first act, the countess g----
entered. her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the
previous evening, so that she perceived franz and albert in the place of
the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion
to franz. her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them, that
franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and, availing
himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the italian
theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two friends went
to
 
 ___________________________
 
dency a strong mind always acquires over a mind less
domineering. he thought several times of the project the count had of
visiting paris; and he had no doubt but that, with his eccentric
character, his characteristic face, and his colossal fortune, he would
produce a great effect there. and yet he did not wish to be at paris
when the count was there.

the evening passed as evenings mostly pass at italian theatres; that is,
not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing. the
countess g---- wished to revive the subject of the count, but franz
announced he had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of
albert’s demonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of
the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days. as
similar intrigues are not uncommon in italy, if we may credit
travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
congratulated albert on his success. they promised, upon separating, to
meet at the duke of bracciano’
 
 ___________________________
 
ft him at the
moment they were about to extinguish the _moccoli_, and that he had lost
sight of him in the via macello.

“then he has not returned?” said the duke.

“i waited for him until this hour,” replied franz.

“and do you know whither he went?”

“no, not precisely; however, i think it was something very like a
rendezvous.”

“_diavolo!_” said the duke, “this is a bad day, or rather a bad night,
to be out late; is it not, countess!” these words were addressed to the
countess g----, who had just arrived, and was leaning on the arm of
signor torlonia, the duke’s brother.

“i think, on the contrary, that it is a charming night,” replied the
countess, “and those who are here will complain of but one thing--its
too rapid flight.”

“i am not speaking,” said the duke with a smile, “of the persons who are
here; the men run no other danger than that of falling in love with you,
and the women of falling ill of jealousy at seeing you so lovely; i
meant persons who
 
 ___________________________
 
 a kind of admiration; he was not insensible to
such a proof of courage.

“you are right, your excellency,” he said; “this must be one of your
friends.” then going to albert, he touched him on the shoulder, saying,
“will your excellency please to awaken?”

albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and opened his eyes.
“oh,” said he, “is it you, captain? you should have allowed me to sleep.
i had such a delightful dream. i was dancing the galop at torlonia’s
with the countess g----.” then he drew his watch from his pocket, that
he might see how time sped.

“half-past one only?” said he. “why the devil do you rouse me at this
hour?”

“to tell you that you are free, your excellency.”

“my dear fellow,” replied albert, with perfect ease of mind, “remember,
for the future, napoleon’s maxim, ‘never awaken me but for bad news;’ if
you had let me sleep on, i should have finished my galop, and have been
grateful to you all my life. so, then, they have 
 
 ___________________________
 
e way; everyone has not black slaves, a
princely retinue, an arsenal of weapons that would do credit to an
arabian fortress, horses that cost six thousand francs apiece, and greek
mistresses.”

“have you seen the greek mistress?”

“i have both seen and heard her. i saw her at the theatre, and heard her
one morning when i breakfasted with the count.”

“he eats, then?”

“yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating.”

“he must be a vampire.”

“laugh, if you will; the countess g----, who knew lord ruthven, declared
that the count was a vampire.”

“ah, capital,” said beauchamp. “for a man not connected with newspapers,
here is the pendant to the famous sea-serpent of the _constitutionnel_.”

“wild eyes, the iris of which contracts or dilates at pleasure,” said
debray; “facial angle strongly developed, magnificent forehead, livid
complexion, black beard, sharp and white teeth, politeness
unexceptionable.”

“just so, lucien,” returned morcerf; “you h
 
 ___________________________
 
f
the absurdities of parisian fashion never to appear at the opera until
after the beginning of the performance, so that the first act is
generally played without the slightest attention being paid to it, that
part of the audience already assembled being too much occupied in
observing the fresh arrivals, while nothing is heard but the noise of
opening and shutting doors, and the buzz of conversation. “surely,” said
albert, as the door of a box on the first circle opened, “that must be
the countess g----.”

“and who is the countess g----?” inquired château-renaud.

“what a question! now, do you know, baron, i have a great mind to pick a
quarrel with you for asking it; as if all the world did not know who the
countess g---- was.”

“ah, to be sure,” replied château-renaud; “the lovely venetian, is it
not?”

“herself.” at this moment the countess perceived albert, and returned
his salutation with a smile. “you know her, it seems?” said château-
renaud.

“franz intr
 
 ___________________________
 
 to avail themselves of this permission. for an instant
the idea struck madame danglars that this eagerness on the part of the
young viscount arose from his impatience to join her party, and she
whispered her expectations to her daughter, that albert was hurrying to
pay his respects to them. mademoiselle eugénie, however, merely returned
a dissenting movement of the head, while, with a cold smile, she
directed the attention of her mother to an opposite box on the first
circle, in which sat the countess g----, and where morcerf had just made
his appearance. “so we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?” cried
the countess, extending her hand to him with all the warmth and
cordiality of an old acquaintance; “it was really very good of you to
recognize me so quickly, and still more so to bestow your first visit on
me.”

“be assured,” replied albert, “that if i had been aware of your arrival
in paris, and had known your address, i should have paid my respects to
you before this. allow
 
 ___________________________
 
e, i actually clapped my hands with
joy. imagine my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object i
met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink jacket! i
concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner of the winning horse
must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as i entered my apartments,
i beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize to the unknown horse and
rider. inside the cup was a small piece of paper, on which were written
these words--‘from lord ruthven to countess g----.’”

“precisely; i was sure of it,” said morcerf.

“sure of what?”

“that the owner of the horse was lord ruthven himself.”

“what lord ruthven do you mean?”

“why, our lord ruthven--the vampire of the salle argentina!”

“is it possible?” exclaimed the countess; “is he here in paris?”

“to be sure,--why not?”

“and you visit him?--meet him at your own house and elsewhere?”

“i assure you he is my most intimate friend, and m. de château-renaud
has also
 
 ___________________________
 
, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.”

“i admire all that is beautiful,” returned the young lady.

“what do you think of the count?” inquired debray; “he is not much
amiss, according to my ideas of good looks.”

“the count,” repeated eugénie, as though it had not occurred to her to
observe him sooner; “the count?--oh, he is so dreadfully pale.”

“i quite agree with you,” said morcerf; “and the secret of that very
pallor is what we want to find out. the countess g---- insists upon it
that he is a vampire.”

“then the countess g---- has returned to paris, has she?” inquired the
baroness.

“is that she, mamma?” asked eugénie; “almost opposite to us, with that
profusion of beautiful light hair?”

“yes,” said madame danglars, “that is she. shall i tell you what you
ought to do, morcerf?”

“command me, madame.”

“well, then, you should go and bring your count of monte cristo to us.”

“what for?” asked eugénie.

“what for? w
 
 ___________________________
 
o you mean at rome?”

“i do.”

“ah, then, i suppose you heard haydée’s guzla; the poor exile frequently
beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the airs of her native
land.” morcerf did not pursue the subject, and monte cristo himself fell
into a silent reverie. the bell rang at this moment for the rising of
the curtain. “you will excuse my leaving you,” said the count, turning
in the direction of his box.

“what? are you going?”

“pray, say everything that is kind to countess g---- on the part of her
friend the vampire.”

“and what message shall i convey to the baroness!”

“that, with her permission, i shall do myself the honor of paying my
respects in the course of the evening.”

the third act had begun; and during its progress the count of morcerf,
according to his promise, made his appearance in the box of madame
danglars. the count of morcerf was not a person to excite either
interest or curiosity in a place of public amusement; his presence,
therefore, wa
 
 ___________________________
 
d monte cristo; “but the
particulars are still unknown to me. you shall relate them to me, my
child. they are, no doubt, both curious and interesting.”

“yes, yes; but let us go. i feel as though it would kill me to remain
long near that dreadful man.” so saying, haydée arose, and wrapping
herself in her burnouse of white cashmere embroidered with pearls and
coral, she hastily quitted the box at the moment when the curtain was
rising upon the fourth act.

“do you observe,” said the countess g---- to albert, who had returned to
her side, “that man does nothing like other people; he listens most
devoutly to the third act of _robert le diable_, and when the fourth
begins, takes his departure.”



chapter 54. a flurry in stocks

some days after this meeting, albert de morcerf visited the count of
monte cristo at his house in the champs-élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary re
 
 ___________________________
 
,
for during the last four days we have spoken of no one else.”

“you have talked of me?”

“yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!”

“then i am also a puzzle to your mother? i should have thought her too
reasonable to be led by imagination.”

“a problem, my dear count, for everyone--for my mother as well as
others; much studied, but not solved, you still remain an enigma, do not
fear. my mother is only astonished that you remain so long unsolved. i
believe, while the countess g---- takes you for lord ruthven, my mother
imagines you to be cagliostro or the count saint-germain. the first
opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion; it will be easy for
you, as you have the philosophy of the one and the wit of the other.”

“i thank you for the warning,” said the count; “i shall endeavor to be
prepared for all suppositions.”

“you will, then, come on saturday?”

“yes, since madame de morcerf invites me.”

“you are very kind.”

“will m. danglars b