eping wife and daughter, pressed
emmanuel’s hand with friendly warmth, and then going to his private room
on the second floor had sent for cocles. “then,” said the two women to
emmanuel, “we are indeed ruined.”

it was agreed in a brief council held among them, that julie should
write to her brother, who was in garrison at nîmes, to come to them as
speedily as possible. the poor women felt instinctively that they
required all their strength to support the blow that impended. besides,
maximilian morrel, though hardly two and twenty, had great influence
over his father. he was a strong-minded, upright young man. at the time
when he decided on his profession his father had no desire to choose for
him, but had consulted young maximilian’s taste. he had at once declared
for a military life, and had in consequence studied hard, passed
brilliantly through the polytechnic school, and left it as sub-
lieutenant of the 53d of the line. for a year he had held this rank, and
expected promotion on the 
 
 ___________________________
 
es, every millionaire is as noble as a bastard--that
is, he can be.”

“do not say that, debray,” returned beauchamp, laughing, “for here is
château-renaud, who, to cure you of your mania for paradoxes, will pass
the sword of renaud de montauban, his ancestor, through your body.”

“he will sully it then,” returned lucien; “for i am low--very low.”

“oh, heavens,” cried beauchamp, “the minister quotes béranger, what
shall we come to next?”

“m. de château-renaud--m. maximilian morrel,” said the servant,
announcing two fresh guests.

“now, then, to breakfast,” said beauchamp; “for, if i remember, you told
me you only expected two persons, albert.”

“morrel,” muttered albert--“morrel--who is he?” but before he had
finished, m. de château-renaud, a handsome young man of thirty,
gentleman all over,--that is, with the figure of a guiche and the wit of
a mortemart,--took albert’s hand. “my dear albert,” said he, “let me
introduce to you m. maximilian mo
 
 ___________________________
 
onsequence of the promise you did me
the honor to make, and whom i now present to you. they are the count of
château-renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whose
ancestors had a place at the round table; m. lucien debray, private
secretary to the minister of the interior; m. beauchamp, an editor of a
paper, and the terror of the french government, but of whom, in spite of
his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in italy, since his
paper is prohibited there; and m. maximilian morrel, captain of spahis.”

at this name the count, who had hitherto saluted everyone with courtesy,
but at the same time with coldness and formality, stepped a pace
forward, and a slight tinge of red colored his pale cheeks. “you wear
the uniform of the new french conquerors, monsieur,” said he; “it is a
handsome uniform.” no one could have said what caused the count’s voice
to vibrate so deeply, and what made his eye flash, which was in general
so clear, lustrous, and limpid when he ple
 
 ___________________________
 
eauchamp, keep that
for the _corsaire_ or the _charivari_, but spare my future father-in-law
before me.” then, turning to monte cristo, “you just now spoke his name
as if you knew the baron?”

“i do not know him,” returned monte cristo; “but i shall probably soon
make his acquaintance, for i have a credit opened with him by the house
of richard & blount, of london, arstein & eskoles of vienna, and thomson
& french at rome.” as he pronounced the two last names, the count
glanced at maximilian morrel. if the stranger expected to produce an
effect on morrel, he was not mistaken--maximilian started as if he had
been electrified. “thomson & french,” said he; “do you know this house,
monsieur?”


“they are my bankers in the capital of the christian world,” returned
the count quietly. “can my influence with them be of any service to
you?”

“oh, count, you could assist me perhaps in researches which have been,
up to the present, fruitless. this house, in past years, did ours a
g
 
 ___________________________
 
peech of m. danglars.”

“for heaven’s sake, beauchamp,” returned morcerf, “do not deprive me of
the merit of introducing him everywhere. is he not peculiar?”

“he is more than that,” replied château-renaud; “he is one of the most
extraordinary men i ever saw in my life. are you coming, morrel?”

“directly i have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us
a visit at rue meslay, no. 14.”

“be sure i shall not fail to do so,” returned the count, bowing. and
maximilian morrel left the room with the baron de château-renaud,
leaving monte cristo alone with morcerf.



chapter 41. the presentation

when albert found himself alone with monte cristo, “my dear count,” said
he, “allow me to commence my services as _cicerone_ by showing you a
specimen of a bachelor’s apartment. you, who are accustomed to the
palaces of italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in paris can live. as we
pass from one room
 
 ___________________________
 
 who
never played. the whole of the second story was set apart for
maximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister’s apartments, except
that for the breakfast-parlor he had a billiard-room, where he received
his friends. he was superintending the grooming of his horse, and
smoking his cigar at the entrance of the garden, when the count’s
carriage stopped at the gate.

cocles opened the gate, and baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
whether monsieur and madame herbault and monsieur maximilian morrel
would see his excellency the count of monte cristo. “the count of monte
cristo?” cried morrel, throwing away his cigar and hastening to the
carriage; “i should think we would see him. ah, a thousand thanks,
count, for not having forgotten your promise.” and the young officer
shook the count’s hand so warmly, that monte cristo could not be
mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and he saw that he had been
expected with impatience, and was received with pleasure. “come, come,”
 sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ich.”

“indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had not
been so favorable.”

“poor count! and is he aware of the danger he has been in?”

“i think not.”

“then it will be but charitable to inform him. when he arrives, i will
not fail to do so.”

just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to madame de villefort. albert
extended his hand. “madame,” said albert, “allow me to present to you m.
maximilian morrel, captain of spahis, one of our best, and, above all,
of our bravest officers.”

“i have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at auteuil,
at the house of the count of monte cristo,” replied madame de villefort,
turning away with marked coldness of manner. this answer, and especially
the tone in which it was uttered, chilled the heart of poor morrel. but
a recompense was in store for him; turning around, he saw near the door
a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyes were, w
 
 ___________________________
 
. the poor child appeared herself to require
the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative. a bright spot
burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and her
pulse beat with feverish excitement. she was thinking of the despair of
maximilian, when he should be informed that madame de saint-méran,
instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his enemy. more
than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she would
not have hesitated a moment, if maximilian morrel had been named albert
de morcerf or raoul de château-renaud; but morrel was of plebeian
extraction, and valentine knew how the haughty marquise de saint-méran
despised all who were not noble. her secret had each time been repressed
when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be
useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her father and mother,
all would be lost. two hours passed thus; madame de saint-méran was in a
feverish sleep, and the notary had arrived. th
 
 ___________________________
 
 as
usual, valentine strolled for a short time among her flowers, but
without gathering them. the mourning in her heart forbade her assuming
this simple ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on the
outward semblance of woe. she then turned towards the avenue. as she
advanced she fancied she heard a voice speaking her name. she stopped
astonished, then the voice reached her ear more distinctly, and she
recognized it to be that of maximilian.



chapter 73. the promise

it was, indeed, maximilian morrel, who had passed a wretched existence
since the previous day. with the instinct peculiar to lovers he had
anticipated after the return of madame de saint-méran and the death of
the marquis, that something would occur at m. de villefort’s in
connection with his attachment for valentine. his presentiments were
realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him
pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees. valentine was
ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiet
 
 ___________________________
 
bright
eye began to interrogate. “dear grandfather.” said she hurriedly, “you
know poor grandmamma died an hour since, and now i have no friend in the
world but you.” his expressive eyes evinced the greatest tenderness. “to
you alone, then, may i confide my sorrows and my hopes?” the paralytic
motioned “yes.” valentine took maximilian’s hand. “look attentively,
then, at this gentleman.” the old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with
slight astonishment on morrel. “it is m. maximilian morrel,” said she;
“the son of that good merchant of marseilles, whom you doubtless
recollect.”

“yes,” said the old man. “he brings an irreproachable name, which
maximilian is likely to render glorious, since at thirty years of age he
is a captain, an officer of the legion of honor.” the old man signified
that he recollected him. “well, grandpapa,” said valentine, kneeling
before him, and pointing to maximilian, “i love him, and will be only
his; were i compelled to marry another,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i would destroy myself.”

the eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude of tumultuous thoughts.
“you like m. maximilian morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” asked valentine.

“yes.”

“and you will protect us, who are your children, against the will of my
father?”--noirtier cast an intelligent glance at morrel, as if to say,
“perhaps i may.” maximilian understood him.

“mademoiselle,” said he, “you have a sacred duty to fulfil in your
deceased grandmother’s room, will you allow me the honor of a few
minutes’ conversation with m. noirtier?”

“that is it,” said the old man’s eye. then he looked 
 
 ___________________________
 
friend of villefort’s? how is it that i have never
met you at his house?”

“i am no acquaintance of m. de villefort’s.” answered morrel, “but i was
of madame de saint-méran.” albert came up to them at this moment with
franz.

“the time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said
albert; “but we are not superstitious. m. morrel, allow me to present to
you m. franz d’epinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom i
made the tour of italy. my dear franz, m. maximilian morrel, an
excellent friend i have acquired in your absence, and whose name you
will hear me mention every time i make any allusion to affection, wit,
or amiability.” morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared it would be
hypocritical to accost in a friendly manner the man whom he was tacitly
opposing, but his oath and the gravity of the circumstances recurred to
his memory; he struggled to conceal his emotion and bowed to franz.

“mademoiselle de villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” said deb
 
 ___________________________
 
ise of the door did not awaken her, and monte cristo gazed at her with
affectionate regret. “she remembered that she had a son,” said he; “and
i forgot i had a daughter.” then, shaking his head sorrowfully, “poor
haydée,” said he; “she wished to see me, to speak to me; she has feared
or guessed something. oh, i cannot go without taking leave of her; i
cannot die without confiding her to someone.” he quietly regained his
seat, and wrote under the other lines:--

“i bequeath to maximilian morrel, captain of spahis,--and son of my
former patron, pierre morrel, shipowner at marseilles,--the sum of
twenty millions, a part of which may be offered to his sister julia and
brother-in-law emmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune
may mar their happiness. these twenty millions are concealed in my
grotto at monte cristo, of which bertuccio knows the secret. if his
heart is free, and he will marry haydée, the daughter of ali pasha of
yanina, whom i have brought up with the love of a