at i actually am one; he made himself a
count, so that he is not one at all.”

“impossible!”

“listen my dear count; m. de morcerf has been my friend, or rather my
acquaintance, during the last thirty years. you know i have made the
most of my arms, though i never forgot my origin.”

“a proof of great humility or great pride,” said monte cristo.

“well, when i was a clerk, morcerf was a mere fisherman.”

“and then he was called----”

“fernand.”

“only fernand?”

“fernand mondego.”

“you are sure?”

“_pardieu!_ i have bought enough fish of him to know his name.”

“then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?”

“because fernand and danglars, being both parvenus, both having become
noble, both rich, are about equal in worth, excepting that there have
been certain things mentioned of him that were never said of me.”

“what?”

“oh, nothing!”

“ah, yes; what you tell me recalls to mind something about the name of
fernand mondego. i have
 
 ___________________________
 
 heard that name in greece.”

“in conjunction with the affairs of ali pasha?”

“exactly so.”

“this is the mystery,” said danglars. “i acknowledge i would have given
anything to find it out.”

“it would be very easy if you much wished it?”

“how so?”

“probably you have some correspondent in greece?”

“i should think so.”

“at yanina?”

“everywhere.”

“well, write to your correspondent in yanina, and ask him what part was
played by a frenchman named fernand mondego in the catastrophe of ali
tepelini.”

“you are right,” exclaimed danglars, rising quickly, “i will write
today.”

“do so.”

“i will.”


“and if you should hear of anything very scandalous----”

“i will communicate it to you.”

“you will oblige me.” danglars rushed out of the room, and made but one
leap into his _coupé_.



chapter 67. the office of the king’s attorney

let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest speed, and
follow madame danglars 
 
 ___________________________
 
anger was beginning to rise,--
“you have been my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate with me to
be aware that i am likely to maintain my resolution on this point.”

“if i have been your friend, morcerf, your present manner of speaking
would almost lead me to forget that i ever bore that title. but wait a
moment, do not let us get angry, or at least not yet. you are irritated
and vexed--tell me how this fernand is related to you?”

“he is merely my father,” said albert--“m. fernand mondego, count of
morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles and whose
honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.”

“is it your father?” said beauchamp; “that is quite another thing. then
i can well understand your indignation, my dear albert. i will look at
it again;” and he read the paragraph for the third time, laying a stress
on each word as he proceeded. “but the paper nowhere identifies this
fernand with your father.”

“no; but the connection will be 
 
 ___________________________
 
h in its numerous
modifications served to express every varied emotion of his mind. “sir,”
 replied he, “if you came to me with the idea of demanding satisfaction,
you should have gone at once to the point, and not have entertained me
with the idle conversation to which i have been patiently listening for
the last half hour. am i to put this construction on your visit?”

“yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous calumny.”

“wait a moment--no threats, if you please, m. fernand mondego, vicomte
de morcerf; i never allow them from my enemies, and therefore shall not
put up with them from my friends. you insist on my contradicting the
article relating to general fernand, an article with which, i assure you
on my word of honor, i had nothing whatever to do?”

“yes, i insist on it,” said albert, whose mind was beginning to get
bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.

“and if i refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?” said beauchamp
in a calm tone.

“yes,
 
 ___________________________
 
what? that french officer----”

“yes.”

“fernand?”

“yes.”

“the traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service he
was----”

“pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!” albert advanced
furiously towards beauchamp, but the latter restrained him more by a
mild look than by his extended hand.

“my friend,” said he, “here is a proof of it.”


albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable
inhabitants of yanina, proving that colonel fernand mondego, in the
service of ali tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million
crowns. the signatures were perfectly legal. albert tottered and fell
overpowered in a chair. it could no longer be doubted; the family name
was fully given. after a moment’s mournful silence, his heart
overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears. beauchamp, who had
watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm of grief, approached
him. “now, albert,” said he, “you understand me--do you not? i wished 
 
 ___________________________
 
smission to the sublime
emperor, from the french lord, the count of monte cristo, an emerald
valued at eight hundred thousand francs; as the ransom of a young
christian slave of eleven years of age, named haydée, the acknowledged
daughter of the late lord ali tepelini, pasha of yanina, and of
vasiliki, his favorite; she having been sold to me seven years
previously, with her mother, who had died on arriving at constantinople,
by a french colonel in the service of the vizier ali tepelini, named
fernand mondego. the above-mentioned purchase was made on his highness’s
account, whose mandate i had, for the sum of four hundred thousand
francs.

“‘given at constantinople, by authority of his highness, in the year
1247 of the hegira.

“‘signed el-kobbir.’

“‘that this record should have all due authority, it shall bear the
imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed to it.’

“near the merchant’s signature there was, indeed, the seal of the
sublime emperor. a dreadful sile
 
 ___________________________
 
oman. his misery was depicted in
sinister lines on his countenance. ‘m. de morcerf,’ said the president,
‘do you recognize this lady as the daughter of ali tepelini, pasha of
yanina?’--‘no,’ said morcerf, attempting to rise, ‘it is a base plot,
contrived by my enemies.’ haydée, whose eyes had been fixed on the door,
as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and, seeing the count standing,
shrieked, ‘you do not know me?’ said she. ‘well, i fortunately recognize
you! you are fernand mondego, the french officer who led the troops of
my noble father! it is you who surrendered the castle of yanina! it is
you who, sent by him to constantinople, to treat with the emperor for
the life or death of your benefactor, brought back a false mandate
granting full pardon! it is you who, with that mandate, obtained the
pasha’s ring, which gave you authority over selim, the fire-keeper! it
is you who stabbéd selim. it is you who sold us, my mother and me, to
the merchant, el-kobbir! assassin, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 glove in my face if morrel,
one of my friends, had not stopped him.”

“listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are,--he attributes his
father’s misfortunes to you.”

“madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes,--it is a
punishment. it is not i who strike m. de morcerf; it is providence which
punishes him.”

“and why do you represent providence?” cried mercédès. “why do you
remember when it forgets? what are yanina and its vizier to you, edmond?
what injury has fernand mondego done you in betraying ali tepelini?”

“ah, madame,” replied monte cristo, “all this is an affair between the
french captain and the daughter of vasiliki. it does not concern me, you
are right; and if i have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on the
french captain, or the count of morcerf, but on the fisherman fernand,
the husband of mercédès the catalane.”

“ah, sir!” cried the countess, “how terrible a vengeance for a fault
which fatality made me commit!--for i am the only cu
 
 ___________________________
 
 am about to have the honor of saying to the count of monte
cristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it,
strange as it may appear to you.”

“proceed, sir,” said the count.

“sir,” said albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but which gradually
became firmer, “i reproached you with exposing the conduct of m. de
morcerf in epirus, for guilty as i knew he was, i thought you had no
right to punish him; but i have since learned that you had that right.
it is not fernand mondego’s treachery towards ali pasha which induces me
so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman fernand
towards you, and the almost unheard-of miseries which were its
consequences; and i say, and proclaim it publicly, that you were
justified in revenging yourself on my father, and i, his son, thank you
for not using greater severity.”

had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
albert’s decla