; five hundred leagues are not to be
accomplished without some trouble, and especially in france, where, it
seems, it is forbidden to beat the postilions.”

“my dear count,” replied albert, “i was announcing your visit to some of
my friends, whom i had invited in consequence of the promise you did me
the honor to make, and whom i now present to you. they are the count of
château-renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whose
ancestors had a place at the round table; m. lucien debray, private
secretary to the minister of the interior; m. beauchamp, an editor of a
paper, and the terror of the french government, but of whom, in spite of
his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in italy, since his
paper is prohibited there; and m. maximilian morrel, captain of spahis.”

at this name the count, who had hitherto saluted everyone with courtesy,
but at the same time with coldness and formality, stepped a pace
forward, and a slight tinge of red colored his pale cheeks. 
 
 ___________________________
 
re to preserve a strict _incognito_?”

“no, indeed,” replied monte cristo with a smile, “i do not arrogate to
myself the right of so doing.”

“and who is with madame?--m. debray?” inquired danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made monte cristo smile, acquainted as
he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.

“yes, my lord,” replied the servant, “m. debray is with madame.”
 danglars nodded his head; then, turning to monte cristo, said, “m.
lucien debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
minister of the interior. as for my wife, i must tell you, she lowered
herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
families in france. her maiden name was de servières, and her first
husband was colonel the marquis of nargonne.”

“i have not the honor of knowing madame danglars; but i have already met
m. lucien debray.”

“ah, indeed?” said danglars; “and where was that?”

“at the house of m. de morcer
 
 ___________________________
 
monizing well with the furnishings of
this charming apartment, the only one throughout the great mansion in
which any distinctive taste prevailed. the truth was, it had been
entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out by m. danglars
and his architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great
work of improvement solely because he was the most fashionable and
celebrated decorator of the day. the decorations of the boudoir had then
been left entirely to madame danglars and lucien debray. m. danglars,
however, while possessing a great admiration for the antique, as it was
understood during the time of the directory, entertained the most
sovereign contempt for the simple elegance of his wife’s favorite
sitting-room, where, by the way, he was never permitted to intrude,
unless, indeed, he excused his own appearance by ushering in some more
agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had rather the air and
manner of a person who was himself introduced, than that of being th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
presenter of another, his reception being cordial or frigid, in
proportion as the person who accompanied him chanced to please or
displease the baroness.

madame danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still
strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate piece
of cabinet and inlaid work, while lucien debray, standing before a small
work-table, was turning over the pages of an album. lucien had found
time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate many particulars
respecting him to madame danglars. it will be remembered that monte
cristo had made a lively impression on the minds of all the party
assembled at the breakfast given by albert de morcerf; and although
debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings, he had never
been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in his 
 
 ___________________________
 
 refusal. to no class of persons is the presentation of a gratuitous
opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthy millionaire, who still
hugs economy while boasting of carrying a king’s ransom in his waistcoat
pocket.

danglars had, however, protested against showing himself in a
ministerial box, declaring that his political principles, and his
parliamentary position as member of the opposition party would not
permit him so to commit himself; the baroness had, therefore, despatched
a note to lucien debray, bidding him call for them, it being wholly
impossible for her to go alone with eugénie to the opera. there is no
gainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable construction would have been
put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone without escort,
while the addition of a third, in the person of her mother’s admitted
lover, enabled mademoiselle danglars to defy malice and ill-nature. one
must take the world as one finds it.


the curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, it bei
 
 ___________________________
 
ressed to them. leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
the various countenances around them, as though demanding someone person
who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they deemed
excessive impertinence; but as no one responded to the challenge, the
friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and affected to busy
themselves with the stage. at this moment the door of the minister’s box
opened, and madame danglars, accompanied by her daughter, entered,
escorted by lucien debray, who assiduously conducted them to their
seats.

“ha, ha,” said château-renaud, “here come some friends of yours,
viscount! what are you looking at there? don’t you see they are trying
to catch your eye?” albert turned round, just in time to receive a
gracious wave of the fan from the baroness; as for mademoiselle eugénie,
she scarcely vouchsafed to waste the glances of her large black eyes
even upon the business of the stage. “i tell you what, my dear fellow,”
 said château-re
 
 ___________________________
 
a flurry in stocks

some days after this meeting, albert de morcerf visited the count of
monte cristo at his house in the champs-élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. he came to
renew the thanks of madame danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed “baronne danglars,
_née_ hermine de servieux.”

albert was accompanied by lucien debray, who, joining in his friend’s
conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. he was convinced
that lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger
half of which sentiment emanated from the rue de la chaussée d’antin. in
short, madame danglars, not being able personally to examine in detail
the domestic economy and household arrangements of a man who gave away
horses worth 30,000 francs an
 
 ___________________________
 




chapter 99. the law

we have seen how quietly mademoiselle danglars and mademoiselle
d’armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being
that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think
of theirs. we will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude
of his debt before the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness,
who after being momentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which
had struck her, had gone to seek her usual adviser, lucien debray. the
baroness had looked forward to this marriage as a means of ridding her
of a guardianship which, over a girl of eugénie’s character, could not
fail to be rather a troublesome undertaking; for in the tacit relations
which maintain the bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her
ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be a model of wisdom
and a type of perfection.

now, madame danglars feared eugénie’s sagacity and the influence of
mademoiselle d’armilly; she had freque