ssuring him that their poor dwelling
would ever be open to him. as edmond passed the door on the fourth
floor, he paused to inquire whether caderousse the tailor still dwelt
there; but he received, for reply, that the person in question had got
into difficulties, and at the present time kept a small inn on the route
from bellegarde to beaucaire.

having obtained the address of the person to whom the house in the
allées de meillan belonged, dantès next proceeded thither, and, under
the name of lord wilmore (the name and title inscribed on his passport),
purchased the small dwelling for the sum of twenty-five thousand francs,
at least ten thousand more than it was worth; but had its owner asked
half a million, it would unhesitatingly have been given. the very same
day the occupants of the apartments on the fifth floor of the house, now
become the property of dantès, were duly informed by the notary who had
arranged the necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the new landlord
gave them their choic
 
 ___________________________
 
sailor.’”

“which is evidently not his real name, but a fictitious one.”

then, noticing that julie was struck with the sound of his voice,--

“tell me,” continued he, “was he not about my height, perhaps a little
taller, with his chin imprisoned, as it were, in a high cravat; his coat
closely buttoned up, and constantly taking out his pencil?”

“oh, do you then know him?” cried julie, whose eyes sparkled with joy.

“no,” returned monte cristo “i only guessed. i knew a lord wilmore, who
was constantly doing actions of this kind.”

“without revealing himself?”

“he was an eccentric being, and did not believe in the existence of
gratitude.”

“oh, heaven,” exclaimed julie, clasping her hands, “in what did he
believe, then?”


“he did not credit it at the period which i knew him,” said monte
cristo, touched to the heart by the accents of julie’s voice; “but,
perhaps, since then he has had proofs that gratitude does exist.”

“and do you know this 
 
 ___________________________
 
motion, “if lord
wilmore was your unknown benefactor, i fear you will never see him
again. i parted from him two years ago at palermo, and he was then on
the point of setting out for the most remote regions; so that i fear he
will never return.”

“oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you,” said julie, much affected; and the
young lady’s eyes swam with tears.

“madame,” replied monte cristo gravely, and gazing earnestly on the two
liquid pearls that trickled down julie’s cheeks, “had lord wilmore seen
what i now see, he would become attached to life, for the tears you shed
would reconcile him to mankind;” and he held out his hand to julie, who
gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of the count. “but,”
 continued she, “lord wilmore had a family or friends, he must have known
someone, can we not----”

“oh, it is useless to inquire,” returned the count; “perhaps, after all,
he was not the man you seek for. he was my friend: he had no secrets
from me, and if thi
 
 ___________________________
 
h a letter of introduction addressed to me, are you
not?” said the count.

“i did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me so strange.”

“the letter signed ‘sinbad the sailor,’ is it not?”

“exactly so. now, as i have never known any sinbad, with the exception
of the one celebrated in the _thousand and one nights_----”

“well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; he is a
very rich englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name is
lord wilmore.”

“ah, indeed? then that explains everything that is extraordinary,” said
andrea. “he is, then, the same englishman whom i met--at--ah--yes,
indeed. well, monsieur, i am at your service.”

“if what you say be true,” replied the count, smiling, “perhaps you will
be kind enough to give me some account of yourself and your family?”

“certainly, i will do so,” said the young man, with a quickness which
gave proof of his ready invention. “i am (as you have said) the count
an
 
 ___________________________
 
isto, “did i not possess a moral distrust of my
best friends, and a sort of inclination to lead others to doubt them
too; therefore, in departing from this rule, i should (as the actors
say) be playing a part quite out of my line, and should, therefore, run
the risk of being hissed, which would be an act of folly.”

“however, your excellency,” said andrea, “in consideration of lord
wilmore, by whom i was recommended to you----”

“yes, certainly,” interrupted monte cristo; “but lord wilmore did not
omit to inform me, my dear m. andrea, that the season of your youth was
rather a stormy one. ah,” said the count, watching andrea’s countenance,
“i do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely to avoid that
necessity that your father was sent for from lucca. you shall soon see
him. he is a little stiff and pompous in his manner, and he is
disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes known that he has been
for eighteen years in the austrian service, all that will be par
 
 ___________________________
 
 that case i shall always choose to remain there.”

“you cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; ‘man proposes, and god
disposes.’” andrea sighed.

“but,” said he, “so long as i do remain in paris, and nothing forces me
to quit it, do you mean to tell me that i may rely on receiving the sum
you just now mentioned to me?”

“you may.”

“shall i receive it from my father?” asked andrea, with some uneasiness.

“yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but lord wilmore
will be the security for the money. he has, at the request of your
father, opened an account of 6,000. francs a month at m. danglars’,
which is one of the safest banks in paris.”

“and does my father mean to remain long in paris?” asked andrea.

“only a few days,” replied monte cristo. “his service does not allow him
to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.”

“ah, my dear father!” exclaimed andrea, evidently charmed with the idea
of his speedy departure.

“
 
 ___________________________
 
, at
signor gozzi’s; also a letter of introduction to the count of monte
cristo, on whom i give you a draft of 48,000 francs. remember to go to
the count on the 26th may at seven o’clock in the evening.

(signed)

“abbé busoni.”

“it is the same.”

“what do you mean?” said the major.

“i was going to say that i received a letter almost to the same effect.”

“you?”

“yes.”

“from the abbé busoni?”

“no.”

“from whom, then?”

“from an englishman, called lord wilmore, who takes the name of sinbad
the sailor.”

“and of whom you have no more knowledge than i of the abbé busoni?”

“you are mistaken; there i am ahead of you.”

“you have seen him, then?”

“yes, once.”

“where?”

“ah, that is just what i cannot tell you; if i did, i should make you as
wise as myself, which it is not my intention to do.”

“and what did the letter contain?”

“read it.”

“‘you are poor, and your future prospects are dark and gloomy. do you
wish
 
 ___________________________
 
of monte cristo had discovered the
history of the house at auteuil. he wrote the same day for the required
information to m. de boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. at the end of the second day m. de
villefort received the following note:--

“the person called the count of monte cristo is an intimate acquaintance
of lord wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen in paris and
who is there at this moment; he is also known to the abbé busoni, a
sicilian priest, of high repute in the east, where he has done much
good.”

m. de villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be made
respecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the
following evening he received these details:--

“the abbé, who was in paris only for a month, inhabited a small two-
storied house behind saint-sulpice; there w
 
 ___________________________
 
he replied that the abbé
was not in paris, an answer which satisfied most persons, because the
abbé was known to be a great traveller. besides, whether at home or not,
whether in paris or cairo, the abbé always left something to give away,
which the valet distributed through this wicket in his master’s name.
the other room near the library was a bedroom. a bed without curtains,
four armchairs, and a couch, covered with yellow utrecht velvet,
composed, with a _prie-dieu_, all its furniture. lord wilmore resided in
rue fontaine-saint-george. he was one of those english tourists who
consume a large fortune in travelling. he hired the apartment in which
he lived furnished, passed only a few hours in the day there, and rarely
slept there. one of his peculiarities was never to speak a word of
french, which he however wrote with great facility.”

the day after this important information had been given to the king’s
attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the rue férou,
and rap
 
 ___________________________
 
he east; he has five or six rings as testimonials from
eastern monarchs of his services.”

“does he wear them?”

“no, but he is proud of them; he is better pleased with rewards given to
the benefactors of man than to his destroyers.”

“he is a quaker then?”

“exactly, he is a quaker, with the exception of the peculiar dress.”

“has he any friends?”

“yes, everyone who knows him is his friend.”

“but has he any enemies?”

“one only.”

“what is his name?”

“lord wilmore.”

“where is he?”

“he is in paris just now.”

“can he give me any particulars?”

“important ones; he was in india with zaccone.”

“do you know his abode?”

“it’s somewhere in the chaussée d’antin; but i know neither the street
nor the number.”


“are you at variance with the englishman?”

“i love zaccone, and he hates him; we are consequently not friends.”

“do you think the count of monte cristo had ever been in france before
he made this visit to pari
 
 ___________________________
 
resources.”

“however----”

“my resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only to search for
yourself and you will find, alas, but too many objects upon whom to
exercise your benevolence.” the abbé once more bowed as he opened the
door, the stranger bowed and took his leave, and the carriage conveyed
him straight to the house of m. de villefort. an hour afterwards the
carriage was again ordered, and this time it went to the rue fontaine-
saint-george, and stopped at no. 5, where lord wilmore lived. the
stranger had written to lord wilmore, requesting an interview, which the
latter had fixed for ten o’clock. as the envoy of the prefect of police
arrived ten minutes before ten, he was told that lord wilmore, who was
precision and punctuality personified, was not yet come in, but that he
would be sure to return as the clock struck.

the visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which was like all
other furnished drawing-rooms. a mantle-piece, with two modern sèvres
vases, a tim
 
 ___________________________
 
epiece representing cupid with his bent bow, a mirror with
an engraving on each side--one representing homer carrying his guide,
the other, belisarius begging--a grayish paper; red and black tapestry--
such was the appearance of lord wilmore’s drawing-room. it was
illuminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gave only a feeble
light, as if out of consideration for the envoy’s weak sight. after ten
minutes’ expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth stroke the door
opened and lord wilmore appeared. he was rather above the middle height,
with thin reddish whiskers, light complexion and light hair, turning
rather gray. he was dressed with all the english peculiarity, namely, in
a blue coat, with gilt buttons and high collar, in the fashion of 1811,
a white kerseymere waistcoat, and nankeen pantaloons, three inches too
short, but which were prevented by straps from slipping up to the knee.
his first remark on entering was,--“you know, sir, i do not speak
french?”

“i know you
 
 ___________________________
 
 do not like to converse in our language,” replied the envoy.

“but you may use it,” replied lord wilmore; “i understand it.”

“and i,” replied the visitor, changing his idiom, “know enough of
english to keep up the conversation. do not put yourself to the
slightest inconvenience.”

“aw?” said lord wilmore, with that tone which is only known to natives
of great britain.

the envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the latter read
with english coolness, and having finished,--“i understand,” said he,
“perfectly.”


then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been
addressed to the abbé busoni. but as lord wilmore, in the character of
the count’s enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more
numerous; he described the youth of monte cristo, who he 
 
 ___________________________
 
eful to conceal it from
everyone. after the battle of navarino, when the greek government was
consolidated, he asked of king otho a mining grant for that district,
which was given him. hence that immense fortune, which, in lord
wilmore’s opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per annum,--
a precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the failure of
the mine.

“but,” asked the visitor, “do you know why he came to france?”

“he is speculating in railways,” said lord wilmore, “and as he is an
expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a new system of
telegraphy, which he is seeking to bring to perfection.”

“how much does he spend yearly?” asked the prefect.

“not more than five or six hundred thousand francs,” said lord wilmore;
“he is a miser.” hatred evidently inspired the englishman, who, knowing
no other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice. “do you
know his house at auteuil?”

“certainly.”

“what do you know resp
 
 ___________________________
 
here is a deadly feud between
us.”

“but,” said the envoy, “you do not go about it in the right way to kill
him, if i understand you correctly.”

“aw?” said the englishman, “i practice shooting every day, and every
other day grisier comes to my house.”

this was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the
englishman appeared to know. the agent arose, and having bowed to lord
wilmore, who returned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the
english, he retired. lord wilmore, having heard the door close after
him, returned to his bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his
light hair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume
the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the count of monte
cristo. it was m. de villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the
house of m. de villefort. the procureur felt more at ease, although he
had learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since
the dinner-party at auteuil, he slept s
 
 ___________________________
 
y have heard it, and to enlighten himself--but
why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked
villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest can this m. de
monte cristo or m. zaccone,--son of a shipowner of malta, discoverer of
a mine in thessaly, now visiting paris for the first time,--what
interest, i say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and
useless fact like this? however, among all the incoherent details given
to me by the abbé busoni and by lord wilmore, by that friend and that
enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion--that in no
period, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have been any
contact between him and me.”

but villefort uttered words which even he himself did not believe. he
dreaded not so much the revelation, for he could reply to or deny its
truth;--he cared little for that _mene, mene, tekel upharsin_, which
appeared suddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;--but what he was
really anxious for was to di
 
 ___________________________
 
,” said the abbé, “and i will again have pity on you, and
will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries my weakness may
lead to, if you tell me the truth.”

“ah, reverend sir,” cried caderousse, clasping his hands, and drawing
nearer to monte cristo, “i may indeed say you are my deliverer!”

“you mean to say you have been freed from confinement?”

“yes, that is true, reverend sir.”

“who was your liberator?”

“an englishman.”

“what was his name?”

“lord wilmore.”

“i know him; i shall know if you lie.”

“ah, reverend sir, i tell you the simple truth.”

“was this englishman protecting you?”

“no, not me, but a young corsican, my companion.”

“what was this young corsican’s name?”

“benedetto.”

“is that his christian name?”

“he had no other; he was a foundling.”

“then this young man escaped with you?”

“he did.”

“in what way?”

“we were working at saint-mandrier, near toulon. do you know saint-
mandr
 
 ___________________________
 
ve, while in your heart you still believe in him.”

“but who are you, then?” asked caderousse, fixing his dying eyes on the
count. “look well at me!” said monte cristo, putting the light near his
face. “well, the abbé--the abbé busoni.” monte cristo took off the wig
which disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much
to the beauty of his pallid features. “oh?” said caderousse,
thunderstruck, “but for that black hair, i should say you were the
englishman, lord wilmore.”

“i am neither the abbé busoni nor lord wilmore,” said monte cristo;
“think again,--do you not recollect me?” there was a magic effect in the
count’s words, which once more revived the exhausted powers of the
miserable man. “yes, indeed,” said he; “i think i have seen you and
known you formerly.”

“yes, caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once.”

“who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let me die?”

“because nothing can save you; your wounds a