o
a spanish bank. during the war with spain he was employed in the
commissariat of the french army, and made a fortune; then with that
money he speculated in the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his capital;
and, having first married his banker’s daughter, who left him a widower,
he has married a second time, a widow, a madame de nargonne, daughter of
m. de servieux, the king’s chamberlain, who is in high favor at court.
he is a millionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he is the
baron danglars, with a fine residence in the rue de mont-blanc, with ten
horses in his stables, six footmen in his antechamber, and i know not
how many millions in his strongbox.”

“ah!” said the abbé, in a peculiar tone, “he is happy.”

“happy? who can answer for that? happiness or unhappiness is the secret
known but to one’s self and the walls--walls have ears but no tongue;
but if a large fortune produces happiness, danglars is happy.”

“and fernand?”

“fernand? why, much the same st
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the red ribbon
that depended from his button-hole.

the groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of the
porter’s lodge, saying, “pray, does not the count of monte cristo live
here?”

“his excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge; “but----”
 added he, glancing an inquiring look at ali. ali returned a sign in the
negative.

“but what?” asked the groom.

“his excellency does not receive visitors today.”

“then here is my master’s card,--the baron danglars. you will take it to
the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the chamber, my
master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”

“i never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge; “the valet de
chambre will carry your message.” the groom returned to the carriage.
“well?” asked danglars. the man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he
had received, repeated what the concierge had said. “bless me,” murmured
baron danglars, “this must surely 
 
 ___________________________
 
 done well to purchase them, although you were
somewhat remiss not to have procured them sooner.”

“indeed, your excellency, i had very considerable difficulty in
obtaining them, and, as it is, they have cost an enormous price.”

“does the sum you gave for them make the animals less beautiful,”
 inquired the count, shrugging his shoulders.

“nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that i could wish.
whither does your excellency desire to be driven?”

“to the residence of baron danglars, rue de la chaussée d’antin.” this
conversation had passed as they stood upon the terrace, from which a
flight of stone steps led to the carriage-drive. as bertuccio, with a
respectful bow, was moving away, the count called him back. “i have
another commission for you, m. bertuccio,” said he; “i am desirous of
having an estate by the seaside in normandy--for instance, between le
havre and boulogne. you see i give you a wide range. it will be
absolutely necessary that the place you ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 seemed to feel their degradation in being
brought into juxtaposition with the gaudy colors that covered the
ceiling. the count turned round as he heard the entrance of danglars
into the room. with a slight inclination of the head, danglars signed to
the count to be seated, pointing significantly to a gilded armchair,
covered with white satin embroidered with gold. the count sat down. “i
have the honor, i presume, of addressing m. de monte cristo.”


the count bowed. “and i of speaking to baron danglars, chevalier of the
legion of honor, and member of the chamber of deputies?”

monte cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the baron’s card.

danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips. “you will, i trust,
excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by your title when i first
addressed you,” he said, “but you are aware that we are living under a
popular form of government, and that i am myself a representative of the
liberties of the people.”

“so much so,” replied monte 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to harness the horses to my carriage,
he discovered that they had been removed from the stables without his
knowledge. i desire to know what is the meaning of this?”

“be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said danglars.

“oh, yes; i will listen, monsieur, for i am most curious to hear what
explanation you will give. these two gentlemen shall decide between us;
but, first, i will state the case to them. gentlemen,” continued the
baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of baron danglars, are
two that belong exclusively to me--a pair of the handsomest and most
spirited creatures to be found in paris. but to you, at least, m.
debray, i need not give a further description, because to you my
beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. well, i had promised
madame de villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the
bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they
are gone--positively gone. no doubt m. danglars has sacrificed them to
the selfish
 
 ___________________________
 
d arrangements of a man who gave away
horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a greek slave
wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of money, had deputed those
eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to give her a faithful account
of the mode of life of this incomprehensible person. but the count did
not appear to suspect that there could be the slightest connection
between lucien’s visit and the curiosity of the baroness.

“you are in constant communication with the baron danglars?” the count
inquired of albert de morcerf.

“yes, count, you know what i told you?”

“all remains the same, then, in that quarter?”

“it is more than ever a settled thing,” said lucien,--and, considering
that this remark was all that he was at that time called upon to make,
he adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headed
cane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and
the pictures.

“ah,” said monte cristo “i did not expect that 
 
 ___________________________
 
i predict from all this an avalanche of
dinners and routs. now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, i have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
m. and madame danglars, and m. and madame de villefort, to my country-
house at auteuil. if i were to invite you and the count and countess of
morcerf to this dinner, i should give it the appearance of being a
matrimonial meeting, or at least madame de morcerf would look upon the
affair in that light, especially if baron danglars did me the honor to
bring his daughter. in that case your mother would hold me in aversion,
and i do not at all wish that; on the contrary, i desire to stand high
in her esteem.”

“indeed, count,” said morcerf, “i thank you sincerely for having used so
much candor towards me, and i gratefully accept the exclusion which you
propose. you say you desire my mother’s good opinion; i assure you it is
already yours to a very unusual extent.”


“do you think so?” said monte cristo, with
 
 ___________________________
 
since i bring you your two hundred francs.” caderousse shrugged
his shoulders. “it is humiliating,” said he, “thus to receive money
given grudgingly,--an uncertain supply which may soon fail. you see i am
obliged to economize, in case your prosperity should cease. well, my
friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. i
know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry the daughter
of danglars.”

“what? of danglars?”

“yes, to be sure; must i say baron danglars? i might as well say count
benedetto. he was an old friend of mine and if he had not so bad a
memory he ought to invite me to your wedding, seeing he came to mine.
yes, yes, to mine; gad, he was not so proud then,--he was an under-clerk
to the good m. morrel. i have dined many times with him and the count of
morcerf, so you see i have some high connections and were i to cultivate
them a little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms.”

“come, your jealousy represents everything to you in t
 
 ___________________________
 
aughter, is a felon who escaped with me from
confinement at toulon. he was no. 59, and i no. 58. he was called
benedetto, but he is ignorant of his real name, having never known his
parents.

“sign it!” continued the count.

“but would you ruin me?”

“if i sought your ruin, fool, i should drag you to the first guard-
house; besides, when that note is delivered, in all probability you will
have no more to fear. sign it, then!”

caderousse signed it. “the address, ‘to monsieur the baron danglars,
banker, rue de la chaussée d’antin.’” caderousse wrote the address. the
abbé took the note. “now,” said he, “that suffices--begone!”

“which way?”

“the way you came.”

“you wish me to get out at that window?”

“you got in very well.”

“oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir.”

“idiot! what design can i have?”

“why, then, not let me out by the door?”

“what would be the advantage of waking the porter?”

“ah, reverend sir, tell me, d
 
 ___________________________
 
 madame de villefort the approaching marriage of eugénie
danglars and m. andrea cavalcanti. this formal announcement, which
implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned
in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which our
readers must be admitted. we beg them to take one step backward, and to
transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes,
into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was
the pride of its owner, baron danglars. in this room, at about ten
o’clock in the morning, the banker himself had been walking to and fro
for some minutes thoughtfully and in evident uneasiness, watching both
doors, and listening to every sound. when his patience was exhausted, he
called his valet. “étienne,” said he, “see why mademoiselle eugénie has
asked me to meet her in the drawing-room, and why she makes me wait so
long.”

having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm;
mademoiselle danglars ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 two portions, for which they each give a receipt; then,
when the marriage is celebrated, they place the amount at your disposal
as the chief member of the alliance.”

“because,” said andrea, with a certain ill-concealed uneasiness, “i
thought i heard my father-in-law say that he intended embarking our
property in that famous railway affair of which you spoke just now.”

“well,” replied monte cristo, “it will be the way, everybody says, of
trebling your fortune in twelve months. baron danglars is a good father,
and knows how to calculate.”

“in that case,” said andrea, “everything is all right, excepting your
refusal, which quite grieves me.”

“you must attribute it only to natural scruples under similar
circumstances.”

“well,” said andrea, “let it be as you wish. this evening, then, at nine
o’clock.”

“adieu till then.” notwithstanding a slight resistance on the part of
monte cristo, whose lips turned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious
smile, andrea
 
 ___________________________
 
ars, smiling, “they are bonds on the bank of
france, payable to bearer. stay, count,” he added, “you, who may be
called the emperor, if i claim the title of king of finance, have you
many pieces of paper of this size, each worth a million?” the count took
into his hands the papers, which danglars had so proudly presented to
him, and read:--

“to the governor of the bank. please pay to my order, from the fund
deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge the same to my
account.

“baron danglars.”

“one, two, three, four, five,” said monte cristo; “five millions--why
what a crœsus you are!”

“this is how i transact business,” said danglars.

“it is really wonderful,” said the count; “above all, if, as i suppose,
it is payable at sight.”

“it is, indeed, said danglars.

“it is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in france
these things are done. five millions on five little scraps of paper!--it
must be seen to be believed.”

“you do not dou
 
 ___________________________
 
 rather strange to the governor. two days will be a different
thing,” said danglars, smiling.

“come,” said boville, with a tone of entire incredulity, “five millions
to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to me as though he knew
me?”

“perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; m. de monte cristo
knows everybody.”

“five millions!”

“here is his receipt. believe your own eyes.” m. de boville took the
paper danglars presented him, and read:--

“received of baron danglars the sum of five million one hundred thousand
francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of thomson & french of
rome.”

“it is really true,” said m. de boville.

“do you know the house of thomson & french?”

“yes, i once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000
francs; but since then i have not heard it mentioned.”

“it is one of the best houses in europe,” said danglars, carelessly
throwing down the receipt on his desk.

“and he had five millions in your ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 last
fifteen years, till extraordinary and unexpected catastrophes have
suddenly overturned it,--without any fault of mine, i can honestly
declare. you, madame, have only sought to increase your own, and i am
convinced that you have succeeded. i leave you, therefore, as i took
you,--rich, but little respected. adieu! i also intend from this time to
work on my own account. accept my acknowledgments for the example you
have set me, and which i intend following.

“your very devoted husband,

“baron danglars.”

the baroness had watched debray while he read this long and painful
letter, and saw him, notwithstanding his self-control, change color once
or twice. when he had ended the perusal, he folded the letter and
resumed his pensive attitude. “well?” asked madame danglars, with an
anxiety easy to be understood.

“well, madame?” unhesitatingly repeated debray.

“with what ideas does that letter inspire you?”

“oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the idea that m.
dan
 
 ___________________________
 
nto conversation with two or three of the industrious idlers
who are always to be found in rome at the doors of banking-houses,
churches, museums, or theatres. with the frenchman, the man who had
followed him entered too; the frenchman knocked at the inner door, and
entered the first room; his shadow did the same.

“messrs. thomson & french?” inquired the stranger.

an attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk at the first
desk. “whom shall i announce?” said the attendant.

“baron danglars.”

“follow me,” said the man. a door opened, through which the attendant
and the baron disappeared. the man who had followed danglars sat down on
a bench. the clerk continued to write for the next five minutes; the man
preserved profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. then the
pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; he raised his head, and
appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy,--“ah, ha,” he said, “here you
are, peppino!”

“yes,” was the laconic reply.