the florentine ghibelines after the
defeat of manfred.

[824] _ganellon_: whose treacherous counsel led to the defeat of roland
at roncesvalles.

[825] _tribaldello_: a noble of faenza, who, as one account says, to
revenge himself for the loss of a pig, sent a cast of the key of the
city gate to john of apia, then prowling about romagna in the interest
of the french pope, martin iv. he was slain at the battle of forlì in
1282 (_inf._ xxvii. 43).

[826] _frozen in a hole, etc._: the two are the count ugolino and the
archbishop roger.

[827] _tydeus_: one of the seven against thebes, who, having been
mortally wounded by menalippus the theban, whom he slew, got his friends
to bring him the head of his foe and gnawed at it with his teeth. dante
found the incident in his favourite author statius (_theb._ viii.).

[828] _i in the world, etc._: dante has learned from bocca that the
prospect of having their memory refreshed on earth has no charm for the
sinners met with here. the bribe he offers is that o
 
 ___________________________
 

  but stretch thy hand and be its work begun
    of setting free mine eyes.' this did not i.
    twas highest courtesy to yield him none.[855]                  150
  ah, genoese,[856] strange to morality!
    ye men infected with all sorts of sin!
    out of the world 'tis time that ye should die.
  here, to romagna's blackest soul[857] akin,
    i chanced on one of you; for doing ill
    his soul o'erwhelmed cocytus' floods within,
  though in the flesh he seems surviving still.


note on the count ugolino.

ugolino della gherardesca, count of donoratico, a wealthy noble and a
man fertile in political resource, was deeply engaged in the affairs of
pisa at a critical period of her history. he was born in the first half
of the thirteenth century. by giving one of his daughters in marriage to
the head of the visconti of pisa--not to be confounded with those of
milan--he came under the suspicion of being guelf in his sympathies; the
general opinion of pisa being then, as it always had been, strongly

 
 ___________________________
 
allowed to ugo and his sons. after the door of the tower
had been kept closed for eight days it was opened, and the corpses,
still fettered, were huddled into a tomb in the franciscan church.--the
original authorities are far from being agreed as to the details of
ugo's overthrow and death.--for the matter of this note i am chiefly
indebted to the careful epitome of the pisan history of that time by
philalethes in his note on this canto (_göttliche comödie_).


footnotes:

[829] _the sinner_: count ugolino. see note at the end of the canto.

[830] _mingle speech, etc._: a comparison of these words with those of
francesca (_inf._ v. 124) will show the difference in moral tone between
the second circle of inferno and the ninth.

[831] _a florentine_: so farinata (_inf._ x. 25) recognises dante by his
florentine speech. the words heard by ugo are those at xxxii. 133.

[832] _the archbishop roger_: ruggieri, of the tuscan family of the
ubaldini, to which the cardinal of _inf._ x. 120 also belonged. t