journey,                                                         9

  canto iii.

  the gate of inferno--the vestibule of the caitiffs--the great
  refusal--acheron--charon--the earthquake--the slumber of dante,     17

  canto iv.

  the first circle, which is the limbo of the unbaptized and of
  the virtuous heathen--the great poets--the noble castle--the
  sages and worthies of the ancient world,                            24

  canto v.

  the second circle, which is that of carnal sinners--minos--the
  tempest--the troop of those who died because of their love--
  francesca da rimini--dante's swoon,                                 32

  canto vi.

  the third circle, which is that of the gluttonous--the hail and
  rain and snow--cerberus--ciacco and his prophecy,                   40

  canto vii.

  the fourth circle, which is that of the avaricious and the
  thriftless--plutus--the great weights rolled by the sinners in
  opposite directions--fortune--the fifth circle, which is that

 
 ___________________________
 
ammedans in
this honourable place greatly puzzles the early commentators.

[247] _a part, etc._: he passes into the darkness of the limbo out of
the brightly-lit, fortified enclosure. it is worth remarking, as one
reads, how vividly he describes his first impression of a new scene,
while when he comes to leave it a word is all he speaks.




canto v.


  from the first circle thus i downward went
    into the second,[248] which girds narrower space,
    but greater woe compelling loud lament.
  minos[249] waits awful there and snarls, the case
    examining of all who enter in;
    and, as he girds him, dooms them to their place.
  i say, each ill-starred spirit must begin
    on reaching him its guilt in full to tell;
    and he, omniscient as concerning sin,
  sees to what circle it belongs in hell;                           10
    then round him is his tail as often curled
    as he would have it stages deep to dwell.
  and evermore before him stand a world
    of shades; and all in turn
 
 ___________________________
 
 to judgment come,
    confess and hear, and then are downward hurled.[250]
  'o thou who comest to the very home
    of woe,' when he beheld me minos cried,
    ceasing a while from utterance of doom,
  'enter not rashly nor in all confide;
    by ease of entering be not led astray.'                         20
    'why also[251] growling?' answered him my guide;
  'seek not his course predestinate to stay;
    for thus 'tis willed[252] where nothing ever fails
    of what is willed. no further speech essay.'
  and now by me are agonising wails
    distinguished plain; now am i come outright
    where grievous lamentation me assails.
  now ha
 
 ___________________________
 
  the book was galahad,[273] and he as well
    who wrote the book. that day we read no more.'
  and while one shade continued thus to tell,
    the other wept so bitterly, i swooned                          140
    away for pity, and as dead i fell:
  yea, as a corpse falls, fell i on the ground.


footnotes:

[248] _the second_: the second circle of the inferno, and the first of
punishment. the lower the circle, the more rigorous the penalty endured
in it. here is punished carnal sin.

[249] _minos_: son of jupiter and king of crete, so severely just as to
be made after death one of the judges of the under world. he is degraded
by dante, as many other noble persons of the old mythology are by him,
into a demon. unlike the fallen angels of milton, dante's devils have no
interest of their own. their only function is to help in working out
human destinies.

[250] _downward hurled_: each falls to his proper place without
lingering by the way. all through inferno there is an absence of direct

 
 ___________________________
 
divine interposition. it is ruled, as it were, by a course of nature.
the sinners, compelled by a fatal impulse, advance to hear their doom,
just as they fall inevitably one by one into charon's boat. minos by a
sort of devilish instinct sentences each sinner to his appropriate
punishment. in _inf._ xxvii. 127 we find the words in which minos utters
his judgment. in _inf._ xxi. 29 a devil bears the sinner to his own
place.

[251] _why also, etc._: like charon. if minos represents conscience, as
some would have it, dante is here again assailed by misgivings as to his
enterprise, and is quieted by reason in the person of virgil.

[252] _thus 'tis willed, etc._: these two lines are the same as those to
charon, _inf._ iii. 95, 96.

[253] _precipitous extreme_: opinions vary as to what is meant by
_ruina_. as dante is certainly still on the outer edge of the second
circle or terrace, and while standing there hears distinctly the words
the spirits say when they rea
 
 ___________________________
 
alley for four italian miles' (gsell-fels, _ober.
ital._ i. 35).

[394] _the cretan infamy_: the minotaur, the offspring of pasiphaë; a
half-bovine monster who inhabited the cretan labyrinth, and to whom a
human victim was offered once a year. he lies as guard upon the seventh
circle--that of the violent (_inf._ xi. 23, _note_)--and is set at the
top of the rugged slope, itself the scene of a violent convulsion.

[395] _duke of athens_: theseus, instructed by ariadne, daughter of
pasiphaë and minos, how to outwit the minotaur, entered the labyrinth in
the character of a victim, slew the monster, and then made his way out,
guided by a thread he had unwound as he went in.

[396] _the slippery waste_: the word used here, _scarco_, means in
modern tuscan a place where earth or stones have been carelessly shot
into a heap.

[397] _the new weight_: the slope had never before been trodden by
mortal foot.

[398] _the former time_: when virgil descended to evoke a shade from the
ninth circle (_inf
 
 ___________________________
 
u of him hast prayed,
    imprisoned spirit, do thou further show
  how with these knots the spirits have been made
    incorporate; and, if thou canst, declare
    if from such members e'er is loosed a shade.'                   90
  then from the trunk came vehement puffs of air;
    next, to these words converted was the wind:
    'my answer to you shall be short and clear.
  when the fierce soul no longer is confined
    in flesh, torn thence by action of its own,
    to the seventh depth by minos 'tis consigned.
  no choice is made of where it shall be thrown
    within the wood; but where by chance 'tis flung
    it germinates like seed of spelt that's sown.
  a forest tree it grows from sapling young;                       100
    eating its leaves, the harpies cause it pain,
    and open loopholes whence its sighs are wrung.
  we for our vestments shall return again
    like others, but in them shall ne'er be clad:[426]
    men justly lose what from themselves they've ta'en.
  dragge
 
 ___________________________
 
    a boss of the hard cliff, till on this wise
    my escort asked: 'of the other fools[557] art one?
  here piety revives as pity dies;
    for who more irreligious is than he
    in whom god's judgments to regret give rise?                    30
  lift up, lift up thy head, and thou shalt see
    him for whom earth yawned as the thebans saw,
    all shouting meanwhile: "whither dost thou flee,
  amphiaraüs?[558] wherefore thus withdraw
    from battle?" but he sinking found no rest
    till minos clutched him with all-grasping claw.
  lo, how his shoulders serve him for a breast!
    because he wished to see too far before
    backward he looks, to backward course addressed.
  behold tiresias,[559] who was changed all o'er,                   40
    till for a man a woman met the sight,
    and not a limb its former semblance bore;
  and he behoved a second time to smite
    the same two twisted serpents with his wand,
    ere he again in manly plumes was dight.
  with back to him, see a
 
 ___________________________
 
us_: the quarrel among the fiends arose from dante's
insatiable desire to confer with 'tuscan or lombard.'

[614] _to the next bolgia_: the sixth. they are now on the top of the
circular ridge that divides it from the fifth. from the construction of
malebolge the ridge is deeper on the inner side than on that up which
they have travelled from the pitch.

[615] _no more a cause of dread_: there seems some incongruity between
virgil's dread of these smaller devils and the ease with which he cowed
minos, charon, and pluto. but his character gains in human interest the
more he is represented as sympathising with dante in his terrors; and in
this particular case the confession of fellow-feeling prepares the way
for the beautiful passage which follows it (line 38, etc.), one full of
an almost modern tenderness.

[616] _cologne_: some make it clugny, the great benedictine monastery;
but all the old commentators and most of the mss. read cologne. all that
the text necessarily carries is that the cl
 
 ___________________________
 
 him not, nor rob me of him" cried,
  "for him of right among my thralls i bear
    because he offered counsel fraudulent;
    since when i've had him firmly by the hair.
  none is absolved unless he first repent;
    nor can repentance house with purpose ill,
    for this the contradiction doth prevent."                      120
  ah, wretched me! how did i shrinking thrill
    when clutching me he sneered: "perhaps of old
    thou didst not think[713] i had in logic skill."
  he carried me to minos:[714] minos rolled
    his tail eight times round his hard back; in ire
    biting it fiercely, ere of me he told:
  "among the sinners of the shrouding fire!"
    therefore am i, where thou beholdest, lost;
    and, sore at heart, go clothed in such attire.'
  what he would say thus ended by the ghost,                       130
    away from us the moaning flame did glide
    while to and fro its pointed horn was tossed.
  but we passed further on, i and my guide,
    along the cliff to where 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of their
worldly undertakings, and, relinquishing all earthly pleasures and
business, give themselves up in their old age to a religious life.
either, then, he sets guido here in order that he may have a modern
false counsellor worthy to be ranked with ulysses; or because, on longer
experience, he had come to reprobate more keenly the abuse of the
franciscan habit; or, most likely of all, that he might, even at the
cost of guido, load the hated memory of boniface with another reproach.

[714] _minos_: here we have minos represented in the act of pronouncing
judgment in words as well as by the figurative rolling of his tail
around his body (_inf._ v. 11).




canto xxviii.


  could any, even in words unclogged by rhyme
    recount the wounds that now i saw,[715] and blood,
    although he aimed at it time after time?
  here every tongue must fail of what it would,
    because our human speech and powers of thought
    to grasp so much come short in aptitude.
  if all the people were togeth
 
 ___________________________
 

    by albert of siena,' one confessed,                            110
    'but came not here through that for which i went
  to death. 'tis true i told him all in jest,
    i through the air could float in upward gyre;
    and he, inquisitive and dull at best,
  did full instruction in the art require:
    i could not make him dædalus,[752] so then
    his second father sent me to the fire.
  but to the deepest bolgia of the ten,
    for alchemy which in the world i wrought,
    the unerring minos doomed me.' 'now were men
  e'er found,' i of the poet asked, 'so fraught                    121
    with vanity as are the sienese?[753]
    french vanity to theirs is surely nought.'
  the other leper hearing me, to these
    my words: 'omit the stricca,'[754] swift did shout,
    'who knew his tastes with temperance to please;
  and nicholas,[755] who earliest found out
    the lavish custom of the clove-stuffed roast
    within the garden where such seed doth sprout.
  nor count the club[75
 
 ___________________________
 
, i. 69, ii. 58.

  marcabò, xxviii. 75.

  marcia, iv. 128.

  maremma, xxv. 19, xxix. 48.

  marquis of este, xviii. 56.

  mars, xiii. 144, xxiv. 145, xxxi. 51.

  mascheroni, sassol, xxxii. 65.

  matthias, apostle, xix. 95.

  medea, xviii. 96.

  medicina, pier da, xxviii. 73.

  medusa, ix. 52.

  megæra, ix. 46.

  menalippus, xxxii. 131.

  messenger of heaven, ix. 85.

  michael, archangel, vii. 11.

  ---- scott, xx. 116.

  ---- zanche, xxii. 88, xxxiii. 144.

  mincio, xx. 77.

  minos, v. 4, xiii. 96, xx. 36, xxvii. 124, xxix. 120.

  minotaur, xii. 12, 25.

  mongibello, xiv. 56.

  montagna, xxvii. 47.

  montaperti, x. 85, xxxii. 81.

  montereggione, xxxi. 40.

  montfort, guy of, xii. 119.

  montone, xvi. 94.

  moon, the, x. 80, xx. 127.

  mordred, xxxii. 61.

  morocco, xxvi. 104.

  mosca, vi. 80, xxviii. 106.

  moses, iv. 57.

  mozzi, andrea de', xv. 112.

  murderers, xii.

  myrrha, xxx. 38.


  napoleone degli alberti, xxxii. 55.

  narcissus, xxx. 128.

  na