the divine comedy of dante alighieri




[illustration]




  the
  divine
  comedy
  of
  dante
  alighieri


  a translation

  by
  james romanes sibbald


  edinburgh
  published by david douglas
  mdccclxxxiv


  _all rights reserved._




  edinburgh university press:

  t. and a. constable, printers to her majesty.




  the
  inferno


  a translation
  with notes and an introductory essay by
  james romanes sibbald


  edinburgh
  published by david douglas
  mdccclxxxiv




preface.


a translator who has never felt his self-imposed task to be a light one
may be excused from ente
 
 ___________________________
 
ring into explanations that would but too
naturally take the form of apologies. i will only say that while i have
striven to be as faithful as i could to the words as well as to the
sense of my author, the following translation is not offered as being
always closely literal. the kind of verse employed i believe to be that
best fitted to give some idea, however faint, of the rigidly measured
and yet easy strength of dante's _terza rima_; but whoever chooses to
adopt it with its constantly recurring demand for rhymes necessarily
becomes in some degree its servant. such students as wish to follow the
poet word by word will always find what they need in dr. j. a. carlyle's
excellent prose version of the _inferno_, a work to which i have to
acknowledge my own indebtedness at many points.

the matter of the notes, it is needless to say, has been in very great
part found ready to my hand in existing commentaries. my e
 
 ___________________________
 
dition of john
villani is that of florence, 1823.

the note at page cx was printed before it had been resolved to provide
the volume with a copy of giotto's portrait of dante. i have to thank
the council of the arundel society for their kind permission to messrs.
dawson to make use of their lithograph of mr. seymour kirkup's
invaluable sketch in the production of the frontispiece--a privilege
that would have been taken more advantage of had it not been deemed
advisable to work chiefly from the photograph of the same sketch, given
in the third volume of the late lord vernon's sumptuous and rare edition
of the _inferno_ (florence, 1865). in this vernon photograph, as 
 
 ___________________________
 
well as
in the arundel society's chromolithograph, the disfiguring mark on the
face caused by the damage to the plaster of the fresco is faithfully
reproduced. a less degree of fidelity has been observed in the
frontispiece; although the restoration has not been carried the length
of replacing the lost eye.

edinburgh, _february_, 1884.




contents.


                                                                    page

  florence and dante,                                               xvii

  giotto's portrait of dante,                                         cx

the inferno.

  canto i.

  the slumber--the wood--the hill--the three beasts--virgil--the
  veltro or greyhound,                                                 1

  canto ii.

  dante's misgivings--virgil's account of how he was induced to
  come to his help--the three heavenly ladies--the beginning of
  the journey,                                                    
 
 ___________________________
 
     9

  canto iii.

  the gate of inferno--the vestibule of the caitiffs--the great
  refusal--acheron--charon--the earthquake--the slumber of dante,     17

  canto iv.

  the first circle, which is the limbo of the unbaptized and of
  the virtuous heathen--the great poets--the noble castle--the
  sages and worthies of the ancient world,                            24

  canto v.

  the second circle, which is that of carnal sinners--minos--the
  tempest--the troop of those who died because of their love--
  francesca da rimini--dante's swoon,                                 32

  canto vi.

  the third circle, which is that of the gluttono
 
 ___________________________
 
fifth circle, which is that
  of the wrathful--styx--the lofty tower,                             47

  canto viii.

  the fifth circle continued--the signals--phlegyas--the skiff--
  philip argenti--the city of dis--the fallen angels--the rebuff
  of virgil,                                                          55

  canto ix.

  the city of dis, which is the sixth circle and that of the
  heretics--the furies and the medusa head--the messenger of heaven
  who opens the gates for virgil and dante--the entrance to the
  city--the red-hot tombs,                                            62

  canto x.

  the sixth circle continued--farinata degli uberti--cavalcante dei
  cavalcanti--farinata's prophecy--frederick ii.,                     69

  canto xi.

  the sixth circle continued--pope anastasius--virgil explains on
  what principle sinners are classified in inferno--usury,            77

  canto xii.

  the seventh circle, first division--the minotaur--the river
  of blood, which for
 
 ___________________________
 
to xxxiv.

  the ninth circle--the fourth ring or judecca, the deepest point
  of the inferno and the centre of the universe--it is the place
  of those treacherous to their lords or benefactors--lucifer with
  judas, brutus, and cassius hanging from his mouths--passage
  through the centre of the earth--ascent from the depths to the
  light of the stars in the southern hemisphere,                     260

  index,                                                             269




florence and dante.


dante is himself the hero of the _divine comedy_, and ere many stages of
the _inferno_ have been passed the reader feels that all his steps are
being taken in a familiar companionship. when every allowance has been
made for what the exigencies of art required him to heighten or
suppress, it is still impossible not to be convinced that the author is
revealing himself much as he really was--in some of his weakness as well
as in all his strength. the poem itself, by many an unconscious touch,
d
 
 ___________________________
 
e. the one likeness answers marvellously to the
other; and, together, they have helped the world to recognise in him the
great example of a man of genius who, though at first sight he may seem
to be austere, is soon found to attract our love by the depth of his
feelings as much as he wins our admiration by the wealth of his fancy,
and by the clearness of his judgment on everything concerned with the
lives and destiny of men. his other writings in greater or less degree
confirm the impression of dante's character to be obtained from the
_comedy_. some of them are partly autobiographical; and, studying as a
whole all that is left to us of him, we can gain a general notion of
the nature of his career--when he was born and what was his condition in
life; his early loves and friendships; his studies, military service,
and political aims; his hopes and illusions, and the weary purgatory of
his exile.

to the knowledge of dante's life and character which is thus to be
acquired, the formal biograph
 
 ___________________________
 
 his time with the
seal of genuineness; and something that has been ascertained by careful
research among florentine and other documents. but when all that old and
modern _lives_ have to tell us has been sifted, the additional facts
regarding him are found to be but few; such at least as are beyond
dispute. boccaccio, his earliest biographer, swells out his _life_, as
the earlier commentators on the _comedy_ do their notes, with what are
plainly but legendary amplifications of hints supplied by dante's own
words; while more recent and critical writers succeed with infinite
pains in little beyond establishing, each to his own satisfaction, what
was the order of publication of the poet's works, where he may have
travelled to, and when and for how long a time he may have had this or
that great lord for a patron.

a very few pages would therefore be enough to tell the events of dante's
life as far as they are certainly known. but, to be of use as an
introduction to the study of his great poem, 
 
 ___________________________
 
among the actors in these are to be
found many of the persons of the _comedy_. in reading the poem we are
never suffered for long to forget his exile. from one point of view it
is an appeal to future ages from florentine injustice and ingratitude;
from another, it is a long and passionate plea with his native town to
shake her in her stubborn cruelty. in spite of the worst she can do
against him he remains no less her son. in the early copies of it, the
_comedy_ is well described as the work of dante alighieri, the
florentine; since not only does he people the other world by preference
with florentines, but it is to florence that, even when his words are
bitter against her, his heart is always feeling back. among the glories
of paradise he loves to let his memory rest on the church in which he
was baptized and the streets he used to tread. he takes pleasure in her
stones; and with her towers and palaces florence stands for the
unchanging background to the changing scenes of his mystical pil
 
 ___________________________
 
mage to both emperor and
pope, and only studious to complete a virtual independence of both.
florence had been matilda's favourite place of residence; and,
benefiting largely as it did by her easy rule, it is no wonder that her
name should have been cherished by the florentines for ages after as a
household word.[1] nor is the greatest florentine unmindful of her. foe
of the empire though she was, he only remembers her piety; and it is by
matilda, as representing the active religious life, that dante is
ushered into the presence of beatrice in the earthly paradise.[2]

it was a true instinct which led florence and other cities to side
rather with the pope than with the emperor in the long-continued
struggle between them for predominance in italy. with the pope for
overlord they would at least have a master who was an italian, and one
who, his title being imperfect, would in his own interest be led to
treat them with indulgence; while, in the permanent triumph of the
emperor, italy must have
 
 ___________________________
 
leges. but although the labourers and
humbler tradesmen were without franchises, their interests were not
therefore neglected, being bound up with those of the one or two
thousand citizens who shared with the patricians the control of public
affairs.

there were two classes of nobles with whom florence had to reckon as she
awoke to life--those within the walls, and those settled in the
neighbouring country. in later times it was a favourite boast among the
noble citizens--a boast indulged in by dante--that they were descended
from ancient roman settlers on the banks of the arno. a safer boast
would in many cases have been that their ancestors had come to italy in
the train of otho and other conquering emperors. though settled in the
city, in some cases for generations, the patrician families were not
altogether of it, being distinguished from the other citizens, if not
always by the possession of ancestral landward estates, at least by
their delight in war and contempt for honest industry. 
 
 ___________________________
 
nt and original
as well to earn from his contemporaries the title of the wonder of the
world.

on the goodwill of italians frederick had the claim of being the most
italian of all the emperors since the revival of the western empire, and
the only one of them whose throne was permanently set on italian soil.
yet he never won the popular heart. to the common mind he always
appeared as something outlandish and terrible--as the man who had driven
a profitable but impious trade in the sultan's land. dante, in his
childhood, must have heard many a tale of him; and we find him keenly
interested in the character of the emperor who came nearest to uniting
italy into a great nation, in whose court there had been a welcome for
every man of intellect, and in whom a great original poet would have
found a willing and munificent patron. in the _inferno_, by the mouth of
pier delle vigne, the imperial chancellor, he pronounces frederick to
have been worthy of all honour;[5] yet justice requires him to lodg
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the choice of means, he built
nothing politically that was not ere his death crumbling to dust. his
enduring work was that of an intellectual reformer under whose
protection and with whose personal help his native language was refined,
europe was enriched with a learning new to it or long forgotten, and the
minds of men, as they lost their blind reverence for rome, were prepared
for a freer treatment of all the questions with which religion deals. he
was thus in some respects a precursor of dante.

more than once in the course of frederick's career it seemed as if he
might become master of tuscany in fact as well as in name, had florence
only been as well affected to him as were siena and pisa. but already,
as has been said, the popular interest had been strengthened by
accessions from among the nobles. others of them, without descending
into the ranks of the citizens, had set their hopes on being the first
in a commonwealth rather than privates in the imperial garrison. these
men, with
 
 ___________________________
 
t cities and fortresses held by those of
their own way of thinking. all their wits were then bent on how, by dint
of some fighting and much diplomacy, they might shake the strength and
undermine the credit of their successful rivals in the city, and secure
their own return in triumph. it was an art they were proud to be adepts
in.[8]

in a rapid sketch like this it would be impossible to tell half the
changes made on the constitution of florence during the second part of
the thirteenth century. dante in a well-known passage reproaches
florence with the political restlessness which afflicted her like a
disease. laws, he says, made in october were fallen into desuetude ere
mid-november.[9] and yet it may be that in this constant readiness to
change, lies the best proof of the political capacity of the
florentines. it was to meet new necessities that they made provision of
new laws. especial watchfulness was called for against the encroachments
of the grandees, whose constant tendency--whateve
 
 ___________________________
 
 city, and, above all, the german
men-at-arms of manfred.[15] but the worst enemies of florence were the
traitors in her own ranks. she bore it long in mind that it was her
merchants and handicraftsmen who stood stubbornly at bay, and tinged the
arbia red with their life-blood; while it was among the men of high
degree that the traitors were found. on one of them, bocca degli abati,
who struck off the right hand of the standard-bearer of the cavalry, and
so helped on the confusion and the rout, dante takes vengeance in his
pitiless verse.[16]

the fortifications of florence had been recently completed and
strengthened, and it was capable of a long defence. but the spirit of
the people was broken for the time, and the conquerors found the gates
open. then it was that farinata almost atoned for any wrong he ever did
his native town, by withstanding a proposal made by the ghibelines of
the rival tuscan cities, that florence should be destroyed, and empoli
advanced to fill her room. 'alone, wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h open face i defended her,' dante
makes him say.[17] but the wonder would rather be if he had voted to
destroy a city of which he was about to be one of the tyrants. florence
had now a fuller experience than ever of the oppression which it was in
the character of the ghibelines to exercise. a rich booty lay ready to
their hands; for in the panic after montaperti crowds of the best in
florence had fled, leaving all behind them except their wives and
children, whom they would not trust to the cruel mercy of the victors.
it was in
 
 ___________________________
 
as ready, and knew his advantage. he answered
with the splendid confidence of a man sure of a heavenly if he missed
an earthly triumph. 'go tell the sultan of lucera,'[18] was his reply,
'that to-day i shall send him to hell, or he will send me to paradise.'
manfred was slain, and his body, discovered only after long search, was
denied christian burial. yet, excommunicated though he was, and
suspected of being at heart as much mohammedan as christian, he, as well
as his great rival, is found by dante in purgatory.[19] and, while the
christian poet pours his invective on the pious charles,[20] he is at no
pains to hide how pitiful appeared to him the fate of the frank and
handsome manfred, all whose followers adored him. he, as more than once
it happens in the _comedy_ to those whose memory is dear to the poet, is
saved from inferno by the fiction that in the hour of death he sent one
thought heavenward--'so wide is the embrace of infinite mercy.'[21]

to florence charles proved a useful if 
 
 ___________________________
 
her check by the sicilian vespers,
which lost him half his kingdom (1283). but siena and pisa, arezzo, and
even pistoia, were the objects of a sleepless anxiety. pisa was the
chief source of danger, being both from sentiment and interest
stubbornly ghibeline. when at length its power was broken by genoa, its
great maritime rival, in the naval battle of meloria (1284), there was
no longer any city in tuscany to be compared for wealth and strength
with florence.


iii.

it was at this period that dante, reaching the age of manhood, began to
perform the duties that fell to him as a youthful citizen--duties which,
till the age of thirty was reached, were chiefly those of military
service. the family to which he belonged was a branch of the elisei,
who are included by villani in the earliest catalogue given by him of
the great florentine houses. cacciaguida, one of the elisei, born in
1106, married a daughter of the aldighieri, a family of ferrara. their
son was christened aldighiero, and this w
 
 ___________________________
 
as adopted by the family as a
surname, afterwards changed to alighieri. the son of aldighiero was
bellincione, father of aldighiero ii., the father of dante.

it serves no purpose to fill a page of biography with genealogical
details when the hero's course in life was in no way affected by the
accident of who was his grandfather. in the case of dante, his position
in the state, his political creed, and his whole fashion of regarding
life, were vitally influenced by the circumstances of his birth. he knew
that his genius, and his genius alone, was to procure him fame; he
declares a virtuous and gentle life to be the true proof of nobility:
and yet his family pride is always breaking through. in real life, from
his family's being decayed in wealth and fallen in consideration
compared with its neighbours, he may have been led to put emphasis o
 
 ___________________________
 
asure with which he
listens to a declaration of the unmixed purity of their common
blood.[25] in inferno he catches a glimpse, sudden and terrible, of a
kinsman whose violent death had remained unavenged; and, for the nonce,
the philosopher-poet is nothing but the member of an injured florentine
clan, and winces at the thought of a neglected blood feud.[26] and when
farinata, the great ghibeline, and haughtiest of all the florentines of
the past generation, asks him, 'who were thine ancestors?' dante says
with a proud pretence of humility, 'anxious to obey, i hid nothing, but
told him all he demanded.'[27]

dante was born in florence in the may of 1265.[28] a brother of his
father had been one of the guards of the florentine caroccio, or
standard-bearing car, at the battle of montaperti (1260). whether
dante's father necessarily shared in the exile of his party may be
doubted. he is said--on slight authority--to have been a jurisconsult:
there is no reason to suppose he was at montaperti. i
 
 ___________________________
 
t is difficult to
believe that florence was quite emptied of its lawyers and merchants as
a consequence of the ghibeline victory. in any case, it is certain that
while the fugitive guelfs were mostly accompanied by their wives, and
did not return till 1267, we have dante's own word for it that he was
born in the great city by the arno,[29] and was baptized in the
baptistery, his beautiful st. john's.[30] at the font he received the
name of durante, shortened, as he bore it, into dante. it is in this
form that it finds a place in the _comedy_,[31] once, and only once,
written down of necessity, the poet says--the necessity of being
faithful in the report of beatrice's words: from the wider necessity, we
may assume, of imbedding in the work itself the name by which the author
was commonly known, and by which he desired to be called for all time.

when dante was about ten years old he lost his father. of his mother
nothing but her christian name of bella is known. neither of th
 
 ___________________________
 
em is
mentioned in the _comedy_,[32] nor indeed are his wife and children.
boccaccio describes the alighieri as having been in easy though not in
wealthy circumstances; and leonardo bruni, who in the fifteenth century
sought out what he could learn of dante, says of him that he was
possessed of a patrimony sufficient for an honourable livelihood. that
he was so might be inferred from the character of the education he
received. his studies, says boccaccio, were not directed to any object
of worldly profit. that there is no sign of their having been directed
by churchmen tends to prove the existence in his native town of a class
of cultivated laymen; and that there was such appears from the ease
with which, when, passing from boyhood to manhood, he 
 
 ___________________________
 
, to his contemporaries it answered the promise of its
title and stood for a magazine of almost complete information in the
domains of natural history, ethics, and politics. it was written in
french, as being a more agreeable language than italian; and was
composed, there is reason to believe, while latini lived in paris as an
exiled guelf after montaperti. his _tesoretto_, or _little treasure_, a
poem in jingling eight-syllabled italian verse, has been thought by some
to have supplied hints to dante for the _comedy_.[35] by neither of
these works is he evinced a man of strong intellect, or even of good
taste. yet there is the testimony of villani that he did much to refine
the language of his contemporaries, and to apply fixed principles to the
conduct of state affairs.[36] dante meets him in inferno, and hails him
as his intellectual father--as the master who taught him from day to day
how fame is to be won.[37] but it is too much to infer from these words
that latini served as his teache
 
 ___________________________
 
r, in the common sense of the word. it
is true they imply an intimacy between the veteran scholar and his
young townsman; but the closeness of their intercourse is perhaps best
accounted for by supposing that latini had been acquainted with dante's
father, and by the great promise of dante's boyhood was led to take a
warm interest in his intellectual development. their intimacy, to judge
from the tone of their conversation down in inferno, had lasted till
latini's death. but no tender reminiscence of the days they spent
together avails to save him from condemnation at the hands of his severe
disciple. by the manners of brunetto, and the epicurean heresies of
others of his friends, dante, we may be sure, was never infected or
defiled.

dante describes himself as having begun the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ilosopher. from his earliest years he was used to write in verse;
and he seems to have esteemed as one of his best endowments the easy
command of his mother tongue acquired by him while still in boyhood.

of the poems written in his youth he made a selection, and with a
commentary gave them to the world as his first work.[38] all the sonnets
and canzoni contained in it bear more or less directly on his love for
beatrice portinari. this lady, whose name is so indissolubly associated
with that of dante, was the daughter of a rich citizen of good family.
when dante saw her first he was a child of nine, and she a few months
younger. it would seem fabulous, he says, if he related what things he
did, and of what a passion he was the victim during his boyhood. he
seized opportunities of beholding her, but for long never passed beyond
a silent worship; and he was eighteen before she spoke to him, and then
only in the way of a passing salutation. on this he had a vision, and
that inspired him with a
 
 ___________________________
 
ad written,
but the first he put into circulation. the mode of publication he
adopted was the common one of sending copies of it to such other poets
as were within reach. the sonnet in itself contains a challenge to
interpret his dream. several poets attempted the riddle--among them the
philosopher and poet guido cavalcanti. they all failed in the solution;
but with some of them he was thus brought into terms of intimacy, and
with cavalcanti of the closest friendship. some new grace of style in
dante's verse, some art in the presentation of his mystical meaning that
escapes the modern reader, may have revealed to the middle-aged man of
letters that a new genius had arisen. it was by guido's advice that the
poems of which this sonnet stands the first were some years later
collected and published with the explanatory narrative. to him, in a
sense, the whole work is addressed; and it agreed with his taste, as
well as dante's own, that it should contain nothing but what was written
in the vulga
 
 ___________________________
 
 and that, under the veil of love for her, the poet would
express his youthful passion for truth. others, going to the opposite
extreme, are found wondering why he never sought, or, seeking, failed to
win, the hand of beatrice. to those who would refine the beatrice of the
early work into a being as purely allegorical as she of the _comedy_, it
may be conceded that the _vita nuova_ is not so much the history of a
first love as of the new emotional and intellectual life to which a
first love, as dante experienced it, opens the door. out of the
incidents of their intercourse he chooses only such as serve for motives
to the joys and sorrows of the passionate aspiring soul. on the other
hand, they who seek reasons why dante did not marry beatrice have this
to justify their curiosity, that she did marry another man. but her
husband was one of the rich and powerful bardi; and her father was so
wealthy that after providing for his children he could endow a hospital
in florence. the marriage was do
 
 ___________________________
 
ubtless arranged as a matter of family
convenience, due regard being had to her dower and her husband's
fortune; and we may assume that when dante, too, was married later on,
his wife was found for him by the good offices of his friends.[40] our
manners as regards these things are not those of the italy of the
thirteenth century. it may safely be said that dante never dreamed of
beatrice for his wife; that the expectation of wedding her would have
sealed his lips from uttering to the world any word of his love; and
that she would have lost something in his esteem if, out of love for
him, she had refused the man her father chose for her.

we must not seek in the _vita nuova_ what it does not profess to give.
there was a real beatrice portinari, to a careless glance perhaps not
differing much from other florentine ladies of her age and condition;
but her
 
 ___________________________
 
 we do not find in dante's pages. these are devoted to a record
of the dreams and visions, the new thoughts and feelings of which she
was the occasion or the object. he worshipped at a distance, and in a
single glance found reward enough for months of adoration; he read all
heaven into a smile. so high strung is the narrative, that did we come
on any hint of loving dalliance it would jar with all the rest she is
always at a distance from him, less a woman than an angel.

in all this there is certainly as much of retice
 
 ___________________________
 
t. he cannot dwell on the
circumstances of her departure, he says, without being his own
panegyrist. taken along with some other expressions in the _vita nuova_,
and the tone of her words to him when they meet in the earthly paradise,
we may gather from this that not only was she aware of his long
devotion, but that, ere she died, he had been given to understand how
highly she rated it. and on the occasion of her death, one described as
being her nearest relative by blood and, after cavalcanti, dante's chief
friend--her brother, no doubt--came to him and begged him to write
something concerning her. it would be strange indeed if they had never
looked frankly into one another's faces; and yet, for anything that is
directly told in the _vita nuova_, they never did.

the chief value of the _vita nuova_ is therefore psychological. it is a
mine of materials illustrative of the author's mental and emotional
development, but as regards historical details it is wanting in fulness
and precision. yet
 
 ___________________________
 
, even in such a sketch of dante's life as this tries
to be, it is necessary to dwell on the turning-points of the narrative
contained in the _vita nuova_; the reader always remembering that on one
side dante says more than the fact that so he may glorify his love, and
less on another that he may not fail in consideration for beatrice. she
is first a maiden whom no public breath is to disturb in her virgin
calm; and afterwards a chaste wife, whose lover is as jealous of her
reputation as any husband could be. the youthful lover had begun by
propounding the riddle of his love so obscurely that even by his
fellow-poets it had been found insoluble, adepts though they themselves
were in the art of smoth
 
 ___________________________
 
nd seeks to be in her
company; and he even leads us to infer that it was owing to his poems
that she became a well-known personage in the streets of florence.
immediately after the sonnet in which he has recourse to pity, he tells
how he was led by a friend into the house of a lady, married only that
day, whom they find surrounded by her lady friends, met to celebrate her
home-coming after marriage. it was the fashion for young gentlemen to
offer their services at such a feast. on this occasion dante for one can
give no help. a sudden trembling seizes him; he leans for support
against the painted wall of the chamber; then, lifting his eyes to see
if the ladies have remarked his plight, he is troubled at beholding
beatrice among them, with a smile on her lips, as, leaning towards her,
they mock at her lover's weakness. to his friend, who, as he leads him
from the chamber, asks what ails him, he replies: 'my feet have reached
that point beyond which if they pass they can never return.' it was
 
 ___________________________
 
 only
matrons that gathered round a bride at her home-coming; beatrice was
therefore by this time a married woman. that she was but newly married
we may infer from dante's confusion on finding her there.[43] his secret
has now been discovered, and he must either renounce his love, or, as he
is at length free to do, beatrice being married, declare it openly, and
spend his life in loyal devotion to her as the mistress of his
imagination and of his heart.[44]

but how is he to pursue his devotion to her, and make use of his new
privilege of freer intercourse, when the very sight of her so unmans
him? he writes three sonnets explaining what may seem pusillanimity i
 
 ___________________________
 
 deserves. and the last sentence of the
_vita nuova_ expresses a hope--a hope which would be arrogant coming
after anything less perfect than the _vita nuova_--that, concerning her,
he shall yet say things never said before of any woman. thus the poet's
earliest work contains an earnest of the latest, and his morning makes
one day with his evening.

the narrative of the _vita nuova_ is fluent and graceful, in this
contrasting strongly with the analytical arguments attached to the
various poems. dante treats his readers as if they were able to catch
the meaning of the most recondite allegory, and yet were ignorant of the
alphabet of literary form. and, as is the case with other poets of the
time, the free movement of his fancy is often hampered by the necessity
he felt of expressing himself in the language of the popular scholastic
philosophy. all this is but to say that he was a man of his period, as
well as a great genius. and even in this his first work he bettered the
example of guido ca
 
 ___________________________
 
valcanti, guido of bologna, and the others whom he
found, but did not long suffer to remain, the masters of italian
verse.[47] these inherited from the provençal and sicilian poets much
of the cant of which european poetry has been so slow to clear itself;
and chiefly that of presenting all human emotion and volition under the
figure of love for a mistress, who was often merely a creature of fancy,
set up to act as queen of beauty while the poet ran his intellectual
jousts. but dante dealt in no feigned inspiration, and distinguishes
himself from the whole school of philosophical and artificial poets as
'one who can only speak as love inspires.'[48] he may deal in allegory
and utter sayings dark enough, but the first suggestions of his thoughts
are obtained from facts of emotion or of real life. his lady was no
creature of fancy, but his neighbour beatrice portinari: and she who
ends in the _paradiso_ as the embodied beauty of holiness was, to begin
with, a fair florentine 
 
 ___________________________
 
girl.

the instance of beatrice is the strongest, although others might be
adduced, to illustrate dante's economy of actual experience; the skilful
use, that is, of real emotions and incidents to serve for suggestion and
material of poetical thought. as has been told, towards the close of the
_vita nuova_ he describes how he found a temporary consolation for the
loss of beatrice in the pity of a fair and noble lady. in his next work,
the _convito_, or _banquet_, she appears as the personification of
philosophy. the plan of the _convito_ is that of a commentary on odes
which are interpreted as hav
 
 ___________________________
 
ing various meanings--among others the
literal as distinguished from the allegorical or essentially true. as
far as this lady is concerned, dante shows some eagerness to pass from
the literal meaning; desirous, it may be, to correct the belief that he
had ever wavered in his exclusive devotion to beatrice. that for a time
he did transfer his thoughts from beatrice in heaven to the fair lady of
the window is almost certain, and by the time he wrote the _purgatorio_
he was able to make confession of such a fault. but at the earlier
period at which the _convito_[49] was written, he may have come to
regard the avowal in the _vita nuova_ as a
 
 ___________________________
 
 her image. and from thus beholding
    her in fancy i went on to frequent the places where she is to be
    found in very deed--in the schools of theology, to wit, and the
    debates of philosophers. so that in a little time, thirty months or
    so, i began to taste so much of her sweetness that the love i bore
    to her effaced or banished every other thought.'[50]

no one would guess from this description of how he grew enamoured of
philosophy, that at the beginning of his arduous studies dante took a
wife. she was gemma, the daughter of manetto donati, but related only
distantly, if at all, to the great corso donati. they were married in
1292, he being twenty-seven; and in the course of the nine years that
elapsed till his exile she bore him five sons and two daughters.[51]
from his silence regarding her in his works, and from some words of
boccaccio's which apply only to the period of his exile, it has been
inferred that the union was unhappy. but dante makes no mention in his
writi
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs of his parents or children any more than of gemma.[52] and why
should not his wife be included among the things dearest to him which,
he tells us, he had to leave behind him on his banishment? for anything
we know to the contrary, their wedded life up to the time of his exile
may have been happy enough; although most probably the marriage was one
of convenience, and almost certainly dante found little in gemma's mind
that answered to his own.[53] in any case it is not safe to lay stress
upon his silence. during the period covered by the _vita nuova_ he
served more than once in the field, and to this none of his earlier
works make any reference. in 1289, arezzo having warmly espoused the
ghibeline cause, the florentines, led by corso donati and the great
merchant vieri dei cerchi, took up arms and met the foe in the field of
campaldino, on the edge of the upland region of the cas
 
 ___________________________
 
entino. dante, as
a young man of means and family, fought in the vanguard;[54] and in a
letter partly preserved by one of his early biographers[55] he describes
himself as being then no tiro in arms, and as having with varying
emotions watched the fortunes of the day. from this it is clear that he
had served before, probably in an expedition into the aretine territory
made in the previous year, and referred to in the _inferno_.[56] in the
same year as campaldino was won he was present at the surrender of
cap
 
 ___________________________
 
rona, a fortress belonging to pisa.[57] but of all this he is silent
in his works, or only makes casual mention of it by way of illustration.
it is, therefore, a waste of time trying to prove his domestic misery
from his silence about his marriage.


iv.

so hard a student was dante that he now for a time nearly lost the use
of his eyes.[58] but he was cured by regimen, and came to see as well as
ever, he tells us; which we can easily believe was very well indeed. for
his work, as he planned it out, he needed all his powers. the _convito_,
for example, was designed to admit of a full treatment of all that
concerns philosophy. it marks an earlier stage of his intellectual and
spiritual life than does the opening of the _inferno_. in it we have the
fruit of the years during 
 
 ___________________________
 
independent of wealth or ancestry, and he finds
every one to be noble who practises the virtues proper to his time of
life. 'none of the uberti of florence or the visconti of milan can say
he is noble because belonging to such or such a race; for the divine
seed is sown not in a family but in the individual man.' this amounts,
it must be admitted, to no more than saying that high birth is one
thing, and nobility of character another; but it is significant of what
were the current opinions, that dante should be at such pains to
distinguish between the two qualities. the canzone which supplies the
text for the treatise closes with a picture of the noble soul at every
stage of life, to which chaucer may well have been indebted for his
description of the true gentleman:[60]--'the soul that is adorned by
this grace does not keep it hid, but from the day when soul is wed to
body shows it forth even until death. in early life she is modest,
obedient, and gentle, investing the outward form and all 
 
 ___________________________
 
mptuous of the
vulgar objects of ambition. the calm is on the surface. as has been said
above, he was proud of his own birth, the more proud perhaps that his
station was but a middling one; and to the close of his life he hated
upstarts with their sudden riches, while the philip argenti on whom in
the _inferno_ he takes what has much the air of a private revenge may
have been only a specimen of the violent and haughty nobles with whom he
stood on an uneasy footing.

yet the impression we get of dante's surroundings in florence from the
_vita nuova_ and other poems, from references in the _comedy_, and from
some anecdotes more or less true which survive in the pages of boccaccio
and elsewhere, is on the whole a pleasant one. we should mistake did we
think of him as always in the guise of absorbed student or tearful
lover. friends he had, and society of various kinds. he tells how in a
severe illness he was nursed by a young and noble lady, nearly related
to him by blood--his sister most prob
 
 ___________________________
 
ntine to be told that the one kind of service was of
less dignity than the other. the population grew apace, and, to provide
the means for extending the city walls, every citizen, on pain of his
testament being found invalid, was required to bequeath a part of his
estate to the public. already the banks of the arno were joined by three
bridges of stone, and the main streets were paved with the
irregularly-shaped blocks of lava still familiar to the sojourner in
florence. but between the time of dante's boyhood and the close of the
century the other outstanding features of the city were greatly altered,
or were in the course of change. the most important churches of
florence, as he first knew it, were the baptistery and the neighbouring
small cathedral church of santa reparata; after these ranked the church
of the trinity, santo stefano, and some other churches which are now
replaced by larger ones, or of which the site alone can be discovered.
on the other side of the river, samminiato with
 
 ___________________________
 
 its elegant façade rose
as now upon its hill.[69] the only great civic building was the palace
of the podesta. the old market was and had long been the true centre of
the city's life.

at the time dante went into exile arnolfo was already working on the
great new cathedral of st. mary of the flowers, the spacious santa
croce, and the graceful badia; and santa maria novella was slowly
assuming the perfection of form that was later to make it the favourite
of michel angelo. the palace of the signory was already planned, though
half a century was to elapse before its tower soared aloft to daunt the
private strongholds which bristled, fierce and threatening, all over the
city. the bell-tower of gi
 
 ___________________________
 
otto, too, was of later erection--the only
pile we can almost regret that dante never saw. the architect of it was
however already adorning the walls of palace and cloister with paintings
whose inspiration was no longer, like that of the works they
overshadowed, drawn from the outworn motives of byzantine art, but from
the faithful observation of nature.[70] he in painting and the pisan
school in sculpture were furnishing the world with novel types of beauty
in the plastic arts, answering to the 'sweet new style' in verse of
which it was dante that discovered the secret.[7
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, who had
ample experience of how accomplished they were.

at home they had full employment for their political genius; and still
upon the old problem, of how to curb the arrogance of the class that, in
place of being satisfied to share in the general prosperity, sought its
profit in the maintenance of privilege. it is necessary, at the cost of
what may look like repetition, to revert to the presence and activity of
this class in florence, if we are to form a true idea of the
circumstances of dante's life, and enter into the spirit with which much
of the _comedy_ is informed. though many of the nobles were now engaged
in commerce and figured among the popular leaders, most of the greater
houses stood proudly aloof from everything that might corrupt their
gentility. these were styled the magnates: they found, as it were, a
vocation for themselves in being nobles. among them the true distinctive
spirit of ghibelinism survived, although none of them would now have
dared to describe himself a
 
 ___________________________
 
n
political influence. if serfage was already abolished in the state of
florence, it was the ordinances which made it possible for the serf to
use his liberty.[72] but the greatest blow dealt to the nobles by the
new laws was their exclusion, as nobles, from all civil and political
offices. these they could hold only by becoming members of one of the
trade guilds.[73] and to deprive a citizen of his rights it was enough
to inscribe his name in the list of magnates.

it is not known in what year dante became a member of the guild of
apothecaries. without much reason it has been assumed that he was one of
the nobles who took advantage of the law of 1294. but there is no
evidence that in his time the alighieri ranked as magnates, and much
ground for believing that for some considerable time past they had
belonged to the order of full citizens.

it was not necessary for every guildsman to practise the art or engage
in the business to which his guild was devoted, and we are not required
to imagi
 
 ___________________________
 
ne dante as having anything to do with medicine or with the
spices and precious stones in which the apothecaries traded. the guilds
were political as much as industrial associations, and of the public
duties of his membership he took his full share. the constitution of the
republic, jealously careful to limit the power of the individual
citizen, provided that the two chief executive officers, the podesta and
the captain of the people, should always be foreigners. they held office
only for six months. to
 
 ___________________________
 
 each of them was assigned a numerous council,
and before a law could be abrogated or a new one passed it needed the
approval of both these councils, as well as that of the priors, and of
the heads of the principal guilds. the priors were six in number, one
for each district of the city. with them lay the administration in
general of the laws, and the conduct of foreign affairs. their office
was elective, and held for two months.[74] of one or other of the
councils dante is known to have been a member in 1295, 1296, 1300, and
1301.[75] in 1299 he is found engaged on a political mission to the
little hill-city of san gemigniano, where in the town-house they still
show the pulpit from which he addressed the local senate.[76] from the
middle of june till the middle of august 1300 he served as one of the
priors.[77]

at the time when dante entered on this office, florence was distracted
by the feud of blacks and whites, names borrowed from the factions of
pistoia, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e filled by boniface viii., who six years
previously, by violence and fraud, had procured the resignation of
celestine v.--him who made the great refusal.[82] boniface was at once
arrogant and subtle, wholly faithless, and hampered by no scruple
either of religion or humanity. but these qualities were too common
among those who before and after him filled the papal throne, to secure
him in a special infamy. that he has won from the ruthless hatred which
blazes out against him in many a verse of dante's,[83] and for this
hatred he is indebted to his interference in the affairs of florence,
and what came as one of the fruits of it--the poet's exile.

and yet, from the point of view not only of the interest of rome but
also of italy, there is much to be said for the policy of boniface.
german domination was a just subject of fear, and the imperialist
element was still so strong in northern and central italy, that if the
emperor albert[84] had been a man of a more resolute ambition, he
might--s
 
 ___________________________
 
led to
secure general support, for without being ghibeline in fact it had the
air of being so; and the name of ghibeline was one that no reasoning
could rob of its terrors.[85]

as was usual in florence when political feeling ran high, the hotter
partisans came to blows, and the streets were more than once disturbed
by violence and bloodshed. to an onlooker it must have seemed as if the
interposition of some external authority was desirable; and almost on
the same day as the new priors, of whom dante was one and who were all
whites, took office in the june of 1300, the cardinal acquasparta
entered the city, deputed by the pope to establish peace. his proposals
were declined by the party in power, and having failed in his mission he
left the city, and took the priestly revenge upon it of placing it under
interdict.[86] ere many months were passed, the blacks, at a meeting of
the heads of the party, resolved to open negotiations anew with
boniface. for this illegal step some of them, includin
 
 ___________________________
 
g corso donati,
were ordered into exile by the authorities, who, to give an appearance
of impartiality to their proceedings, at the same time banished some of
the whites, and among them guido cavalcanti. it was afterwards made a
charge against dante that he had procured the recall of his friend guido
and the other whites from exile; but to this he could answer that he was
not then in office.[87] corso in the meantime was using his enforced
absence from florence to treat freely with the pope.

boniface had already entered into correspondence with charles of valois,
brother of philip, the reigning king of france, with the view of
securing the services of a strongly-connected champion. it was the game
that had been played before by the roman 
 
 ___________________________
 
 openly hostile to the papal and guelf
interest by refusing him admission to the city. he came with gentle
words, and ready to take the most stringent oaths not to tamper with the
liberties of the commonwealth; but once he had gained an entrance
(november 1301) and secured his hold on florence, he threw off every
disguise, gave full play to his avarice, and amused himself with looking
on at the pillage of the dwellings and warehouses of the whites by the
party of corso donati. by all this, says dante, charles 'gained no
land,' lackland as he was, 'but only sin and shame.'[89]

there is a want of precise information as to the events of this time.
but it seems probable that dante formed one of an embassy sent by the
rulers of florence to the pope in the autumn of this year; and that on
the occasion of the entrance of charles he was absent from florence.
what the embassy had to propose which boniface could be expected to be
satisfied with, short of complete submission, is not known and is not

 
 ___________________________
 
easy to guess. it seems clear at least that dante cannot have been
chosen as a person likely to be specially pleasing to the roman court.
within the two years preceding he had made himself prominent in the
various councils of which he was a member, by his sturdy opposition to
affording aid to the pope in his romagnese wars. it is even possible
that his theory of the empire was already more or less known to
boniface, and as that pontiff claimed imperial authority over such
states as florence, this would be sufficient to secure him a rough
recep
 
 ___________________________
 
ce and the interest of the
_parte guelfa_. if the fine was not paid within three days his goods and
property were to be confiscated. this condemnation he shared with three
others. in the following march he was one of twelve condemned, for
contumacy, to be burned alive if ever they fell into the hands of the
florentine authorities. we may perhaps assume that the cruel sentence,
as well as the charge of peculation, was uttered only in order to
conform to some respectable precedents.


v.

besides dante many other whites had been expelled from florence.[91]
whether they liked it or not, they were forced to seek aid from the
ghibelines of arezzo and romagna. this led naturally to a change of
political views, and though at the time of their banishment all of them
were guelfs in various degrees, as months and years went on they
developed into ghibelines, more or less declared. dissensions, too,
would be bred among them out of recriminations touching the past, and
charges of deserting the general 
 
 ___________________________
 
interest for the sake of securing
private advantage in the way of making peace with the republic. for a
time, however, the common desire of gaining a return to florence held
them together. of the council constituted to bring this about, dante was
a member. once only with his associates does he appear to have come the
length of formal negotiations with a view to getting back. charles of
valois had passed away from the temporary scene of his extortions and
treachery, upon the futile quest of a crown. boniface, ere being
persecuted to death by his old ally, philip of france (1303), had vainly
attempted to check the cruelty of the blacks; and benedict, his
successor, sent the cardinal of ostia to florence with powers to
reconcile the tw
 
 ___________________________
 
o parties. dante is usually credited with the
composition of the letter in which vieri dei cerchi and his
fellow-exiles answered the call of the cardinal to discuss the
conditions of their return home. all that had been done by the banished
party, said the letter, had been done for the public good.[92] the
negotiations came to nothing; nor were the exiles more fortunate in
arms. along with their allies they did once succeed by a sudden dash in
penetrating to the market-place, and florence lay within their grasp
 
 ___________________________
 

when, seized with panic, they turned and fled from the city, which many
of them were never to see again.

almost certainly dante took no active part in this attempt, and indeed
there is little to show that he was ever heartily associated with the
exiles. in his own words, he was compelled to break with his companions
owing to their imbecility and wickedness, and to form a party by
himself.[93] with the whites, then, he had little more to do; and the
story of their fortunes need not longer detain us. it is enough to say
that while, like dante, the chief men among them were for ever excluded
from florence, the principles f
 
 ___________________________
 
. the success of
donati and his party, though won with the help of the people, was too
clearly opposed to the popular interest to be permanent. ere long the
inveterate contradiction between magnate and merchant was again to
change the course of florentine politics; the disabilities against
lawless nobles were again to be enforced; and corso donati himself was
to be crushed in the collision of passions he had evoked but could not
control (1308). though tenderly attached to members of his family, dante
bore corso a grudge as having been the chief agent in procuring his
exile--a grudge which years could do nothing to wipe out. he places in
the mouth of forese donati a prophecy of the great baron's shameful
death, expressed in curt and scornful words, terrible from a
brother.[94] it is no figure of speech to say that dante nursed revenge.

for some few years his hopes were set on henry of luxemburg, elected
emperor in 1308. a ghibeline, in the ordinary sense of the term, dante
never was. we hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e in his _de monarchia_ a full account of the
conception he had formed of the empire--that of authority in temporal
affairs embodied in a just ruler, who, being already supreme, would be
delivered from all personal ambition; who should decree justice and be a
refuge for all that were oppressed. he was to be the captain of
christian society and the guardian of civil right; as in another sphere
the pope was to be the shepherd of souls and the guardian of the deposit
of divine truth. in dante's eyes the one great officer was as much god's
vicegerent as the other. while the most that a ghibeline or a moderate
guelf would concede was that there should be a division of power between
pope and emperor--the ghibeline leaving it to the emperor and the guelf
to the pope to define their provinces--dante held, and in this he stood
almost alone among politicians, that they ought to be concerned with
wholly different kingdoms, and that christendom was wronged by the
trespass of either upon the 
 
 ___________________________
 
other's domain. an equal wrong was done by
the neglect by either of his duty, and both, as dante judged, had been
shamefully neglecting it. for more than half a century no emperor had
set foot in italy; and since the papal court had under clement v. been
removed to avignon (1305), the pope had ceased to be a free agent, owing
to his neighbourhood to france and the unscrupulous philip.[95]

dante trusted that the virtuous single-minded henry vii. would prove a
monarch round whom all the best in italy might gather to make him
emperor in deed as well as in name. his judgment took the colour of his
hopes, for under the awful shadow of the emperor he trusted to enter
florence. although no ghibeline or imperialist in the vulgar sense, he
constituted himself henry's apologist and herald; and in letters
addressed to the 'wicked florentines,' to the emperor, and to the
princes and peoples of it
 
 ___________________________
 
aly, he blew as it were a trumpet-blast of
triumph over the emperor's enemies and his own. henry had crossed the
alps, and was tarrying in the north of italy, when dante, with a keen
eye for where the key of the situation lay, sharpened by his own wishes,
urged him to lose no more time in reducing the lombard cities to
obedience, but to descend on florence, the rotten sheep which was
corrupting all the italian flock. the men of florence he bids prepare to
receive the just reward of their crimes.

the florentines answered dante's bitter invective and the emperor's
milder promises by an unwearied opposition with the arms which their
increasing command of all that
 
 ___________________________
 
 tends to soften life made them now less
willing to take up, and by the diplomacy in which they were supreme the
exiles were recalled, always excepting the more stubborn or dangerous;
and among these was reckoned dante. alliances were made on all hands, an
art which henry was notably wanting in the trick of. wherever he turned
he was met and checkmated by the florentines, who, wise by experience,
were set on retaining control of their own affairs. after his coronation
at rome (1312),[96] he marched northwards, and with his pisan and
aretine allies for six weeks laid fruitless siege to florence. king
robert of naples, whose aid he had hoped to gain by means of a family
alliance, was joined to the league of gue
 
 ___________________________
 
lfs, and henry passed away from
florence to engage in an enterprise against the southern kingdom, a
design cut short by his death (1313). he was the last emperor that ever
sought to take the part in italian affairs which on dante's theory
belonged to the imperial office. well-meaning but weak, he was not the
man to succeed in reducing to practice a scheme of government which had
broken down even in the strong hands of the two fredericks, and ere the
commonwealths of italy had become each as powerful as a northern
kingdom. to explain his failure, dante finds that his descent into italy
was unseasonable: he came too soon. rather, it may be said, he came far
too late.[97]

when, on the death of henry, dante was disappointe
 
 ___________________________
 
ty. in a letter addressed to the
italian cardinals, he besought them to replace clement v., who died in
1314,[98] by an italian pope. why should they, he asked, resign this
great office into gascon hands? why should rome, the true centre of
christendom, be left deserted and despised? his appeal was fruitless, as
indeed it could not fail to be with only six italian cardinals in a
college of twenty-four; and after a vacancy of two years the gascon
clement was succeeded by another gascon. although dante's motives in
making this attempt were doubtless as purely patriotic as those which
inspired catherine of siena to similar action a century later, he met,
we may be sure, with but little sympathy from his former
fellow-citizens. they were intent upon the interests of florence alone,
and even of these they may sometimes have taken a narrow view. his was
the wider patriotism of the italian, and it was the whole peninsula
that he longed to see delivered from french influence and once more
provided 
 
 ___________________________
 
bourhood
of the pope. in this they were guilty of no desertion of their
principles. their guelfism had never been more than a mode of minding
themselves.

for about three years (1313-1316) the most dangerous foe of florence was
uguccione de la faggiuola, a partisan ghibeline chief, sprung from the
mountain-land of urbino, which lies between tuscany and romagna. he made
himself lord of pisa and lucca, and defeated the florentines and their
allies in the great battle of montecatini (1315). to him dante is
believed to have attached himself.[99] it would be easy for the republic
to form an exaggerated idea of the part which the exile had in shaping
the policy or contributing to the success of his patron; and we are not
surprised to find that, although dante's fighting days were done, he was
after the defeat subjected to a third condemnation (november 1315). if
caught, he was to lose his head; and his sons, or some of them, were
threatened with the same fate. the terms of the sentence may again 
 
 ___________________________
 
have
been more severe than the intentions of those who uttered it. however
this may be, an amnesty was passed in the course of the following year,
and dante was urged to take advantage of it. he found the conditions of
pardon too humiliating. like a malefactor he would require to walk,
taper in hand and a shameful mitre on his head, to the church of st
john, and there make an oblation for his crimes. it was not in this
fashion that in his more hopeful hours the exile had imagined his
restoration. if ever he trod again the pavement of his beautiful st
john's, it was to be proudly, as a patriot touching whom his country had
confessed her sins; or, wi
 
 ___________________________
 
d florence on the terms imposed by
his enemies, so he never had the chance of entering it on his own. the
spirit in which he, as it were, turned from the open gates of his native
town is well expressed in a letter to a friend, who would seem to have
been a churchman who had tried to win his compliance with the terms of
the pardon. after thanking his correspondent for his kindly eagerness to
recover him, and referring to the submission required, he says:--'and is
it in this glorious fashion that dante alighieri, wearied with an almost
trilustral exile, is recalled to his country? is this the desert of an
innocence known to all, and of laborious study which for long has kept
him asweat?... but, father, this is no way for me to return to my
country by; though if by you or others one can be hit upon through which
the honour and fame of dante will take no hurt, it shall be followed by
me with no tardy steps. if by none such florence is to be entered, i
will never enter florence. what then! can i
 
 ___________________________
 
 not, wherever i may be,
behold the sun and stars? is not meditation upon the sweetness of truth
as free to me in one place as another? to enjoy this, no need to submit
myself ingloriously and with ignominy to the state and people of
florence! and wherever i may be thrown, in any case i trust at least to
find daily bread.'

the cruelty and injustice of florence to her greatest son have been the
subject of much eloquent blame. but, in justice to his contemporaries,
we must try to see dante as they saw him, and bear in mind that the very
qualities fame makes so much of--his fervent temper and devotion to
great ideas--placed him out of the reach of common sympathy. others
besides him had been banished from florence, with as much or as little
reason, and had known the saltness of bread which has been begged, and
the steepness of strange stairs. the pains of banishment made them the
more eager to have it brought to a close. with dante all that he
suffered went to swell the count of g
 
 ___________________________
 
ion; it also goes far to account for his difficulty in getting
back. we can even imagine that in florence his refusal to abate one
tittle of what was due to him in the way of apology was, for a time, the
subject of wondering speculation to the citizens, ere they turned again
to their everyday affairs of politics and merchandise. had they been
more used to deal with men in whom a great genius was allied to a
stubborn sense of honour, they would certainly have left less room in
their treatment of dante for happier ages to cavil at.

how did the case stand? in the letter above quoted from, dante says that
his innocence was known to all. as far as the charge of corruption in
his office-bearing went, his banishment--no one can doubt it for a
moment--was certainly unjust; and the political changes in florence
since the death of corso donati had taken all the life out of the other
charges. but by his eager appeals to the emperor to chastise the
florentines he had raised fresh barriers against his 
 
 ___________________________
 
return. the
governors of the republic could not be expected to adopt his theory of
the empire and share his views of the imperial claims; and to them dante
must have seemed as much guilty of disloyalty to the commonwealth in
inviting the presence of henry, as corso donati had been in dante's eyes
for his share in bringing charles of valois to harry florence. his
political writings since his exile--and all his writings were more or
less political--had been such as might well confirm or create an opinion
of him as a man difficult to live with, as one whose intellectual
arrogance had a ready organ in his unsparing tongue or pen. rumour
would most willingly dwell upon and distort the features of his
character and conduct that separated him from the common herd. and to
add to all this
 
 ___________________________
 
, even after he had deserted the party of the whites in
exile, and had become a party to himself, he found his friends and
patrons--for where else could he find them?--among the foes of florence.


vi.

history never abhors a vacuum so much as when she has to deal with the
life of a great man, and for those who must have details of dante's
career during the nineteen years which elapsed between his banishment
and his death, the industry of his biographers has exhausted every
available hint, while some of them press into their service much that
has only the remotest bearing on their hero. if even one-half of their
suppositions were adopted, we should be forced to the conclusion that
the _comedy_ and all the other works of his exile were composed in the
intervals of a very busy life. we have his own word for this much,
(_convito_ 
 
 ___________________________
 
l
of his wanderings, and, as will have been observed, says no word of any
country but italy. keeping close to well-ascertained facts, it seems
established that in the earlier period of his exile he sojourned with
members of the great family of the counts guidi,[102] and that he also
found hospitality with the malaspini,[103] lords of the val di magra,
between genoa and lucca. at a still earlier date (august 1306) he is
found witnessing a deed in padua. it was most probably in the same year
that dante found giotto there, painting the walls of the scrovegni
chapel, and was courteously welcomed by the artist, and taken to his
house.[104] at some time of his life he studied at bologna: john villani
says, during his exile.[105] of his supposed residence in paris, though
it is highly probable, there is a want of proof; of a visit to england,
none at all that is worth a moment's consideration. some of his
commentators and biographers seem to think he was so short-witted that
he must have been in a
 
 ___________________________
 
 place before it could occur to him to name it in
his verse.

we have dante's own word for it that he found his exile almost
intolerable. besides the bitter resentment which he felt at the
injustice of it, he probably cherished the conviction that his career
had been cut short when he was on the point of acquiring great influence
in affairs. the illusion may have been his--one not uncommon among men
of a powerful imagination--that, given only due opportunity, he could
mould the active life of his time as easily as he moulded and fashioned
the creations of his fancy. it
 
 ___________________________
 
egun 'go to his wife or suffer her to join him where
he was;' although the statement is probably an extension of the fact
that she never did join him. in any case it is to make too large a use
of the words to find in them evidence, as has frequently been done, of
the unhappiness of all his married life, and of his utter estrangement
from gemma during his banishment. the union--marriage of convenience
though it was--might be harmonious enough as long as things went
moderately well with the pair. dante was never wealthy, but he seems to
have had his own house in florence and small landed possessions in its
neighbourhood.[108] that before his banishment he was considerably in
debt appears to be ascertained;[109] but, without knowing the
circumstances in which he borrowed, it is impossible to be sure whether
he may not only have been making use of his credit in order to put out
part of his means to advantage in some of the numerous commercial
enterprises in which his neighbours were engaged. in
 
 ___________________________
 
he was driven into banishment.
when that blow had fallen, it is easy to conceive how what if it was not
mutual affection had come to serve instead of it--esteem and
forbearance--would be changed into indifference with the lapse of months
and years of enforced separation, embittered and filled on both sides
with the mean cares of indigence, and, it may be, on gemma's side with
the conviction that her husband had brought her with himself into
disgrace. if all that is said by boccaccio and some of dante's enemies
as to his temperament and behaviour were true, we could only hope that
gemma's indifference was deep enough to save her from the pangs of
jealousy. and on the other hand, if we are to push suspicion to its
utmost length, we may find an allusion to his own experience in the
lines where dante complains of how soon a widow forgets her
husband.[110] but this is all matter of the merest speculation. gemma
is known to have been alive in 1314.[111] she brought up her children,
says boccaccio
 
 ___________________________
 
, upon a trifling part of her husband's confiscated
estate, recovered on the plea that it was a portion of her dowry. there
may have been difficulties of a material kind, insuperable save to an
ardent love that was not theirs, in the way of gemma's joining her
husband in any of his cities of refuge.

complete evidence exists of dante's having in his later years lived for
a longer or shorter time in the three cities of lucca, verona, and
ravenna. in purgatory he meets a shade from lucca, in the murmur of
whose words he catches he 'knows not what of gentucca;'[112] and when he
charges the lucchese to speak plainly out, he is told that lucca shall
yet be found pleasant by him because of a girl not yet grown to
womanhood. uguccione, acting in the interest of pisa, took possession of
lucca in 1314, and dante is supposed to have 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere resident there in 1314. from the whole
tone of his allusion--the mention of her very name and of her innocent
girlhood--we may gather that there was nothing in his liking for her of
which he had any reason to feel ashamed. in the _inferno_ he had covered
the whole people of lucca with his scorn.[113] by the time he got thus
far with the _purgatorio_ his thoughts of the place were all softened by
his memory of one fair face--or shall we rather say, of one
compassionate and womanly soul? that dante was more than susceptible to
feminine charms is coarsely asserted by boccaccio.[114] but on such a
matter boccaccio is a prejudiced witness, and, in the absence of
sufficient proof to the contrary, justice requires us to assume that the
tenor of dante's life was not at variance with that of his writings. he
who was so severe a judge of others was not, as we can infer from more
than one passage of the _comedy_, a lenient judge when his own failings
were concerned.[115] that his conduct never fel
 
 ___________________________
 
l short of his standard
no one will venture to maintain. but what should have hindered him, in
his hours of weariness and when even his hold on the future seemed to
slacken, in lonely castle or strange town, to seek sympathy from some
fair woman who might remind him in something of beatrice?[116]

when, in 1316, uguccione was driven out of lucca and pisa, that great
partisan took military service with can grande. it has been disputed
whether dante had earlier enjoyed the hospitality of the scaligers, or
was indebted for his first reception in verona to the good offices of
uguccione. it is barely credible that by this time in his life he stood
in need of any one to answer for him in the court of can grande. his
fame as a political writer must have preceded him; and it was of a
character to commend him to the good graces of the great imperialist. in
his _de monarchia_ he had, by an exhaustive treatment of propositions
which now seem childi
 
 ___________________________
 
prince of lofty taste, he was the poet of the 'sweet new style' of the
_vita nuova_, and of sonnets, ballads, and canzoni rich in language and
thought beyond the works of all previous poets in the vulgar tongues.
add to this that the _comedy_ was already written, and published up,
perhaps, to the close of the _purgatorio_, and that all italy was eager
to find who had a place, and what kind of place, in the strange new
world from which the veil was being withdrawn; and it is easy to imagine
that dante's reception at can grande's court was rather that of a man
both admired and feared for his great genius, than that of a wandering
scholar and grumbling exile.

at what time dante came to verona, and for how long he stayed, we have
no means of fixing with certainty. he himself mentions being there in
1320,[119] and it is usually supposed that his residence covered three
years previous to that date; as also that it was shared by his two sons,
piero and jacopo. one of these was afterwards to find 
 
 ___________________________
 
a settlement at
verona in a high legal post. except some frivolous legends, there is no
evidence that dante met with anything but generous treatment from can
grande. a passage of the _paradiso_, written either towards the close of
the poet's residence at verona, or after he had left it, is full of a
praise of the great scaliger so magnificent[120] as fully to make amends
for the contemptuous mention in the _purgatorio_ of his father and
brother.[121] to can grande the _paradiso_ was dedicated by the author
in a long epistle containing an exposition of how the first canto of
that cantica, and, by impl
 
 ___________________________
 
ication, the whole of the poem, is to be
interpreted. the letter is full of gratitude for favours already
received, and of expectation of others yet to come. from the terms of
the dedication it has been assumed that ere it was made the whole of the
_paradiso_ was written, and that dante praises the lord of verona after
a long experience of his bounty.[122]

whether owing to the restlessness of an exile, or to some prospect of
attaining a state of greater ease or of having the command of more
congenial society, we cannot tell; but from the splendid court of can
grande he moved down into romagna, to ravenna, the city which of all in
italy would now be fixed upon by the traveller as the fittest place for
a man of genius, weighed down by infinite sorrows, to close his days in
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
find a tomb. some writers on the life of dante will have it that in
ravenna he spent the greater part of his exile, and that when he is
found elsewhere--in lucca or verona--he is only on a temporary absence
from his permanent home.[123] but this conclusion requires some facts to
be ignored, and others unduly dwelt on. in any case his patron there,
during at least the last year or two of his life, was guido novello of
polenta, lord of ravenna, the nephew of her who above all the persons of
the _comedy_ lives in the hearts of its readers.

be
 
 ___________________________
 
rnardino, the brother of francesca and uncle of guido, had fought on
the side of florence at the battle of campaldino, and dante may then
have become acquainted with him. the family had the reputation of being
moderate guelfs; but ere this the exile, with his ripe experience of
men, had doubtless learned, while retaining intact his own opinions as
to what was the true theory of government, to set good-heartedness and
a noble aim in life above political orthodoxy. this guido novello--the
younger guido--bears the reputation of having been well-informed, of
gentle manners, and fond of gathering around him men accomplished i
 
 ___________________________
 
n
literature and the fine arts. on the death of dante he made a formal
oration in honour of the poet. if his welcome of dante was as cordial as
is generally supposed, and as there is no reason to doubt that it was,
it proved his magnanimity; for in the _purgatorio_ a family specially
hostile to the polentas had been mentioned with honour,[124] while that
to which his wife belonged had been lightly spoken of. how he got over
the condemnation of his kinswoman to inferno--even under such gentle
conditions--it would be more difficult to understand were there not
reason to believe that ere dante went to ravenna it had come
 
 ___________________________
 
 to be a
matter of pride in italy for a family to have any of its members placed
anywhere in that other world of which dante held the key.

it seems as if we might assume that the poet's last months or years were
soothed by the society of his daughter--the child whom he had named
after the object of his first and most enduring love.[125] whether or
not he was acting as ambassador for guido to venice when he caught his
last illness, it appears to be pretty well established that he was held
in honour by his patron and all around him.[126] for his hours of
meditation he had the solemn churches of ravenna with their stor
 
 ___________________________
 
se scholar, giovanni del virgilio, he
engaged in a good-humoured, half-bantering exchange of latin pastoral
poems, through the artificial imagery of which there sometimes breaks a
natural thought, as when in answer to the pedant's counsel to renounce
the vulgar tongue and produce in latin something that will entitle him
to receive the laurel crown in bologna, he declares that if ever he is
crowned as a poet it will be on the banks of the arno.

most of the material for forming a judgment of how dante stood affected
to the religious beliefs of his time is to be gathered from the
_comedy_, and the place for considering it would rather be in an essay
on that work than in a sketch of his life which necessity compels to be
swift. a few words may however be here devoted to the subject, as it is
one with some bearing on the manner in which he would be regarded by
those around him, and through that on the tenor of his life. that dante
conformed to church observances, and, except with a few malevole
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was buried in great honour within the
franciscan church at ravenna. some few years after his death, it is
true, his _de monarchia_ was burned as heretical by orders of the papal
legate in lombardy, who would gladly, if he could, have had the bones of
the author exhumed to share the fate of his book. but all this was only
because the partisans of lewis of bavaria were making political capital
out of the treatise.

attempts have been made to demonstrate that in spite of his outward
conformity dante was an unbeliever at heart, and that the _comedy_ is
devoted to the promulgation of a ghibeline heresy--of which, we may be
sure, no ghibeline ever heard--and to the overthrow of all that the
author professed most devoutly to believe.[130] other critics of a more
sober temper in speculation would find in him a catholic who held the
catholic beliefs with the same slack grasp as the teaching of luther was
held by lessing or goethe.[131] but this is surely to misread the
_comedy_, which is steeped
 
 ___________________________
 
 from beginning to end in a spirit of the
warmest faith in the great christian doctrines. it was no mere
intellectual perception of these that dante had--or professed to
have--for when in paradise he has satisfied saint peter of his being
possessed of a just conception of the nature of faith, and is next asked
if, besides knowing what is the alloy of the coin and the weight of it,
he has it in his own purse, he answers boldly, 'yea, and so shining and
round that of a surety it has the lawful stamp.'[132] and further on,
when required to declare in what he believes, nothing against the
fulness of his creed is to be inferred from the fact tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t he stops short
after pronouncing his belief in the existence of god and in the trinity.
this article he gives as implying all the others; it is 'the spark which
spreads out into a vivid flame.'[133]

yet if the inquiry were to be pushed further, and it were sought to find
how much of free thought he allowed himself in matters of religion,
dante might be discovered to have reached his orthodox position by ways
hateful to the bigots who then took order for preserving the purity of
the faith. the office of the pope he deeply revered, but the papal
absolution avails nothing in his eyes compared with one tear of
heartfelt repentance.[134] it is not on the word of pope or council that
he rests his faith, but on the scriptures, and on the evidences of the
truth of christianity, freely examined and weighed.[135] chief among
these evidences, i
 
 ___________________________
 
gh he was, or believed himself to be--which
is all that needs to be contended for,--in no sense was he
priest-ridden. it was liberty that he went seeking on his great
journey;[138] and he gives no hint that it is to be gained by the
observance of forms or in submission to sacerdotal authority. he knows
it is in his reach only when he has been crowned, and mitred too, lord
of himself[139]--subject to him alone of whom even popes were
servants.[140]

although in what were to prove his last months dante might amuse himself
with the composition of learned trifles, and in the society and
correspondence of men who along with him, if on lines apart from his,
were preparing the way for the revival of classical studies, the best
part of his mind, then as for long before, was devoted to the _comedy_;
and he was counting on the suffrages of a wider audience than courts and
universities could supply.

here there is no room to treat at length of that work, to which when we
turn our thoughts all else he 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
italy:--

  if e'er it comes that this my sacred lay,
    to which both heaven and earth have set their hand--
    through which these many years i waste away--
  shall quell the cruelty that keeps me banned
    from the fair fold where i, a lamb, was found
    hostile to wolves who 'gainst it violence planned;
  with other fleece and voice of other sound,
    poet will i return, and at the font
    where i was christened be with laurel crowned.[141]

but with the completion of the _comedy_ dante's life too came to a
close. he died at ravenna in the month of september 1321.


footnotes:

[1] matilda died in 1115. the name tessa, the contraction of contessa,
was still, long after her time, sometimes given to florentine girls. see
perrens, _histoire de florence_, vol. i. p. 126.

[2] whether by matilda the great countess is meant has been eagerly
disputed, and many of the best critics--such as witte and
scartazzini--prefer to find in her one of the ladies of the _vita
nuova_. in spite of 
 
 ___________________________
 
their pains it seems as if more can be said for the
great matilda than for any other. the one strong argument against her
is, that while she died old, in the poem she appears as young.

[3] see note on _inferno_ xxx. 73.

[4] it might, perhaps, be more correct to say that to some offices the
nobles were eligible, but did not elect.

[5] _inf._ xiii. 75.

[6] _inf._ x. 119.

[7] _inf._ xxiii. 66.

[8] _inf._ x. 51.

[9] _purg._ vi. 144.

[10] dante sets the abbot among the traitors in inferno, and says
scornfully of him that his throat was cut at florence (_inf._ xxxii.
119).

[11] villani throws doubt on the guilt of the abbot. there were some
cases of churchmen being ghibelines, as for instance that of the
cardinal ubaldini (_inf._ x. 120). twenty years before the abbot's death
the general of the franciscans had been jeered at in the streets of
florence for turning his coat and joining the emperor. on the other
hand, many civilians were
 
 ___________________________
 
 to be found among the guelfs.

[12] manfred, says john villani (_cronica_, vi. 74 and 75), at first
sent only a hundred men. having by farinata's advice been filled with
wine before a skirmish in which they were induced to engage, they were
easily cut in pieces by the florentines; and the royal standard was
dragged in the dust. the truth of the story matters less than that it
was believed in florence.

[13] provenzano is found by dante in purgatory, which he has been
admitted to, in spite of his sins, because of his self-sacrificing
devotion to a friend (_purg._ xi. 121).

[14] for this good advice he gets a word of praise in inferno (_inf._
xvi. 42).

[15] these mercenaries, though called germans, were of various races.
there were even greeks and saracens among them. the mixture corresponded
with the motley civilisation of manfred's court.

[16] _inf._ xxxii. 79.

[17] _inf._ x. 93.

[18] lucera was a fortress which had been
 
 ___________________________
 
 peopled with saracens by
frederick.

[19] manfred, _purg._ iii. 112; charles, _purg._ vii. 113.

[20] _purg._ xx. 67.

[21] _purg._ iii. 122.

[22] for an account of the constitution and activity of the _parte
guelfa_ at a later period, see perrens, _hist. de florence_, vol. iv. p.
482.

[23] _purg._ xx. 68.

[24] _parad._ xi. 89.

[25] _parad._ xvi. 40, etc.

[26] _inf._ xxix. 31.

[27] _inf._ x. 42. though dante was descended from nobles, his rank in
florence was not that of a noble or magnate, but of a commoner.

[28] the month is indicated by dante himself, _parad._ xxii. 110. the
year has recently been disputed. for 1265 we have j. villani and the
earliest biographers; and dante's own expression at the beginning of the
_comedy_ is in favour of it.

[29] _inf._ xxiii. 95.

[30] _inf._ xix. 17; _parad._ xxv. 9.

[31] _purg._ xxx. 55.

[32] _inf._ viii. 45, where virgil says of dante that blessed was s
 
 ___________________________
 
he
that bore him, can scarcely be regarded as an exception to this
statement.

[33] in 1326, out of a population of ninety thousand, from eight to ten
thousand children were being taught to read; and from five to six
hundred were being taught grammar and logic in four high schools. there
was not in dante's time, or till much later, a university in florence.
see j. villani, xi. 94, and burckhardt, _cultur der renaissance_, vol.
i. p. 76.

[34] for an interesting account of heresy in florence from the eleventh
to the thirteenth centuries, see perrens, _hist. de florence_, vol. i.
livre ii. chap. iii.

[35] it opens with brunetto's being lost in the forest of roncesvalles,
and there are some other features of resemblance--all on the
surface--between his experience and dante's.

[36] g. villani, vi
 
 ___________________________
 
ii. 10. latini died in 1294. villani gives the old
scholar a very bad moral character.

[37] _inf._ xv. 84.

[38] we may, i think, assume the _vita nuova_ to have been published
some time between 1291 and 1300; but the dates of dante's works are far
from being ascertained.

[39] so long as even italian critics are not agreed as to whether the
title means _new life_, or _youth_, i suppose one is free to take his
choice; and it seems most natural to regard it as referring to the new
world into which the lover is transported by his passion.

[40] as, indeed, boccaccio, _vita di dante_, expressly says was the
case.

[41] in this adopting a device frequently used by the love-poets of the
period.--witte, _dante-forschungen_, vol.
 
 ___________________________
 
 ii. p. 312.

[42] the _vita nuova_ contains some thirty poems.

[43] see sir theodore martin's introduction to his translation of _vita
nuova_, page xxi.

[44] in this matter we must not judge the conduct of dante by english
customs.

[45] _donne, ch' avete intelletto d' amore_: ladies that are acquainted
well with love. quoted in _purg._ xxiv. 51.

[46] beatrice died in june 1290, having been born in april 1266.

[47] _purg._ xi. 98.

[48] _purg._ xxiv. 52.

[49] the date of the _convito_ is still the subject of controversy, as
is that of most of dante's works. but it certainly was composed between
the _vita nuova_ and the _comedy_.

there is a remarkable sonnet by guido cavalcanti addressed to dante,
r
 
 ___________________________
 
e consisted of fifteen books. only four
were written.

[60] _wife of bath's tale._ in the context he quotes _purg._ vii. 121,
and takes ideas from the _convito_.

[61] dies to sensual pleasure and is abstracted from all worldly affairs
and interests. see _convito_ iv. 28.

[62] from the last canzone of the _convito_.

[63] in the _vita nuova_.

[64] _purg._ xxiii. 115, xxiv. 75; _parad._ iii. 49.

[65] _purg._ xi. 95.

[66] _purg._ ii. 91.

[67] _purg._ iv. 123.

[68] sacchetti's stories of how dante showed displeasure with the
blacksmith and the donkey-driver who murdered his _canzoni_ are
interesting only as showing what kind of legends about him were current
in the streets of florence.--sacchetti, _novelle_, cxiv, cxv.

[69] _purg._ xii. 101.

[70] _purg._ xi. 94:--

        'in painting cimabue deemed the field
        his own, but now on giotto goes the cry,
        till by his fame the other's is concealed.'

[71] giotto is often said to have drawn inspiration from the _comedy_;
but t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat dante, on his side, was indebted to the new school of painting
and sculpture appears from many a passage of the _purgatorio_.

[72] serfage had been abolished in 1289. but doubt has been thrown on
the authenticity of the deed of abolition. see perrens, _hist. de
florence_, vol. ii. p. 349.

[73] no unusual provision in the industrious italian cities. harsh
though it may seem, it was probably regarded as a valuable concession to
the nobles, for their disaffection appears to have been greatly caused
by
 
 ___________________________
 
 their uneasiness under disabilities. there is much obscurity on
several points. how, for example, came the nobles to be allowed to
retain the command of the vast resources of the _parte guelfa_? this
made them almost independent of the commonwealth.

[74] at a later period the priors were known as the signory.

[75] fraticelli, _storia della vita di dante_, page 112 and note.

[76] it is to be regretted that ampère in his charming _voyage
dantesque_ devoted no chapter to san gemigniano, than which no tuscan
city has more thoroughly preserved its mediæval character. there is no
authority for the assertion that dante was employed on several
florentine embassies. the tendency of his early biographers is to
exaggerate his political importance and activity.

[77] under the date of april 1301 dante is deputed by the road committee
to see to the widening, levelling, and general improvement of a street
in the suburbs.--witte, _dante-forschun
 
 ___________________________
 
gen_, vol. ii. p. 279.

[78] dante has a word of praise for giano, at _parad._ xvi. 127.

[79] at which dante fought. see page lxii.

[80] vieri was called messer, a title reserved for magnates, knights,
and lawyers of a certain rank--notaries and jurisconsults; dante, for
example, never gets it.

[81] villani acted for some time as an agent abroad of the great
business house of peruzzi.

[82] _inf._ iii. 60.

[83] he is 'the prince of the modern pharisees' (_inf._ xxvii. 85); his
place is ready for him in hell (_inf._ xix. 53); and he is elsewhere
frequently referred to. in one great passage dante seems to relent
towards him (_purg._ xx. 86).

[84] albert of hapsburg was chosen emperor in 1298, but was never
crowned at rome.

[85] as in the days of guelf an
 
 ___________________________
 
common multitude of townsmen belonged to neither party.

[86] an interdict means that priests are to refuse sacred offices to all
in the community, who are thus virtually subjected to the minor
excommunication.

[87] guido died soon after his return in 1301. he had suffered in health
during his exile. see _inf._ x. 63.

[88] charles of anjou had lost sicily at the sicilian vespers, 1282.

[89] _purg._ xx. 76.

[90] witte attributes the composition of the _de monarchia_ to a period
before 1301 (_dante-forschungen_, vol. i. fourth art.), but the general
opinion of critics sets it much later.

[91] _inf._ vi. 66, where their expulsion is prophesied.

[92] dante's authorship of the letter is now much questioned. the drift
of recent inquiries has been rather to lessen than to swell the bulk of
materials for his biography.

[93] _parad._ xvii. 61.

[94] _purg._ xxiv. 82.

[95] see at _purg._ xx. 43 dante's invective against philip and the
capets in general.

[96] henry had come to italy with the 
 
 ___________________________
 
pope's approval. he was crowned by
the cardinals who were in rome as legates.

[97] _parad._ xxx. 136. high in heaven dante sees an ample chair with a
crown on it, and is told it is reserved for henry. he is to sit among
those who are clothed in white. the date assigned to the action of the
_comedy_, it will be remembered, is the year 1300.

[98] _inf._ xix. 82, where the gascon clement is described as a 'lawless
pastor from the west.'

[99] the ingenious speculations of troya (_del veltro allegorico di
dante_) will always mark a stage in the history of the study of dante,
but as is often the case with books on the 
 
 ___________________________
 
subject, his shows a
considerable gap between the evidence adduced and the conclusions drawn
from it. he would make dante to have been for many years a satellite of
the great ghibeline chief. dante's temper or pride, however we call it,
seems to have been such as to preserve him from ever remaining attached
for long to any patron.

[100] _inf._ x. 81.

[101] the _convito_ is in italian, and his words are: 'wherever this
language is spoken.'

[102] his letter to the florentines and that to the emperor are dated in
1311, from 'near the sources of the arno'--that is, from the casentino,
where the guidi of romena dwelt. if the letter of condolence with the
counts oberto and guido of romena on
 
 ___________________________
 
 the death of their uncle is
genuine, it has great value for the passage in which he excuses himself
for not having come to the funeral:--'it was not negligence or
ingratitude, but the poverty into which i am fallen by reason of my
exile. this, like a cruel persecutor, holds me as in a prison-house
where i have neither horse nor arms; and though i do all i can to free
myself, i have failed as yet.' the letter has no date. like the other
ten or twelve epistles attributed to dante, it is in latin.

[103] there is a splendid passage in praise of this family, _purg._
viii. 121. a treaty is on record in which dante acts as representative
of the malaspini in settling the terms of a peace between them and the
bishop of luni in october 1306.

[104] the authority for this is benvenuto of imola in his comment on the
_comedy_ (_purg._ xi.). the portrait of dante by giotto, still in
florence, but ruined by modern bungling restoration, is usually believed
to have been executed in 1
 
 ___________________________
 
301 or 1302. but with regard to this, see the
note at the end of this essay.

[105] it is true that villani not only says that 'he went to study at
bologna,' but also that 'he went to paris and many parts of the world'
(_cronica_, ix. 136), and that villani, of all contemporary or nearly
contemporary writers, is by far the most worthy of credence. but he
proves to be more than once in error regarding dante; making him,
_e.g._, die in a wrong month and be buried in a wrong church at ravenna.
and the 'many parts of the world' shows that here he is dealing in
hearsay of the vaguest sort. nor can much weight be given to boccaccio
when he sends dante to bologna and paris. but benvenuto of imola, who
lectured on the _comedy_ at bologna within fifty years of dante's death,
says that dante studied there. it would indeed be strange if he did not,
and at more than one period, bologna being the university n
 
 ___________________________
 
earest
florence. proof of dante's residence in paris has been found in his
familiar reference to the rue du fouarre (_parad._ x. 137). his graphic
description of the coast between lerici and turbia (_purg._ iii. 49, iv.
25) certainly seems to show a familiarity with the western as well as
the eastern rivieras of genoa. but it scarcely follows that he was on
his way to paris when he visited them.

[106] _inf._ xiii. 58.

[107] 'o ye, who have hitherto been following me in some small
craft, ... put not further to sea, lest, los
 
 ___________________________
 
ing sight of me, you lose
yourselves' (_parad._ ii. 1). but, to tell the truth, dante is never so
weak as a poet as when he is most the philosopher or the theologian.
the following list of books more or less known to him is not given as
complete:--the vulgate, beginning with st. jerome's prologue; aristotle,
through the latin translation then in vogue; averroes, etc.; thomas
aquinas and the other schoolmen; much of the civil and canon law;
boethius; homer only in scraps, through aristotle, etc.; virgil, cicero
in part, livy, horace, ovid, terence, lucan, and statius; the works o
 
 ___________________________
 
ini; the poetical literature of provence, france, and italy,
including the arthurian romances--the favourite reading of the italian
nobles, and the tales of charlemagne and his peers--equally in favour
with the common people. there is little reason to suppose that among the
treatises of a scientific and quasi-scientific kind that he fell in
with, and of which he was an eager student, were included the works of
roger bacon. these there was a conspiracy among priests and schoolmen to
keep buried. dante seems to have set little store on ecclesiastical
legends of wonder; at least he gives them a wide berth in his works.

[108] in the notes to fraticelli's _vita di dante_ (florence 1861) are
given copies of documents relating to the property of the alighieri, and
of dante in particular. in 1343 his son jacopo, by payment of a small
fine, recovered vineyards and farms that had been his father's.--notes
to chap. iii. fraticelli's admirable life is now in many respects out of
date. he accepts, _e.g
 
 ___________________________
 
._, dino compagni as an authority, and believes in
the romantic story of the letter of fra ilario.

[109] the details are given by witte, _dante-forschungen_, vol ii. p.
61. the amount borrowed by dante and his brother (and a friend) comes to
nearly a thousand gold florins. witte takes this as equivalent to 37,000
francs, _i.e._ nearly £1500. but the florin being the eighth of an
ounce, or about ten shillings' worth of gold, a thousand florins would
be equal only to £500--representing, of course, an immensely greater sum
now-a-days.

[110] _purg._ viii. 76.

[111] see in scartazzini, _dante alighieri_, 1879, page 552, extract
from the will of her mother maria donati, dated february 1314. man
 
 ___________________________
 
y of
these florentine dates are subject to correction, the year being usually
counted from lady-day. 'in 1880 a document was discovered which proves
gemma to have been engaged in a law-suit in 1332.--_il propugnatore_,
xiii^a. 156,'--scheffer-boichorst, _aus dantes verbannung_, page 213.

[112] _purg._ xxiv. 37.

[113] _inf._ xxi. 40.

[114] _in questo mirifico poeta trovò ampissimo luego la lussuria; e non
solamente ne' giovanili anni, ma ancora ne' maturi._--boccaccio, _la
vita di dante_. after mentioning that dante was married, he indulges in
a long invective against marriage; confessing, however, that he is
ignorant of whether dante experienced the miseries he describes. his
conclusion on the subject is that philosophers should leave marriage to
rich fools, to nobles, and to handicraftsmen.

[115] in purgatory his conscience accuses him of pride, and he already
seems to feel the weight of the grievous burden beneath which the proud
bend as they purge themselves of their sin 
 
 ___________________________
 
e which he had always been the victim of
love.' this points to the casentino as the scene. he also calls the
canzone his 'mountain song.' the passion it expresses may be real, but
that he makes the most of it appears from the close, which is occupied
by the thought of how the verses will be taken in florence.

[117] however early the _de monarchia_ may have been written, it is
difficult to think that it can be of a later date than the death of
henry.

[118] the _de vulgari eloquio_ is in latin. dante's own italian is
richer and more elastic than that of contemporary writers. its base is
the tuscan dialect, as refined by the example of the sicilian poets. his
latin, on the contrary, is i believe regarded as being somewhat
barbarous, even for the period.

[119] in his _quæstio de aqua et terra_. in it he speaks of having been
in mantua. the thesis was maintained in verona, but of course he may,
after a prolonged absence, have returned to that city.

[120] _parad._ xvii. 70.

[121] _purg._ xv
 
 ___________________________
 
iii. 121.

[122] but in urgent need of more of it.--he says of 'the sublime
cantica, adorned with the title of the _paradiso_', that '_illam sub
præsenti epistola, tamquam sub epigrammate proprio dedicatam, vobis
adscribo, vobis offero, vobis denique recommendo_.' but it may be
questioned if this involves that the cantica was already finished.

[123] as, for instance, herr scheffer-boichorst in his _aus dantes
verbannung_, 1882.

[124] the traversari (_purg._ xiv. 107). guido's wife was of the
bagnacavalli (_purg._ xiv. 115). the only mention of the polenta family,
apart from that of francesca, is at _inf._ xxvii. 41.

[125] in 1350 a sum of ten gold florins was sent from florence by the
hands of boccaccio to beatrice, daughter of dante; she being then a nun
at ravenna.

[126] the embassy to venice is mentioned by villani, and there was a
treaty concluded in 1321 between the republic and guido. but 
 
 ___________________________
 
dante's
name does not appear in it among those of the envoys from ravenna. a
letter, probably apocryphal, to guido from dante in venice is dated
1314. if dante, as is maintained by some writers, was engaged in tuition
while in ravenna, it is to be feared that his pupils would find in him
an impatient master.

[127] not that dante ever mentions these any more than a hundred other
churches in which he must have spent thoughtful hours.

[128] _purg._ xxviii. 20.

[129] a certain cecco d'ascoli stuck to him like a bur, charging him,
among other things, with lust, and a want of religious faith which would
one day secure him a place in his own inferno. cecco was himself burned
in florence, in 1327, for making too much of evil spirits, and holding
that human actions are necessarily affected by the position of the
stars. he had
 
 ___________________________
 
 been at one time a professor of astronomy.

[130] gabriel rossetti, _comment on the divina commedia_, 1826, and
aroux, _dante, hérétique, révolutionnaire et socialiste_, 1854.

[131] scartazzini, _dante alighieri, seine zeit_, etc., 1879, page 268.

[132] _parad._ xxiv. 86.

[133] _parad._ xxiv. 145.

[134] _inf._ xxvii. 101; _purg._ iii. 118.

[135] _parad._ xxiv. 91.

[136] _parad._ xxiv. 106.

[137] _inf._ x. and xxviii. there is no place in purgatory where those
who in their lives had once held heretical opinions are purified of the
sin; leaving us to infer that it could be repented of in the world so as
to obliterate the stain. see also _parad._ iv. 67.

[138] _purg._ i. 71.

[139] _purg.
 
 ___________________________
 
_ xxvii. 139.

[140] _purg._ xix. 134.

[141] _parad._ xxv. 1.




giotto's portrait of dante.[142]


vasari, in his _lives of the painters_, tells that in his day the
portrait of dante by giotto was still to be seen in the chapel of the
podesta's palace in florence. writers of an earlier date had already
drawn attention to this work.[143] but in the course of an age when
italians cared little for dante, and less for giotto, it was allowed to
be buried out of sight; and when at length there came a revival of
esteem for these great men, the alterations in the interior arrangement
of the palace were found to have been so sweeping that it was even
uncertain which out of many chambers had formerly served as the chapel.
twenty years after a fruitless attempt had been made to discover whether
or not the portrait was still in existence, signor aubrey bezzi,
encouraged by mr. wilde and mr. kirkup, too
 
 ___________________________
 
k the first step in a search
(1839) which was to end by restoring to the world what is certainly the
most interesting of all portraits, if account be taken of its beauty,
as well as of who was its author and who its subject.

on the removal from it of a layer of lime, one of the end walls of what
had been the chapel was found to be covered by a fresco painting,
evidently the work of giotto, and representing a paradise--the subject
in which dante's portrait was known to occur. as is usual in such works,
from the time of giotto downwards, the subject is treated so as to allow
of the free introduction of contemporary personages. among these was a
figure in a red gown, which there was no difficulty in recognising as
the portrait of dante. it shows him younger and with a sweeter
expression than does raphael's dante, or masaccio's,[144] or that in the
cathedral of florence,[145] or that of the mask said to have been taken
after his death. bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t to all of them it bears a strong resemblance.

the question of when this portrait was painted will easily be seen to be
one of much importance in connection with dante's biography. the fresco
it belongs to is found to contain a cardinal, and a young man, who,
because he wears his hair long and has a coronet set on his cap, is
known to be meant for a french prince.[146] if, as is usually assumed,
this prince is charles of valois, then the date of the event celebrated
in the fresco is 1301 or 1302. with regard to when the work was
executed, messrs crowe and cavalcaselle, in their valuable book, say as
follows:[147]--

    'all inferences to be deduced from the 
 
 ___________________________
 
subject and form of these
    frescos point to the date of 1301-2. it may be inquired whether
    they were executed by giotto at the time, and this inquiry can only
    be satisfied approximatively. it may be inferred that dante's
    portrait would hardly have been introduced into a picture so
    conspicuously visible as this, had not the poet at the time been
    influent in florence.... dante's age in the fresco corresponds with
    the date of 1302, and is that of a man of thirty-five. he had
    himself enjoyed the highest office of florence from june to august
    1300.[148] in the fresco he does not wear the dress of the
    "priori," but he holds in the ranks of those near charles of valois
    an honourable place. it may be presumed that the frescos were
    executed previous[149] to dante's exile, and this view is confirmed
    by the technical and artistic progress which the
 
 ___________________________
 
o their own interests and securing vengeance upon their
opponents, was devoted to holding the common purse shut as tightly as
they could against their avaricious pacificator. when he at last
delivered the city from his presence no one would have the heart to
revive the memory of his disastrous visit.

but if, in all this confusion of florentine affairs, giotto did receive
a commission to paint in the palace of the podesta, yet it remains
incredible that he should have been suffered to assign to dante, of all
men, a place of honour in the picture. no citizen had more stubbornly
opposed the policy which brought charles of valois to florence, and that
charles was in the city was reason enough for dante to keep out of it.
in his absence, he was sentenced in january 1302 to pay a ruinously
heavy fine, and in the following march he was condemned to be put to
death if ever he was caught. on fuller acquaintance his fellow-citizens
liked the frenchman as little as he, but this had no effect in softe
 
 ___________________________
 
ning
their dislike or removing their fear of dante. we may be sure that any
friends he may still have had in florence, as their influence could not
protect his goods from confiscation or him from banishment, would hardly
care to risk their own safety by urging, while his condemnation was
still fresh, the admission of his portrait among those of illustrious
florentines.[151] it is true that there have been instances of great
artists having reached so high a pitch of fame as to be able to dictate
terms to patrons, however exalted. in his later ye
 
 ___________________________
 
ars giotto could
perhaps have made such a point a matter of treaty with his employers,
but in 1301 he was still young,[152] and great although his fame already
was, he could scarcely have ventured to insist on the republic's
confessing its injustice to his friend; as it would have done had it
consented that dante, newly driven into exile, should obtain a place of
honour in a work painted at the public cost.

these considerations seem to make it highly improbable that giotto's
wall-painting was meant to do honour to charles of valois and the
cardinal acquasparta. but if it should still be held that it was painted
in 1302, we must either cease to believe, in spite of all that vasari
and the others say, that the portrait is meant for dante; or else
confess it to be inexplicable how it got there. a way out 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted the fresco. the order
in which that artist's works were produced is very imperfectly settled;
and it may easily be that the position in vasari's pages of the mention
made by him of this fresco has given rise to a misunderstanding
regarding the date of it. he speaks of it at the very beginning of his
life of giotto. but this he does because he needs an illustration of
what he has been saying in his opening sentences about the advance that
painter made on cimabue. only after making mention of dante's portrait
does he begin his chronological list of giotto's works; to the portrait
he never returns, and so, as far as vasari is concerned, it is without a
date. judging of it by means of mr. kirkup's careful and beautiful
sketch--and unfortunately we have now no other means of knowing what the
original was like--it may safely be asserted to be in giotto's ripest
style.[153] everything considered, it is therefore allowable to search
the florentine chronicles lower down for an event more likely 
 
 ___________________________
 

if he was then in florence, we have therefore found in this visit of the
duke and the cardinal. but that giotto was in florence at that time is
certain. he painted a portrait[158] of the duke in the palace of the
signory; and through that prince, as vasari tells, he was invited by
king robert to go down to work in naples. all this, in the absence of
evidence of any value in favour of another date, makes it, at the very
least, highly probable that the fresco was a work of 1326 or 1327.

in 1326 dante had been dead for five years. the grudge his
fellow-townsmen had nourished against him for so long was now worn out.
we know that very soon after his death florence began to be proud of
him; and even such of his old enemies as still survived would be willing
that giotto should set him in a place of honour among the great
florentines who help to fill the fresco of the paradise. that he was
already dead would be no hindrance to his finding room alongside of
charles of calabria; for the age was wi
 
 ___________________________
 
sely tolerant of such
anachronisms.[159] had dante been still living the painter would have
been less at liberty to create, out of the records he doubtless
possessed of the features of the friend who had paid him beforehand with
one immortal line, the face which, as we look into it, we feel to be a
glorified transcript of what it was in the flesh. it is the face of one
who has wellnigh forgotten his earthly life, instead of having the worst
of it still before him; of one who, from that troubled italy which like
his own sapia he knew but as a pi
 
 ___________________________
 
lgrim, has passed to the 'true city,'
of which he remains for evermore a citizen--the city faintly imaged by
giotto upon the chapel wall.


footnotes:

[142] it is best known, and can now be judged of only through the
lithograph after a tracing made by mr. seymour kirkup before it was
restored and ruined: published by the arundel society.

[143] antonio pucci, born in 1300, in his _centiloquio_, describes the
figure of dante as being clothed in blood-red. philip villani also
mentions it. he wrote towards the close of the fourteenth century;
vasari towards the middle of the sixteenth.

[144] in the munich collection of drawings, and ascribed to masaccio,
but with how much reason i do not know.

[145] painted by domenico michelino in 1465, after a sketch by alessio
baldovinetto.

[146] 'wearing over the long hair of the frenchmen of the period a
coroneted cap.'--crowe and cavalcaselle, _history of painting in italy_

 
 ___________________________
 

[148] the priorate was the highest office to which a citizen could
aspire, but by no means the highest in florence.

[149] i suppose the meaning is 'immediately previous.'

[150] john villani, _cronica_, viii. 40 and 49; and perrens, _hist. de
florence_, under date of 1301. charles entered florence on the 1st of
november of that year, and left it in the following april.

[151] who the other florentines in the fresco are does not greatly
affect the present question. villani says that along with dante giotto
painted corso donati and brunetto latini.

[152] only twenty-five, if the commonly accepted date of his birth is
correct. in any case, he was still a young man.

[153] it is true that, on technical grounds, it has been questioned if
it is giotto's at all; but there is more than sufficient reason to think
it is. with such doubts however we are scarcely here concerned. even
were it proved to be by a pupil, everything in the text that applies to
the question of date would still remain in po
 
 ___________________________
 
int.

[154] j. villani, ix. 353.

[155] j. villani, x. 1.

[156] _ibid._ x. 49.

[157] j. villani, x. 107.

[158] long since destroyed.

[159] an anachronism of another kind would have been committed by
giotto, if, before the _comedy_ was even begun, he had represented dante
as holding the closed book and cluster of three pomegranates--emblematical
of the three regions described by him and of the completion of his
work.--i say nothing of the inferno found on another wall of the chapel,
since there seems good reason to doubt if it is by giotto.




the inferno.




canto i.


  in middle[160] of the journey of our days
    i found that i was in a darksome wood[161]--
    the right road lost and vanished in the maze.
  ah me! how hard to make it understood
    how ro
 
 ___________________________
 
eat:
    o happy whom he chooses there to dwell!'
  and i to him: 'poet, i thee entreat,                             130
    even by that god who was to thee unknown,
    that i may 'scape this present ill, nor meet
  with worse, conduct me whither thou hast shown,
    that i may see saint peter's gate,[182] and those
    whom thou reportest in such misery thrown.'
  he moved away; behind him held i close.


footnotes:

[160] _middle_: in his _convito_ (iv. 23), comparing human life to an
arch, dante says that at the age of thirty-five a man has reached the
top and begins to go down. as he was born in 1265 that was his own age
in 1300, the year in which the action of the poem is laid.

[161] _darksome wood_: a state of spiritual darkness or despair into
which he has gradually drifted, not without fault of his own.

[162] _a hill_: lower down this hill is termed 'the origin and cause of
all joy.' it is symbolical of spiritual freedom--of the peace and
security that spring from the practice o
 
 ___________________________
 
f virtue. only, as it seems, by
gaining such a vantage-ground can he escape from the wilderness of
doubt--the valley of the shadow of death--in which he is lost.

[163] _that planet_: on the ptolemaic system, which, as perfected by the
arabian astronomers, and with some christian additions, was that
followed by dante, the sun is reckoned as one of the seven planets; all
the others as well as the earth and the fixed stars deriving their light
from it. here the sunlight may signify the divine help granted to all
men in their efforts after virtue.

[164] _the lower foot, etc._: this describes a cautious, slow ascent.

[165] _a nimble leopard_: the leopard and the lion and wolf that come
with it are suggested by jeremiah v. 6: 'a lion out of the forest shall
slay them,' etc. we have dante's own authority for it
 
 ___________________________
 
, in his letter to
can grande, that several meanings are often hidden under the incidents
of the _comedy_. but whatever else the beasts may signify, their chief
meaning is that of moral hindrances. it is plain that the lion and wolf
are the sins of others--pride and avarice. if the leopard agrees with
them in this, it most probably stands for the envy of those among whom
dante lived: at _inf._ vi. 74 we find envy, pride, and avarice classed
together as the sins that have corrupted florence. but from _inf._ xvi.
106 it appears that dante hoped to get the better of the leopard by
means of a cord which he wore girt about his loins. the cord is
emblematical of self-control; and hence the leopard seems best to answer
the idea of sensual pleasure in the sense of a temptation that makes
difficult the pursuit of virtue. but it will be observed that this
hindrance dante trust
 
 ___________________________
 
he
good friday of 1300 fell a fortnight later; but the 25th of march was
held to be the true anniversary of the crucifixion as well as of the
incarnation and of the creation of the world. the date of the action is
fixed by _inf._ xxi. 112. the day was of good omen for success in the
struggle with his lower self.

[168] _a lion_: pride or arrogance; to be taken in its widest sense of
violent opposition to all that is good.

[169] _a she-wolf_: used elsewhere in the _comedy_ to represent avarice.
dante may have had specially in his mind the greed and worldly ambition
of the pope and the court of rome, but it is plain from line 110 that
the wolf stands primarily for a sin, and not for a person or corporate
body.

[170] _no man_: brunetto latini, the friend and master of dante, says
'the soul is the life of man, but without the body is not man.'

[171] _sub julio_: julius was not even consul when virgil was born. but
dante reckoned julius as the founder of the empire, and therefore makes
the ti
 
 ___________________________
 
me in which he flourished his. virgil was only twenty-five years
of age when cæsar was slain; and thus it was under augustus that his
maturer life was spent.

[172] _author_: dante defines an author as 'one worthy to be believed
and obeyed' (_convito_ iv. 6). for a guide and companion on his great
pilgrimage he chooses virgil, not only because of his fame as a poet,
but also because he had himself described a descent to the shades--had
been already there. the vulgar conception of virgil was that of a
virtuous great magician.

[173] _the style, etc._: some at least of dante's minor works had been
given to the world before 1300, certainly the _vita nuova_ and others of
his 
 
 ___________________________
 
poems. to his study of virgil he may have felt himself indebted for
the purity of taste that kept him superior to the frigid and artificial
style of his contemporaries, he prided himself on suiting his language
to his theme, as well as on writing straight from the heart.

[174] _many a creature, etc._: great men and states, infected with
avarice in its extended sense of encroachment on the rights of others.

[175] _feltro and feltro, etc._: who the deliverer was that dante
prophesies the coming of is not known, and perhaps never can be. against
the claims of can grande of verona the objection is that, at any date
which can reasonably be assigned for the publication of the _inferno_,
he had done nothing to justify such bright hopes of his future career.
there seems proof, too, that till the _paradiso_ was written dante
entertained no great respect for the scala family (_purg._ xvi. 118,
xviii. 121). neither is verona, or the widest territory over which can
grande 
 
 ___________________________
 
ever ruled, at all described by saying it lay between feltro and
feltro.--i have preferred to translate _nazi-one_ as birth rather than
as nation or people. 'the birth of the deliverer will be found to have
been between feltro and feltro.' feltro, as dante wrote it, would have
no capital letter; and according to an old gloss the deliverer is to be
of humble birth; _feltro_ being the name of a poor sort of cloth. this
interpretation i give as a curiosity more than anything else; for the
most competent critics have decided against it, or ignored it.--henry of
luxemburg, chosen emperor in november 1308, is an old claimant for the
post of the allegorical _veltro_ or greyhound. on him dante's hopes were
long set as the man who should 'save italy;' and
 
 ___________________________
 
 it seems not out of
place to draw attention to what is said of him by john villani, the
contemporary and fellow-townsman of dante: 'he was of a magnanimous
nature, though, as regarded his family, of poor extraction' (_cronica_,
ix. 1). whatever may be made of the feltros, the description in the text
of the deliverer as one superior to all personal ambition certainly
answers better to dante's ideal of a righteous emperor than to the
character of a partisan leader like uguccione della faggiuola, or an
ambitious prince like can grande.

[176] _camilla, etc._: all persons of the _æneid_.

[177] _envy_: that of satan.

[178] _thou hadst best, etc._: as will be seen from the next canto,
virgil has been sent to the relief of dante; but how that is to be
wrought out is left to his own judgment. he might secure a partial
deliverance for his ward by conducting him up the delectable mount-
 
 ___________________________
 
-the
peaceful heights familiar to himself, and which are to be won by the
practice of natural piety. he chooses the other course, of guiding dante
through the regions of the future state, where the pilgrim's trust in
the divine government will be strengthened by what he sees, and his soul
acquire a larger peace.

[179] _a soul_: beatrice.

[180] _the emperor_: the attribution of this title to god is significant
of dante's lofty conception of the empire.

[181] _'gainst his laws, etc._: virgil was a rebel only in the sense of
being ignorant of the christian revelation (_inf._ iv. 37).

[182] _saint peter's gate_: virgil has not mentioned saint peter. dante
names him as if to proclaim that it is as a christian, though under
heathen guidance, that he makes the pilgrimage. here the gate seems to
be spoken of as if it formed the entrance to paradise, as it was
popularly believed to do, and as if it were at that poi
 
 ___________________________
 
 be found the keynote to the canto. with the
sense of deliverance from immediate danger his enthusiasm has died away.
after all, virgil is only a shade; and his heart misgives him at the
thought of engaging, in the absence of all human companionship, upon a
journey so full of terrors. he is not reassured till virgil has
displayed his commission.

[185] _muses_: the invocation comes now, the first canto being properly
an introduction. here it may be pointed out, as illustrating the
refinement of dante's art, that the invocation in the _purgatorio_ is in
a higher strain, and that in the _paradiso_ in a nobler still.

[186] _silvius' father_: æneas, whose visit to the world of shades is
described in the sixth _æneid_. he finds there his father anchises, who
foretells to him the fortunes of his descendants down to the time of
augustus.

[187] _both of these_: dante uses language slightly apologetic as he
unfolds to virgil, the great imperialist poet, the final cause of rome
and the empire. bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t while he thus exalts the papal office, making all
roman history a preparation for its establishment, dante throughout his
works is careful to refuse any but a spiritual or religious allegiance
to the pope, and leaves himself free, as will be frequently seen in the
course of the _comedy_, to blame the popes as men, while yielding all
honour to their great office. in this emphatic mention of rome as the
divinely-appointed seat of peter's chair may be implied a censure on the
pope for the transference of the holy see to avignon, which was effected
in 1305, between the date assigned to the action of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 poem and the
period when it was written.

[188] _papal gown_: 'the great mantle' dante elsewhere terms it; the
emblem of the papal dignity. it was only in dante's own time that
coronation began to take the place of investiture with the mantle.

[189] _chosen vessel_: paul, who like æneas visited the other world,
though not the same region of it. throughout the poem instances drawn
from profane history, and even poetry and mythology, are given as of
authority equal to those from christian sources.

[190] _a dame_: beatrice, the heroine of the _vita nuova_, at the close
of which dante promises some day to say of her what was never yet said
of any woman.
 
 ___________________________
 
 she died in 1290, aged twenty-four. in the _comedy_ she
fills different parts: she is the glorified beatrice portinari whom
dante first knew as a fair florentine girl; but she also represents
heavenly truth, or the knowledge of it--the handmaid of eternal life.
theology is too hard and technical a term to bestow on her. virgil, for
his part, represents the knowledge that men may acquire of divine law by
the use of their reason, helped by such illumination as was enjoyed by
the virtuous heathen. in other words, he is the exponent of the divine
revelation involved in the imperial system--for the empire was never far
from da
 
 ___________________________
 
nte's thoughts. to him it meant the perfection of just rule, in
which due cognisance is taken of every right and of every duty. the
relation dante bears to these two is that of erring humanity struggling
to the light. virgil leads him as far as he can, and then commits him to
the holier rule of beatrice. but the poem would lose its charm if the
allegorical meaning of every passage were too closely insisted on. and,
worse than that, it cannot always be found.

[191] _dubious state_: the limbo of the virtuous heathen (canto iv.).

[192] _the star_: in the _vita nuova_ dante speaks of the star in the
singular when he means the stars.

[193] 
 
 ___________________________
 
legorical, as applied to the
limbo where virgil had his abode. he and his companions suffer only from
unfulfilled but lofty desire (_inf._ iv. 41).

[196] _a noble lady_: the virgin mary, of whom it is said (_parad._
xxxiii. 16) that her 'benignity not only succours those who ask, but
often anticipates their demand;' as here. she is the symbol of divine
grace in its widest sense. neither christ nor mary is mentioned by name
in the _inferno_.

[197] _lucia_: the martyr saint of syracuse. witte (_dante-forschungen_,
vol. ii. 30) suggests that lucia ubaldini may be meant, a
thirteenth-century florentine saint, and sister of the cardinal (_inf._
x. 120). the day devoted to her memory was the 30th of may. dante was
born in may, and if it could be proved that he was born on the 30th of
the month the suggestion would be plausible. but for the greater lucy is
to be said that she was especially helpful to those troubled in their
eyesight, as dante was at one time of his life. here she is the symbol

 
 ___________________________
 
of illuminating grace.

[198] _thy vassal_: saint lucy being held in special veneration by
dante; or only that he was one that sought light. the word _fedele_ may
of course, as it usually is, be read in its primary sense of 'faithful
one;' but it is old italian for vassal; and to take the reference to be
to the duty of the overlord to help his dependant in need seems to give
force to the appeal.

[199] _rachel_: symbol of the contemplative life.

[200] _a flood, etc._: 'the sea of troubles' in which dante is involved.

[201] _tears_: beatrice weeps for human misery--especially that of
dant
 
 ___________________________
 
e--though unaffected by the view of the sufferings of inferno.

[202] _my guide, etc._: after hearing how virgil was moved to come,
dante accepts him not only for his guide, as he did at the close of the
first canto, but for his lord and master as well.




canto iii.


  through me to the city dolorous lies the way,
    who pass through me shall pains eternal prove,
    through me are reached the people lost for aye.
  'twas justice did my glorious maker move;
    i was created by the power divine,[203]
    the highest wisdom, and the primal love.
  no thing's creation earlier was than mine,
    if not eternal;[204] i for aye en
 
 ___________________________
 
 fell.


footnotes:

[203] _power divine, etc._: the persons of the trinity, described by
their attributes.

[204] _if not eternal_: only the angels and the heavenly spheres were
created before inferno. the creation of man came later. but from _inf._
xxxiv. 124 it appears that inferno was hollowed out of the earth; and at
_parad._ vii. 124 the earth is declared to be 'corruptible and enduring
short while;' therefore not eternal.

[205] _hard, etc._: the injunction to leave all hope behind makes dante
hesitate to enter. virgil anticipates the objection before it is fully
expressed, and reminds him that the passage through inferno is to be
only one stage of his journey. not by this gate will he seek to quit it.

[206] _true good, etc._: truth in its highest form--the contemplation of
god.

[207] _uncouth accents_: 'like german,' says boccaccio.

[208] _horror-stricken_: 'my head enveloped in horror.' some texts have
'error,' and this yields a better meaning--that dante is amazed to have
come 
 
 ___________________________
 
at he is so overwhelmed by fear as to lose his presence of mind.
they are not yet in the true inferno, but only in the vestibule or
forecourt of it--the flat rim which runs round the edge of the pit.

[209] _else triumph, etc._: the satisfaction of the rebel angels at
finding that they endured no worse punishment than that of such as
remained neutral.

[210] _a banner_: emblem of the instability of those who would never
take a side.

[211] _that death, etc._: the touch is very characteristic of dante. he
feigns astonishment at finding that such a proportion of mankind can
preserve so pitiful a middle course between good and evil, and spend
lives that are only 'a kind of--as it were.'

[212] _the great refusal_: dante recognises him, and so he who made the
great refusal must have been a contemporary. almost beyond doubt
celestine v. is meant, who was in 1294 elected pope against his will,
and resigned the tiara after wearing it a few months; the only pope who
ever resigned it, unless we coun
 
 ___________________________
 
t clement i. as he was not canonized
till 1326, dante was free to form his own judgment of his conduct. it
has been objected that dante would not treat with contumely a man so
devout as celestine. but what specially fits him to be the
representative caitiff is just that, being himself virtuous, he
pusillanimously threw away the greatest opportunity of doing good. by
his resignation boniface viii. became pope, to whose meddling in
florentine affairs it was that dante owed his banishment. indirectly,
therefore, he owed it to the resignation of celestine; so that here we
have the first of many private scores to be paid off in the course of
the _comedy_. celestine's resignation is referred to (_inf._ xxvii.
104).--esau and the rich young man in the gospel have both been
suggested in place of celestine. to either of them there lies the
objection that dante could not have recognised him. and, besides,
dante's contemporaries appear at once to have discovered cele
 
 ___________________________
 
stine in
him who made the great refusal. in paradise the poet is told by his
ancestor cacciaguida that his rebuke is to be like the wind, which
strikes most fiercely on the loftiest summits (_parad._ xvii. 133); and
it agrees well with such a profession, that the first stroke he deals in
the _comedy_ is at a pope.

[213] _caitiffs_: to one who had suffered like dante for the frank part
he took in affairs, neutrality may well have seemed the unpardonable sin
in politics; and no doubt but that his thoughts were set on the trimmers
in florence when he wrote, 'let us not speak of them!'

[214] _a veteran_: charon. in all this description of the passage of the
river by the shades, dante borrows freely from virgil. it has been
already remarked on _inf._ ii. 28 that he draws illustrations from pagan
sources. more than that, as we begin to find, he boldly introduce
 
 ___________________________
 
s
legendary and mythological characters among the persons of his drama.
with milton in mind, it surprises, on a first acquaintance with the
_comedy_, to discover how nearly independent of angels is the economy
invented by dante for the other world.

[215] _other ways, etc._: the souls bound from earth to purgatory gather
at the mouth of the tiber, whence they are wafted on an angel's skiff to
their destination (_purg._ ii. 100). it may be here noted that never
does dante hint a fear of one day becoming a denizen of inferno. it is
only the pains of purgatory that oppress his soul by anticipation. so
here charon is made to see at a glance that the pilgrim is not of those
'who make descent to acheron.'

[216] _as fowls, etc._: 'as a bird to its lure'--generally interpreted
of the falcon when called back. but a witness of the sport of netting
thrushes in tuscany describes them as 'flying into the vocal ambush in a
hurried, half-reluctant, and very remarkable manner
 
 ___________________________
 
.'

[217] _courteous master_: virgil here gives the answer promised at line
76; and dante by the epithet he uses removes any impression that his
guide had been wanting in courtesy when he bade him wait.

[218] _wherefore_: charon's displeasure only proves that he feels he has
no hold on dante.

[219] _trembled, etc._: symbolical of the increase of woe in inferno
when the doomed souls have landed on the thither side of acheron. hell
opens to receive them. conversely, when any purified soul is released
from purgatory the mountain of purification trembles to its base with
joy (_purg._ xxi. 58).




canto iv.


  resounding thunder broke the slumber deep
    that drowsed my senses, and myself i shook
    like one by force awakened out of sleep.
  then rising up i cast a steady look,
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 euclid, geometer,
    galen, hippocrates, and avicen,[245]
    averroes,[246] the same who did prepare
  the comment, saw i; nor can tell again
    the names of all i saw; the subject wide
    so urgent is, time often fails me. then
  into two bands the six of us divide;
    me by another way my leader wise
    doth from the calm to air which trembles, guide.               150
  i reach a part[247] which all benighted lies.


footnotes:

[220] _thundering sound_: in a state of unconsciousness, dante, he knows
not how, has been conveyed across acheron, and is awakened by what seems
like the thunder-peal following the lightning-flash which made him
insensible. he now stands on the brink of inferno, where the sounds
peculiar to each region of it converge and are reverberated from its
rim. these sounds are not again to be heard by him except in their
proper localities. no sooner does he actually pass into the first circle
than he hears only sighs.--as regards the topography of inferno, it is
e
 
 ___________________________
 
hus less in circumference than the one above it.
from one circle to the next there slopes a bank of more or less height
and steepness. down the bank which falls to the comparatively flat
ground of the first circle they are now about to pass.--to put it
otherwise, the inferno is an inverted hollow cone.

[221] _pity_: the pity felt by virgil has reference only to those in the
circle they are about to enter, which is his own. see also _purg._ iii.
43.

[222] _wouldst thou, etc._: he will not have dante form a false opinion
of the character of those condemned to the circle which is his own.

[223] _part_: _parte_, altered by some editors into _porta_; but though
baptism is technically described as the gate of the sacraments, it never
is as the gate of the faith. a tenet of dante's faith was that all the
unbaptized are lost. he had no choice in the matter.

[224] _limbo_: border, or borderland. dante makes the first circle
consist of the two limbos of thomas aquinas: that of unbaptized infants,
 
 ___________________________
 

_limbus puerorum_, and that of the fathers of the old covenant, _limbus
sanctorum patrum_. but the second he finds is now inhabited only by the
virtuous heathen.

[225] _sir_--_master_: as a delicate means of expressing sympathy, dante
redoubles his courtesy to virgil.

[226] _hidden drift_: to find out, at first hand as it were, if the
article in the creed is true which relates to the descent into hell;
and, perhaps, to learn if when christ descended he delivered none of the
virtuous heathen.

[227] _lately_: virgil died about half a century before the crucifixion.

[228] _a potentate_: the name of christ is not mentioned in the
_inferno_.

[229] _a hemisphere, etc._: an elaborate way of saying that part of the
limbo was cle
 
 ___________________________
 
arly lit. the flame is symbolical of the light of genius,
or of virtue; both in dante's eyes being modes of worth.

[230] _wins grace, etc._: the thirst for fame was one keenly felt and
openly confessed by dante. see, _e.g._ _de monarchia_, i. 1. in this he
anticipated the humanists of the following century. here we find that to
be famous on earth helps the case of disembodied souls.

[231] _poet_: throughout the _comedy_, with the exception of _parad._ i.
29, and xxv. 8, the term 'poet' is confined to those who wrote in greek
and latin. in _purg._ xxi. 85 the name of poet is said to be that 'which
is most enduring and honourable.'

[232] _a sword_: because homer sings of battles. dante's acquaintance

 
 ___________________________
 
with his works can have been but slight, as they were not then
translated into latin, and dante knew little or no greek.

[233] _to their honour_: 'and in that they do well:' perhaps as showing
themselves free from jealousy. but the remark of benvenuto of imola is:
'poets love and honour one another, and are never envious and
quarrelsome like those who cultivate the other arts and sciences.'--i
quote with misgiving from tamburini's untrustworthy italian translation.
benvenuto lectured on the _comedy_ in bologna for some years about 1370.
it is greatly to be wished that his commentary, liv
 
 ___________________________
 
ely and full of
side-lights as it is, should be printed in full from the original latin.

[234] _the lords, etc._: not the company of him--homer or virgil--who is
lord of the great song, and soars above all others; but the company of
the great masters, whose verse, etc.

[235] _did my master smile_: to see dante made free of the guild of
great poets; or, it may be, to think they are about to discover in him a
fellow poet.

[236] _a noble castle_: where the light burns, and in which, as their
peculiar seat, the shades of the heathen distinguished for virtue and
genius reside. the seven walls are in their number symbolical of the
perfect strength of the castle; or, to take it more pedantically, may
mean the four moral virtues and the three speculative. the gates will
then stand for the seven liberal arts
 
 ___________________________
 
 of grammar, rhetoric, etc. the
moat may be eloquence, set outside the castle to signify that only as
reflected in the eloquent words of inspired men can the outside world
get to know wisdom. over the stream dante passes easily, as being an
adept in learned speech. the castle encloses a spacious mead enamelled
with eternal green.

[237] _cæsar in arms, etc._: suetonius says of cæsar that he was of
fair complexion, but had black and piercing eyes. brunetto latini,
dante's teacher, says in his _tesoro_ (v. 11), of the hawk here
mentioned--the _grifagno_--that its eyes 'flame like fire.'

[238] _brutus_: introduced here that he may not be confounded with the
later brutus, for whom is reserved the lowest place of all in inferno.

[239] _marcia_: wife of cato; mentioned also in _purg._ i. _julia_:
daughter of cæsar and wife of pompey.

[240] _saladin_: died 1193. to the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
he supplied the ideal of a just mohammedan ruler. here are
 
 ___________________________
 
 no other
such. 'he sits apart, because not of gentle birth,' says boccaccio;
which shows what even a man of genius risks when he becomes a
commentator.

[241] _the master_: aristotle, often spoken of by dante as the
philosopher, and reverenced by him as the genius to whom the secrets of
nature lay most open.

[242] _democritus, etc._: according to whom the world owes its form to a
chance arrangement of atoms.

[243] _linus_: not livy, into which some have changed it. linus is
mentioned by virgil along with orpheus, _egl._ iv.

[244] _ptolemy_: greek geographer of the beginning of the second
century, and author of the system of the world believed in by dante, and
freely used by him throughout the poe
 
 ___________________________
 
    the other wept so bitterly, i swooned                          140
    away for pity, and as dead i fell:
  yea, as a corpse falls, fell i on the ground.


footnotes:

[248] _the second_: the second circle of the inferno, and the first of
punishment. the lower the circle, the more rigorous the penalty endured
in it. here is punished carnal sin.

[249] _minos_: son of jupiter and king of crete, so severely just as to
be made after death one of the judges of the under world. he is degraded
by dante, as many other noble persons of the old mythology are by him,
into a demon. unlike the fallen angels of milton, dante's devils have no
interest of their own. their only function is to help in working out
human destinies.

[250] _downward hurled_: each falls to his proper place without
lingering by the way. all through inferno there is an absence of direct
divine interposition. it is ruled, as it were, by a course of nature.
the sinners, compelled by a fatal impulse, advance to hear their doom,

 
 ___________________________
 
just as they fall inevitably one by one into charon's boat. minos by a
sort of devilish instinct sentences each sinner to his appropriate
punishment. in _inf._ xxvii. 127 we find the words in which minos utters
his judgment. in _inf._ xxi. 29 a devil bears the sinner to his own
place.

[251] _why also, etc._: like charon. if minos represents conscience, as
some would have it, dante is here again assailed by misgivings as to his
enterprise, and is quieted by reason in the person of virgil.

[252] _thus 'tis willed, etc._: these two lines are the same as those to
charon, _inf._ iii. 95, 96.

[253] _precipitous extreme_: opinions vary as to what is meant by
_ruina_. as dante is certainly still on the outer edge of the second
circle or terrace, and while standing there hears distinctly the words
the spirits say when they reach the _ruina_, it most likely denotes the
steep slo
 
 ___________________________
 
pe falling from the first to the second circle. the spirits,
driven against the wall which hems them in, burst into sharp
lamentations against their irremediable fate.

[254] _i understood, etc._: from the nature of the punishment, which,
like all the others invented by dante, bears some relation to the sin to
which it is assigned. they who on earth failed to exercise
self-restraint are beaten hither and thither by every wind that blows;
and, as once they were blinded by passion, so now they see nothing
plainly in that dim and obscure place. that dante should assign the
least grievous punishment of all to this sin throws light upon his views
of life. in his eyes it had more than any other the excuse of natural
bent, and had least of malice. here, it must be remarked
 
 ___________________________
 
._ xxvii. 15).

[255] _the cranes_: 'the cranes are a kind of bird that go in a troop,
as cavaliers go to battle, following one another in single file. and one
of them goes always in front as their gonfalonier, guiding and leading
them with its voice' (brunetto latini, _tesoro_, v. 27).

[256] _what folk are these_: the general crowd of sinners guilty of
unlawful love are described as being close packed like starlings. the
other troop, who go in single file like cranes, are those regarding whom
dante specially inquires; and they prove to be the nobler sort of
sinners--lovers with something tragic or pathetic in their fate.

[257] _the next_: dido, perhaps not named by virgil because to him she
owed her fame. for love of æneas she broke the vow of perpetual chastity
made on the tomb of her husband.

[258] _at the last, etc._: achilles, when about to espouse polyxena, and
when off his guard, was slain.

[259] _paris ... and tristram_: paris of troy, and the tristram of king
arthur's table.


 
 ___________________________
 
ur sympathy; for her love, though illicit, was the
infirmity of a noble heart.

[264] _living creature_: 'animal.' no shade, but an animated body.

[265] _thy peace_: peace from all the doubts that assail him, and which
have compelled him to the journey: peace, it may be, from temptation to
sin cognate to her own. even in the gloom of inferno her great
goodheartedness is left her--a consolation, if not a grace.

[266] _your demand_: by a refinement of courtesy, francesca, though
addressing only dante, includes virgil in her profession of willingness
to tell all they care to hear. but as almost always, he remains silent.
it is not for his good the journey is being made.

[267] _native city_: ravenna. the speaker is francesca, daughter of
guido of polenta, lord of ravenna. about the year 1275 she was married
to gianciotto (deformed john) malatesta, son of the lord of rimini; the
marriage, like most of that time in the class to which she belonged,
being one of political convenience. she allowe
 
 ___________________________
 
d her affections to settle
on paolo, her husband's handsome brother; and gianciotto's suspicions
having been aroused, he surprised the lovers and slew them on the spot.
this happened at pesaro. the association of francesca's name with rimini
is merely accidental. the date of her death is not known. dante can
never have set eyes on francesca; but at the battle of campaldino in
1289, where he was present, a troop of cavaliers from pistoia fought on
the florentine side under the command of her brother bernardino; and in
the following year, dante being then twenty-five years of age, her
father, guido, was podesta in florence. the guido of polenta, lord of
ravenna, whom dante had for his last and most generous patron, was
grandson of that elder guido, and nephew of francesca.

[268] _to have lost it
 
 ___________________________
 
 so_: a husband's right and duty were too well
defined in the prevalent social code for her to complain that gianciotto
avenged himself. what she does resent is that she was left no
breathing-space for repentance and farewells.

[269] _which absolves, etc._: which compels whoever is beloved to love
in return. here is the key to dante's comparatively lenient estimate of
the guilt of francesca's sin. see line 39, and _inf._ xi. 83. the church
allowed no distinctions with regard to the lost. dante, for his own
purposes, invents a scale of guilt; and in settling the degrees of it he
is greatly influenced by human feeling--sometimes by private likes and
dislikes. the vestibule of the caitiffs, _e.g._, is his own creation.

[270] _caïna_: the division of the ninth and lowest circle, assigned to
those treacherous to their kindred (_inf._ xxxii. 58). her husband was
still living in 1300.--may not the words of this line be spoken by
paolo? it is as a fratricide even more than as the slayer of
 
 ___________________________
 
 his wife
that gianciotto is to find his place in caïna. the words are more in
keeping with the masculine than the feminine character. they certainly
jar somewhat with the gentler censure of line 102. and, immediately
after, dante speaks of what the 'souls' have said.

[271] _thy teacher_: boethius, one of dante's favourite authors
(_convito_ ii. 13), says in his _de consol. phil._, 'the greatest misery
in adverse fortune is once to have been happy.' but, granting that dante
found the idea in boethius, it is clearly virgil that francesca means.
she sees that dante's guide is a shade, and gathers from his grave
passionless aspect that he is one condemned for ever to look back with
futile regret upon his happier past.

[272] _lancelot_: king arthur's famous knight, who was too bashful to
make his love for queen guinivere known to her. galahad, holding the
secret of both, persuaded the queen to make the first declaration of
love at a meeting he arranged for between th
 
 ___________________________
 
em. her smile, or laugh, as
she 'took lancelot by the chin and kissed him,' assured her lover of his
conquest. the arthurian romances were the favourite reading of the
italian nobles of dante's time.

[273] _galahad_: from the part played by galahad, or galeotto, in the
tale of lancelot, his name grew to be italian for pander. the book, says
francesca, was that which tells of galahad; and the author of it proved
a very galahad to us. the early editions of the _decameron_ bear the
second title of 'the prince galeotto.'




canto vi.


  when i regained my senses, which had fled
    at my compassion for the kindred two,
    which for pure sorrow quite had turned my head,
  new torment
 
 ___________________________
 
 perfection in its full extent,                      110
    to it they then shall more approximate
  than now.'[292] our course we round the circle bent,
    still holding speech, of which i nothing say,
    until we came where down the pathway went:
  there found we plutus, the great enemy.


footnotes:

[274] _as i move again_: in his swoon he has been conveyed from the
second circle down to the third.

[275] _cerberus_: in the greek mythology cerberus is the watch-dog of
the under world. by dante he is converted into a demon, and with his
three throats, canine voracity, and ugly inflamed bulk, is appropriately
set to guard the entrance to the circle of the gluttonous and
wine-bibbers.

[276] _and oft, etc._: on entering the circle the shades are seized and
torn by cerberus; once over-nice in how they fed, they are now treated
as if they were food for dogs. but their enduring pain is to be
subjected to every kind of physical discomfort. their senses of hearing,
touch, and smell are assai
 
 ___________________________
 
led by the opposite of what they were most
used to enjoy at their luxurious feasts.

[277] _great worm_: though human in a monstrous form, cerberus is so
called as being a disgusting brute.

[278] _semblances, etc._: 'emptiness which seems to be a person.' to
this conception of the shades as only seeming to have bodies, dante has
difficulty in remaining true. for instance, at line 101 they mix with
the sleet to make a sludgy mass; and cannot therefore be impalpable.

[279] ciacco at once perceives by the weight of dante's tread that he is
a living man.

[280] _ciacco_: the name or nickname of a florentine wit, and, in his
day, a great diner-out. boccaccio, in his commentary, says that, though
poor, ciacco associated with men of birth and wealth, especially such as
ate and drank delicately. in the _decameron_, ix. 8,
 
 ___________________________
 
 he is introduced as
being on such terms with the great corso donati as to be able to propose
himself to dinner with him. clearly he was not a bad fellow, and his
pitiful case, perhaps contrasted with the high spirits and jovial
surroundings in which he was last met by dante, almost, though not
quite, win a tear from the stern pilgrim.

[281] _the citizens, etc._: dante eagerly confers on florentine politics
with the first florentine he encounters in inferno.

[282] _after, etc._: in the following nine lines the party history of
florence for two years after the period of the poem (march 1300) is
roughly indicated. the city was divided into two factions--the whites,
led by the great merchant vieri dei cerchi, and the blacks, led by corso
donati, a poor and turbulent noble. at the close of 1300 there was a
bloody encounter between the more violent members of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 two parties. in
may 1301 the blacks were banished. in the autumn of that year they
returned in triumph to the city in the train of charles of valois, and
got the whites banished in april 1302, within three years, that is, of
the poet's talk with ciacco. dante himself was associated with the
whites, but not as a violent partisan; for though he was a strong
politician no party quite answered his views. from the middle of june
till the middle of august 1300 he was one of the priors. in the course
of 1301 he is believed to have gone on an embassy to rome to persuade
the pope to abstain from meddling in florentine affairs. he never
entered florence again, being condemned virtually to banishment in
january 1302.

[283] _the boorish party_: _la parte selva
 
 ___________________________
 
ggia_. the whites; but what is
exactly meant by _selvaggia_ is not clear. literally it is 'woodland,'
and some say it refers to the cerchi having originally come from a
well-wooded district; which is absurd. nor, taking the word in its
secondary meaning of savage, does it apply better to one party than
another--not so well, perhaps, to the whites as to the blacks. villani
also terms the cerchi _salvatichi_ (viii. 39), and in a connection where
it may mean rude, ill-mannered. i take it that dante here indulges in a
gibe at the party to which he once belonged, but which, ere he began the
_comedy_, he had quite broken with. in _parad._ xvii. 62 he terms the
members of it 'wicked and stupid.' the sneer in the text would come well
enough from the witty and soft-living ciacco.

[284] _holpen, etc._: pope boniface, already intriguing to gain the
preponderance in florence, which for a time he enjoyed, with the greedy
and faithless charles of valois for his agent.

[285] _two just_: dante and a
 
 ___________________________
 
nother, unknown. he thus distinctly puts
from himself any blame for the evil turn things had taken in florence.
how thoroughly he had broken with his party ere he wrote this is proved
by his exclusion of the irresolute but respectable vieri dei cerchi from
the number of the just men. he, in dante's judgment, was only too much
listened to.--it will be borne in mind that, at the time assigned to the
action of the _comedy_, dante was still resident in florence.

[286] _tegghiaio_: see _inf._ xvi. 42. _farinata_: _inf._ x. 32.

[287] _rusticucci_: _inf._ xvi. 44. _mosca_: _inf._ xxviii. 106.
_arrigo_: cannot be identified. all these distinguished florentines we
may assume to have been hospitable patrons of ciacco's.

[288] _but when, etc._: in the inferno many such prayers are addressed
to dante. the shades in purgatory ask to have their friends on earth
stirred to offer up petitions for their speedy purification and
del
 
 ___________________________
 
iverance; but the only alleviation possible for the doomed spirits is
to know that they are not yet forgotten up in the 'sweet world.' a
double artistic purpose is served by representing them as feeling thus.
it relieves the mind to think that in such misery there is any source of
comfort at all. and by making them be still interested on their own
account in the thoughts of men, the eager colloquies in which they
engage with dante on such unequal terms gain in verisimilitude.

[289] _and list, etc._: the final sentence against them is to echo, in
its results, through all eternity.

[290] _the world to come_: the life after doomsday.

[291] _thy science_: to aristotle. in the _convito_, iv. 16, he quotes
'the philosopher' as teaching that 'everything is then at its full
perfection when it thoroughly fulfils its special functions.'

[292] _than now_: augustine says that 'after the resurrection of the
flesh the joys of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
  and thus about the loathsome pool we wound
    for a wide arc, between the dry and soft,
    with eyes on those who gulp the filth, turned round.
  at last we reached a tower that soared aloft.                    130


footnotes:

[293] _pape, etc._: these words have exercised the ingenuity of many
scholars, who on the whole lean to the opinion that they contain an
appeal to satan against the invasion of his domain. virgil seems to have
understood them, but the text leaves it doubtful whether dante himself
did. later on, but there with an obvious purpose, we find a line of pure
gibberish (_inf._ xxxi. 67).

[294] _plutus_: the god of riches; degraded here into a demon. he guards
the fourth circle, which is that of the misers and spendthrifts.

[295] _wolf_: frequently used by dante as symbolical of greed.

[296] _pride_: which in its way was a kind of greed--that of dominion.
similarly, the avarice represented by the wolf of canto i. was seen to
be the lust of aggrandisement. virgil here 
 
 ___________________________
 
y can never complete the circle. the monotony of their
employment and of their cries represents their subjection to one idea,
and, as in life, so now, their displeasure is excited by nothing so much
as by coming into contact with the failing opposite to their own. yet
they are set in the same circle because the sin of both arose from
inordinate desire of wealth, the miser craving it to hoard, and the
spendthrift to spend. in purgatory also they are placed together (see
_purg._ xxii. 40). so, on dante's scheme, liberality is allied to and
dependent on a wise and reasonable frugality.--there is no hint of the
enormous length of the course run by these shades. far lower down, when
the circles of the inferno have greatly narrowed, the circuit is
twenty-two miles (_inf._ xxix. 9).

[298] _clerks_: churchmen. the tonsure is the sign that a man is of
ecclesiastical condition. many took the tonsure who never became
priests.

[299] _i ought, etc._: dante is astonished that he can pick out no
greedy 
 
 ___________________________
 
priest or friar of his acquaintance, when he had known so many.

[300] _dimming, etc._: their original disposition is by this time
smothered by the predominance of greed. dante treats these sinners with
a special contemptuous bitterness. scores of times since he became
dependent on the generosity of others he must have watched how at a bare
hint the faces of miser and spendthrift fell, while their eyes travelled
vaguely beyond him, and their voices grew cold.

[301] _ruined locks_: 'a spendthrift will spend his very hair,' says an
italian proverb.

[302] _the happy land_: heaven.

[303] _her claws_: dante speaks of fortune as if she were a brutal and
somewhat maliciou
 
 ___________________________
 
s power. in virgil's answer there is a refutation of
the opinion of fortune given by dante himself, in the _convito_ (iv.
11). after describing three ways in which the goods of fortune come to
men he says: 'in each of these three ways her injustice is manifest.'
this part of the _convito_ fraticelli seems almost to prove was written
in 1297.

[304] _framing, etc._: according to the scholastic theory of the world,
each of the nine heavens was directed in its motion by intelligences,
called angels by the vulgar, and by the heathen, gods (_convito_ ii. 5).
as these spheres and the influ
 
 ___________________________
 
on and vicissitude of their greatness, and all must obey
the swing of that wheel, not moved by intelligences, but by the hand of
god, whereby all states arise to their zeniths and vertical points
according to their predestinated periods.'--_rel. med._ i. 17.

[306] _necessity, etc._: suggested, perhaps, by horace's _te semper
anteit sæva necessitas_ (_od._ i. 35). the question of how men can be
free in the face of necessity, here associated with fortune, more than
once emerges in the _comedy_. dante's belief on the subject was
substantially that of his favourite author boethius, who holds that
ultimately 'it is providence that turns the wheel of all things;' and
who says, that 'if you spread your sails to the wind you will be
carried, not where you would, but whither you are driven by the gale: if
you choose to commit yourself to fortune, you must endure the manners of
your mistress.'

[307] _whom they so often, etc._: treat with contumely.

[308] _the stars, etc._: it is now past midnight
 
 ___________________________
 
sed to the active grace of
charity. by more modern critics it has been ingeniously sought to find
in this circle a place not only for the slothful but for the proud and
envious as well. to each of these classes of sinners--such of them as
have repented in this life--a terrace of purgatory is assigned, and at
first sight it does seem natural to expect that the impenitent among
them should be found in inferno. but, while in purgatory souls purge
themselves of every kind of mortal sin, inferno, as dante conceived of
it, contains only such sinners as have been guilty of wicked acts. drift
and bent of heart and mind are taken no account of. the evil seed must
have borne a harvest, and the guilt of every victim of justice must be
plain and open. now, pride and envy are sins indeed, but sins that a man
may keep to himself. if they have betrayed the subject of them into the
commission of crimes, in those crimes they are punished lower down, as
is indicated at xii. 49. and so we find that lucifer is
 
 ___________________________
 
, though his treachery sprang from envy: the greater guilt
includes the less. for sluggishness in the pursuit of good the vestibule
of the caitiffs seems the appropriate place.--there are two kinds of
wrath. one is vehement, and declares itself in violent acts; the other
does not blaze out, but is grudging and adverse to all social good--the
wrath that is nursed. one as much as the other affects behaviour. so in
this circle, as in the preceding, we have represented the two excesses
of one sin.--dante's theory of sins is ably treated of in witte's
_dante-forschungen_, vol. ii. p. 121.




canto viii.


  i say, continuing,[312] that long before
    to its foundations we approachèd nigh
    our eyes went travelling to the top of the tower;
  for, hung out there, two flames[313] we could espy.
    then at such distance, scarce our eyesight made
    it clearly out, another gave reply.
  and, to the sea of knowledge turned, i said:
    'what meaneth this? and what reply would yield
    that oth
 
 ___________________________
 
unbolted since. thou didst it view,
  and saw the dark-writ legend which it bore.
    thence, even now, is one who hastens down
    through all the circles, guideless, to this shore,
  and he shall win us entrance to the town.'                       130


footnotes:

[312] _continuing_: the account of the fifth circle, begun in the
preceding canto, is continued in this. it is impossible to adopt
boccaccio's story of how the first seven cantos were found among a heap
of other papers, years after dante's exile began; and that 'continuing'
marks the resumption of his work. the word most probably suggested the
invention of the incident, or at least led to the identification of some
manuscript that may have been sent to dante, with the opening pages of
the _comedy_. if the tale were true, not only must ciacco's prophecy
(_inf._ vi.) have been interpolated, but we should be obliged to hold
that dante began the poem while he was a prosperous citizen.--boccaccio
himself in his comment on the _comed
 
 ___________________________
 
y_ points out the difficulty of
reconciling the story with ciacco's prophecy.

[313] _two flames_: denoting the number of passengers who are to be
conveyed across the stygian pool. it is a signal for the ferryman, and
is answered by a light hung out on the battlements of the city of dis.

[314] _guilty sprite_: only one is addressed; whether virgil or dante is
not clear.

[315] _phlegyas_: who burnt the temple of apollo at delphi in revenge
for the violation of his daughter by the god.

[316] _deeper, etc._: because used to carry only shades.

[317] _ere thy period_: the curiosity of the shade is excited by the
sinking of the boat in the water. he assumes that dante will one day be
condemned to inferno. neither francesca nor ciacco made a like mistake.

[318] _one who weeps_: he is ashamed to tell his name, and hopes in his
vile disguise to remain
 
 ___________________________
 
 unknown by dante, whose florentine speech and
dress, and perhaps whose features, he has now recognised.

[319] _soul disdainful_: dante has been found guilty of here glorying in
the same sin which he so severely reprobates in others. but, without
question, of set purpose he here contrasts righteous indignation with
the ignoble rage punished in this circle. with his quick temper and zeal
so often kindling into flame, he may have felt a special personal need
of emphasising the distinction.

[320] _names o'erwhelmed, etc._: 'horrible reproaches.'

[321] _philip argenti_: a florentine gentleman related to the great
family of the ad
 
 ___________________________
 
imari, and a contemporary of dante's. boccaccio in his
commentary describes him as a cavalier, very rich, and so ostentatious
that he once shod his horse with silver, whence his surname. in the
_decameron_ (ix. 8) he is introduced as violently assaulting--tearing
out his hair and dragging him in the mire--the victim of a practical
joke played by the ciacco of canto vi. some, without reason, suppose
that dante shows such severity to him because he was a black, and so a
political opponent of his own.

[322] _dis_: a name of pluto, the god of the infernal regions.

[323] _burghers_: the city of dis composes the sixth circle, and, as
immediately appears, is populated by demons. the sinners punished in it
are not mentioned at all in this canto, and it seems more reasonable to
apply _burghers_ to the demons than to the shades. they are called
_gravi_, generally taken to mean sore burdened, and the descrip
 
 ___________________________
 
ated across the stagnant marsh into the
deeper waters of the moat, and up to the gate where phlegyas is used to
land his passengers. it may be a question whether his services are
required for all who are doomed to the lower inferno, or only for those
bound to the city.

[326] _from heaven_: 'rained from heaven.' fallen angels.

[327] _seven times_: given as a round number.

[328] _yes and no_: he will return--he will not return. the demons have
said that virgil shall remain, and he has promised dante not to desert
him.

[329] _who dare, etc._: virgil knows the hindrance is only temporary,
but wonders what superior devilish power can have incited the demons to
deny him entrance. the incident displays the fallen angels as being
still rebellious, and is at the same time skilfully conceived to mark a
pause before dante enters on the lower inferno.

[330] _they showed it, etc._: at the gate of inferno, on the occasion of
christ's descent to limbo. the reference is to the words in the missal
serv
 
 ___________________________
 
the sighs
    come to our ears thus eloquent of woes?'
  and he to me: 'the lords of heresies[349]
    with followers of all sects, a greater band
    than thou wouldst think, these sepulchres comprise.
  to lodge them like to like the tombs are planned.                130
    the sepulchres have more or less of heat.'[350]
    then passed we, turning to the dexter hand,[351]
  'tween torments and the lofty parapet.


footnotes:

[331] _new colour_: both have changed colour, virgil in anger and dante
in fear.

[332] _unless_: to conceal his misgiving from dante, virgil refrains
from expressing all his thought. the 'unless' may refer to what the
lying demons had told him or threatened him with; the 'proffered aid,'
to that involved in beatrice's request.

[333] _this bottom_: the lower depths of inferno. how much still lies
below him is unknown to dante.

[334] _first degree_: the limbo where virgil resides. dante by an
indirect question, seeks to learn how much experience of inferno is
poss
 
 ___________________________
 
essed by his guide.

[335] _erichtho_: a thessalian sorceress, of whom lucan (_pharsalia_
vi.) tells that she evoked a shade to predict to sextus pompey the
result of the war between his father and cæsar. this happened thirty
years before the death of virgil.

[336] _judas' circle_: the judecca, or very lowest point of the inferno.
virgil's death preceded that of judas by fifty years. he gives no hint
of whose the shade was that he went down to fetch; but lucan's tale was
probably in dante's mind. in the middle ages the memory of virgil was
revered as that of a great sorcerer, especially in the neighbourhood of
naples.

[337] _the heaven, etc._: the _primum mobile_; but used here for the
highest heaven. see _inf._ ii. 83, _note_.

[338] _these fens, etc._: virgil knows the locality. they have no
choice, but must remain where they are, for the same moat and wall gird
the city all around.

[339] _erynnyes_: the furies. the queen of whom they are handmaids is
proserpine, carried off
 
 ___________________________
 
hoever looked on the head of medusa
was turned into stone.

[341] _theseus_: who descended into the infernal regions to rescue
proserpine, and escaped by the help of hercules.

[342] _mysterious line_: 'strange verses:' that the verses are called
strange, as boccaccio and others of the older commentators say, because
treating of such a subject in the vulgar tongue for the first time, and
in rhyme, is difficult to believe. rather they are strange because of
the meaning they convey. what that is, dante warns the reader of
superior intellect to pause and consider. it has been noted (_inf._ ii.
28) how he uses the characters of the old mythology as if believing in
their real existence. but this is for his poetical ends. here he bids us
look below the surface and seek for the truth hidden under the strange
disguise.--the opposition to their progress offered by the powers of
hell perplexes even virgil, while dante is reduced to a state of
absolute terror, and is afflicted with still sharper misgi
 
 ___________________________
 
d makes him avert his eyes;
which may signify that the only safe course for men is to turn their
backs on the deep and insoluble problem of how the reality of the divine
government can be reconciled with the apparent triumph of evil.

[343] _from heaven_: the messenger comes from heaven, and his words are
holy. against the obvious interpretation, that he is a good angel, there
lies the objection that no other such is met with in inferno, and also
that it is spoken of as a new sight for him when dante first meets with
one in purgatory. but the obstruction now to be overcome is worthy of
angelic interference; and dante can hardly be said to meet the
messenger, who does not even glance in his direction. the commentators
have made this angel mean all kind of outlandish things.

[344] _a rod_: a piece of the angelic outfit, derived from the
_caduceus_ of mercury.

[345] _cerberus_: hercules, when cerberus opposed his entrance to the
infernal regions, fastened a chain round his neck and dragged h
 
 ___________________________
 
im to the
gate. the angel's speech answers dante's doubts as to the limits of
diabolical power.

[346] _by other cares, etc._: it is not in inferno that dante is to hold
converse with celestial intelligences. the angel, like beatrice when she
sought virgil in limbo, is all on fire to return to his own place.

[347] _arles_: the alyscampo (elysian fields) at arles was an enormous
cemetery, of which ruins still exist. it had a circumference of about
six miles, and contained numerous sarcophagi dating from roman times.

[348] _pola_: in istria, near the gulf of quarnaro, said to have
contained many ancient tombs.

[349] _lords of heresies_: 'heresiarchs
 
 ___________________________
 
.' dante now learns for the first
time that dis is the city of unbelief. each class of heretics has its
own great sepulchre.

[350] _more or less of heat_: according to the heinousness of the heresy
punished in each. it was natural to associate heretics and punishment by
fire in days when dominican monks ruled the roast.

[351] _dexter hand_: as they move across the circles, and down from one
to the other, their course is usually to the left hand. here for some
reason virgil turns to the right, so as to
 
 ___________________________
 
 have the tombs on the left as
he advances. it may be that a special proof of his knowledge of the
locality is introduced when most needed--after the repulse by the
demons--to strengthen dante's confidence in him as a guide; or, as some
subtly think, they being now about to enter the abode of heresy, the
movement to the right signifies the importance of the first step in
forming opinion. the only other occasion on which their course is taken
to the right hand is at _inf._ xvii. 31.




canto x.


  and now advance we by a narrow track
    between the torments and the ramparts high,
    my master first, and i behind his back.
  'o mighty virtue,[352] at whose will am i
    wheeled thr
 
 ___________________________
 
u shalt stand within her gentle ray                     130
    whose beauteous eye sees all, she will make known
    the stages[373] of thy journey on life's way.'
  turning his feet, he to the left moved on;
    leaving the wall, we to the middle[374] went
    upon a path that to a vale strikes down,
  which even to us above its foulness sent.


footnotes:

[352] _virtue_: virgil is here addressed by a new title, which, with the
words of deep respect that follow, marks the full restoration of dante's
confidence in him as his guide.

[353] _nor is there, etc._: the gate was found to be strictly guarded,
but not so are the tombs.

[354] _jehoshaphat_: 'i will also gather all nations, and will bring
them down into the valley of jehoshaphat' (joel iii. 2).

[355] _epicurus_: the unbelief in a future life, or rather the
indifference to everything but the calls of ambition and worldly
pleasure, common among the nobles of dante's age and that preceding it,
went by the name of epicureanism. it is
 
 ___________________________
 
 the most radical of heresies,
because adverse to the first principles of all religions. dante, in his
treatment of heresy, dwells more on what affects conduct as does the
denial of the divine government--than on intellectual divergence from
orthodox belief.

[356] _as well as, etc._: the question is: 'may they be seen?' the wish
is a desire to speak with them.

[357] _nor only now, etc._: virgil has on previous occasions imposed
silence on dante, as, for instance, at _inf._ iii. 51.

[358] _be pleased, etc._: from one of the sepulchres, to be imagined as
a huge sarcophagus, come words similar to the _siste viator!_ common on
roman tombs.

[359] _farinata_: of the great florentine family of the uberti, and, in
the generation before dante, leader of the ghibeline or imperialist
party in florence. his memory long survived among his fellow-townsmen as
that of the typical noble, rough-mannered, unscrupulous, and arrogant;
but yet, for one g
 
 ___________________________
 
ood action that he did, he at the same time ranked in
the popular estimation as a patriot and a hero. boccaccio, misled
perhaps by the mention of epicurus, says that he loved rich and delicate
fare. it is because all his thoughts were worldly that he is condemned
to the city of unbelief. dante has already (_inf._ vi. 79) inquired
regarding his fate. he died in 1264.

[360] _his brows_: when dante tells he is of the alighieri, a guelf
family, farinata shows some slight displeasure. or, as a modern
florentine critic interprets the gesture, he has to think a moment
before he can remember on which side the alighieri ranged
themselves--they being of the small gentry, while he was a great noble,
but this gloss requires dante to have been more free from pride of
family than he really was.

[361] _twice disperse_: the alighieri shared in the exile of the guelfs
in 1248 and 1260.

[362] _you_: s
 
 ___________________________
 
ee also line 95. dante never uses the plural form to a
single person except when desirous of showing social as distinguished
from, or over and above, moral respect.

[363] _guido_: farinata's companion in the tomb is cavalcante
cavalcanti, who, although a guelf, was tainted with the more specially
ghibeline error of epicureanism. when in order to allay party rancour
some of the guelf and ghibeline families were forced to intermarry, his
son guido took a daughter of farinata's to wife. this was in 1267, so
that guido 
 
 ___________________________
 
was much older than dante. yet they were very intimate, and,
intellectually, had much in common. with him dante exchanged poems of
occasion, and he terms him more than once in the _vita nuova_ his chief
friend. the disdain of virgil need not mean more than is on the surface.
guido died in 1301. he is the hero of the _decameron_, vi. 9.

[364] _the lady_: proserpine; _i.e._ the moon. ere fifty months from
march 1300 were past, dante was to see the failure of more than one
attempt made by the exiles, of whom he was one, to gain entrance to
florence. the great attempt was in the beginning of 1304.

[365] _ruth for my race_: when the ghibeline power was finally broken in
florence the uberti were always specially excluded from any amnesty.
there is mention of the political execution of at least one descendant
of farinata's. his son when being led to the scaffold said, 'so we pay
our fathers' debts!'--it has been so long common
 
 ___________________________
 
 to describe dante as a
ghibeline, though no careful writer does it now, that it may be worth
while here to remark that ghibelinism, as farinata understood it, was
practically extinct in florence ere dante entered political life.

[366] _the arbia_: at montaperti, on the arbia, a few miles from siena,
was fought in 1260 a great battle between the guelf florence and her
allies on the one hand, and on the other the ghibelines of florence,
then in exile, under farinata; the sienese and tuscan ghibelines in
general; and some hundreds of men-at-arms lent by manfred.
notwithstanding the gallant behaviour of the florentine burghers, the
guelf defeat was overwhelming, and not only did the arbia run red w
 
 ___________________________
 
e ignorant of what is going on, or about to happen;
which seems to imply that they forget what they once foresaw. guido was
to die within a few months, and the event was too close at hand to come
within the range of his father's vision.

[370] _the second frederick_: the emperor of that name who reigned from
1220 to 1250, and waged a life-long war with the popes for supremacy in
italy. it is not however for his enmity with rome that he is placed in
the sixth circle, but for his epicureanism--as dante understood it. from
his sicilian court a spirit of free inquiry spread through the
peninsula. with men of the stamp of farinata it would be converted into
a crude materialism.

[371] _the cardinal_: ottaviano, of the powerful tuscan family of the
ubaldini, a man of great political activity, and known in tuscany as
'the cardinal.' his sympathies were not with the roman court. the news
of montaperti filled him with delight, and later, when the tuscan
ghibelines refused him money he had asked for,
 
 ___________________________
 
 he burst out with 'and
yet i have lost my soul for the ghibelines--if i have a soul.' he died
not earlier than 1273. after these illustrious names farinata scorns to
mention meaner ones.

[372] _ominous words_: those in which farinata foretold dante's exile.

[373] _the stages, etc._: it is cacciaguida, his ancestor, who in
paradise instructs dante in what his future life is to be--one of
poverty and exile (_parad._ xvii.). this is, however, done at the
request of beatrice.

[374] _to the middle_: turning to the left they cut across the circle
till they reach the inner boundary of the city of tombs. here there is
no wall.




canto xi.


  we at the margin of a lofty steep
    made of great shattered stones in circle bent,
    arrived where worser torments crowd the deep.
  so horrible a stench and violent
    was upward wafted from the v
 
 ___________________________
 

rather than from the next circle in particular that the stench arises,
symbolical of the foulness of the sins which are punished there. the
noisome smells which make part of the horror of inferno are after this
sometimes mentioned, but never dwelt upon (_inf._ xviii. 106, and xxix.
50).

[376] _pope anastasius_: the second of the name, elected pope in 496.
photinus, bishop of sirenium, was infected with the sabellian heresy,
but he was deposed more than a century before the time of anastasius.
dante follows some obscure legend in charging anastasius with heresy.
the important point is that the one heretic, in the sense usually
attached to the term, named as being in the city of unbelief, is a pope.

[377] _three small circles_: the seventh, eighth, and ninth; small in
circumference compared with those above. the pilgrims are now deep in
the hollow cone.

[378] _that sight, etc._: after hearing the following explanation dante
no longer asks to what classes the sinners met with belong, but o
 
 ___________________________
 
hose sin
consists in the exaggeration or misdirection of a wholesome natural
instinct. below them lie the circles filled with such as have been
guilty of malicious wickedness. this manifests itself in two ways: by
violence or by fraud. after first mentioning in a general way that the
fraudulent are set lowest in inferno, virgil proceeds to define
violence, and to tell how the violent occupy the circle immediately
beneath them--the seventh. for division of the maliciously wicked into
two classes dante is supposed to be indebted to cicero: 'injury may be
wrought by force or by fraud.... both are unnatural for man, but fraud
is the more hateful.'--_de officiis_, i. 13. it is remarkable that
virgil says nothing of those in the sixth circle in this account of the
classes of sinners.

[380] _to man alone, etc._: fraud involves the corrupt use of the powers
that distinguish us from the brutes.

[381] _who gamble, etc._: a different sin from the lavish spending
punished in the fourth circle (_inf._
 
 ___________________________
 
 vii.). the distinction is that
between thriftlessness and the prodigality which, stripping a man of the
means of living, disgusts him with life, as described in the following
line. it is from among prodigals that the ranks of suicides are greatly
filled, and here they are appropriately placed together. it may seem
strange that in his classification of guilt dante should rank violence
to one's self as a more heinous sin than that committed against one's
neighbour. he may have in view the fact that none harm their neighbours
so much as they who are oblivious of their own true interest.

[382] _sodom and cahors_: sins against nature are reckoned sins against
god, as explained lower down in this canto. cahors in languedoc had in
the middle ages the reputation of being a nest of usurers. these in old
english chronicles are termed caorsins. with the sins of s
 
 ___________________________
 
the second circle_: the second now beneath them; that is, the
eighth.

[385] _seat of dis_: the ninth and last circle.

[386] _thy ethics_: the ethics of aristotle, in which it is said: 'with
regard to manners, these three things are to be eschewed: incontinence,
vice, and bestiality.' aristotle holds incontinence to consist in the
immoderate indulgence of propensities which under right guidance are
adapted to promote lawful pleasure. it is, generally speaking, the sin
of which those about whom dante has inquired were guilty.--it has been
ingeniously sought by philalethes (_gött. com._) to show that virgil's
disquisition is founded on this threefold classification of
aristotle's--violence being taken to be the same as bestiality, and
malice as vice. but the reference to aristotle is made with the limited
purpose of justifying the lenient treatment of incontinence; in the same
way as a few lines further on genesis is referred to in support of the
harsh treatment of usury.

[387] _physics_: 
 
 ___________________________
 
stotle, in which it is said: 'art
imitates nature.' art includes handicrafts.

[388] _genesis_: 'and the lord god took the man, and put him into the
garden to dress it and to keep it.' 'in the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat bread.'

[389] _his disdain_: the usurer seeks to get wealth independently of
honest labour or reliance on the processes of nature. this far-fetched
argument against usury closes one of the most arid passages of the
_comedy_. the shortness of the canto almost suggests that dante had
himself got weary of it.

[390] _but come, etc._: they have been all this time resting behind the
lid of the tomb.

[391] _the fishes, etc._: the sun being now in aries the stars of pisces
begin to rise about a couple of hours before sunrise. the great bear
lies above caurus, the quarter of the n.n.w. wind. it seems impossible
to harmonise the astronomical indications scattered throughout the
_comedy_, there being traces of dante's having sometimes used details
belonging rather to the day o
 
 ___________________________
 
stones have been carelessly shot
into a heap.

[397] _the new weight_: the slope had never before been trodden by
mortal foot.

[398] _the former time_: when virgil descended to evoke a shade from the
ninth circle (_inf._ ix. 22).

[399] _prey from dis_: the shades delivered from limbo by christ (_inf._
iv. 53). the expression in the text is probably suggested by the words
of the hymn _vexilla: prædamque tulit tartaris_.

[400] _to chaos_: the reference is to the theory of empedocles, known to
dante through the refutation of it by aristotle. the theory was one of
periods of unity and division in nature, according as love or hatred
prevailed.

[401] _another spot_: see _inf._ xxi. 112. the earthquake at the
crucifixion shook even inferno to its base.

[402] _the river of blood_: phlegethon, the 'boiling river.' styx and
acheron have been already passed. lethe, the fourth infernal river, is
placed by dante in purgatory. the first round or circlet of the seventh
circle is filled by phlegethon
 
 ___________________________
 
egligence in revenge. but this may be mythical, as may also be the
long black hair between his eyebrows, which rose up stiff and terrible
as his anger waxed.

[410] _obizzo_: the second marquis of este of that name. he was lord of
ferrara. there seems little, if any, evidence extant of his being
specially cruel. as a strong guelf he took sides with charles of anjou
against manfred. he died in 1293, smothered, it was believed, by a son,
here called a stepson for his unnatural conduct. but though dante
vouches for the truth of the rumour it seems to have been an invention.

[411] _that bulicamë_: the stream of boiling blood is probably named
from the bulicamë, or hot spring, best known to dante--that near viterbo
(see _inf._ xiv. 79). and it may be that the mention of the bulicamë
suggests the reference at line 119.

[412] _in god's house_: literally, 'in the bosom of god.' the shade is
that of guy, son of simon of montfort and vicar in tuscany of charles of
anjou. in 1271 he stabbed, in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he cathedral of viterbo, henry, son of
richard of cornwall and cousin of edward i. of england. the motive of
the murder was to revenge the death of his father, simon, at evesham.
the body of the young prince was conveyed to england, and the heart was
placed in a vase upon the tomb of the confessor. the shade of guy stands
up to the chin in blood among the worst of the tyrants, and alone,
because of the enormity of his crime.

[413] _here took we passage_: dante on nessus' back. virgil has fallen
behind to allow the centaur to act as guide; and how he crosses the
stream dante does not see.

[414] _attila_: king of the huns, who invaded part of italy in the fifth
century; and who, according to the mistaken belief of dante's age, was
the devastator of florence.

[415] _pyrrhus_: king of epirus. _sextus_: son of pompey; a great
sea-captain who fought against the triumvirs. the crime of the first, in
dante's eyes, is that he fought with rome; of the second
 
 ___________________________
 
, that he
opposed augustus.

[416] _rinier of corneto_: who in dante's time disturbed the coast of
the states of the church by his robberies and violence.

[417] _rinier pazzo_: of the great family of the pazzi of val d'arno,
was excommunicated in 1269 for robbing ecclesiastics.




canto xiii.


  ere nessus landed on the other shore
    we for our part within a forest[418] drew,
    which of no pathway any traces bore.
  not green the foliage, but of dusky hue;
    not smooth the boughs, but gnarled and twisted round;
    for apples, poisonous thorns upon them
 
 ___________________________
 
ness.

[420] _harpies_: monsters with the bodies of birds and the heads of
women. in the _æneid_ iii., they are described as defiling the feast of
which the trojans were about to partake on one of the
strophades--islands of the ægean; and on that occasion the prophecy was
made that æneas and his followers should be reduced to eat their tables
ere they acquired a settlement in italy. here the harpies symbolise
shameful waste and disgust with life.

[421] _will prove, etc._: the things seen by dante are to make credible
what virgil tells (_æn._ iii.) of the blood and piteous voice that
issued from the torn bushes on the tomb of polydorus.

[422] _my lay_: see previous note. dante thus indirectly acknowledges
his debt to virgil; and, perhaps, at the same time puts in his claim to
an imaginative licence equal to that taken by his master. on a modern
reader the effect of the reference is to weaken the verisimilitude of
the incident.

[423] _for i am he, etc._: the speaker is pier delle vigne
 
 ___________________________
 
s of his intellectual court. peter was perhaps the
more endeared to his master because, like him, he was a poet of no mean
order. there are two accounts of what caused his disgrace. according to
one of these he was found to have betrayed frederick's interests in
favour of the pope's; and according to the other he tried to poison him.
neither is it known whether he committed suicide; though he is said to
have done so after being disgraced, by dashing his brains out against a
church wall in pisa. dante clearly follows this legend. the whole
episode is eloquent of the esteem in which peter's memory was held by
dante. his name is not mentioned in inferno, but yet the promise is
amply kept that it shall flourish on earth again, freed from unmerited
disgrace. he died about 1249.

[424] _the harlot_: envy.

[425] _of what thou thinkest, etc._: virgil never asks a question for
his own satisfaction. he knows who the spirits are, what brought them
there, and which of them will speak honestly out on t
 
 ___________________________
 
he promise of
having his fame refreshed in the world. it should be noted how, by a
hint, he has made peter aware of who he is (line 48); a delicate
attention yielded to no other shade in the inferno, except ulysses
(_inf._ xxvi. 79), and, perhaps, brunetto latini (_inf._ xv. 99).

[426] _in them shall ne'er be clad_: boccaccio is here at great pains to
save dante from a charge of contradicting the tenet of the resurrection
of the flesh.

[427] _naked_: these are the prodigals; their nakedness representing the
state to which in life they had reduced themselves.

[428] _lano_: who made one of a club of prodigals in siena (_inf._ xxix.
130) and soon ran through his fortune. joining in a florentine
expedition in 1288 against arezzo, he refused to escape from a defeat
encountered by his side at pieve del toppo, preferring, as was supposed,
to end his life at
 
 ___________________________
 
 once rather than drag it out in poverty.

[429] _james of st. andrews_: jacopo da sant' andrea, a paduan who
inherited enormous wealth which did not last him for long. he literally
threw money away, and would burn a house for the sake of the blaze. his
death has been placed in 1239.

[430] _my city, etc._: according to tradition the original patron of
florence was mars. in dante's time an ancient statue, supposed to be of
that god, stood upon the old bridge of florence. it is referred to in
_parad._ xvi. 47 and 145. benvenuto says that he had heard from
boccaccio, who had frequently heard it from old people, that the statue
was regarded with great awe. if a boy flung stones or mud at it, the
bystanders would say of him that he would make a bad end. it was lost in
the great flood of 1333. here the florentine shade represents mars as
troubling florence with wars in reven
 
 ___________________________
 
ge for being cast off as a patron.

[431] _attila_: a confusion with totila. attila was never so far south
as tuscany. neither is there reason to believe that when totila took the
city he destroyed it. but the legend was that it was rebuilt in the time
of charles the great.

[432] _my own house, etc._: it is not settled who this was who hanged
himself from the beams of his own roof. one of the agli, say some;
others, one of the mozzi. boccaccio and peter dante remark that suicide
by hanging was common in florence. but dante's text seems pretty often
to have suggested the invention of details in support or illustration of
it.




canto xiv.


  me of my native place the dear constraint[433]
    led to restore the leaves which round were strewn,
    to him whose voice by this time was grown faint.
  thence came we where the second round joins on
    unto the third, wherein how terrible
    the art of justice can be, is well shown.
  but, clearly of the
 
 ___________________________
 
was told,
    'to half thy question was an answer brought.
  lethe,[453] not in this pit, shalt thou behold.
    thither to wash themselves the spirits go,
    when penitence has made them spotless souled.'
  then said he: 'from the wood 'tis fitting now
    that we depart; behind me press thou nigh.                     140
    keep we the margins, for they do not glow,
  and over them, ere fallen, the fire-flakes die.'


footnotes:

[433] _dear constraint_: the mention of florence has awakened dante to
pity, and he willingly complies with the request of the unnamed suicide
(_inf._ xiii. 142). as a rule, the only service he consents to yield the
souls with whom he converses in inferno is to restore their memory upon
earth; a favour he does not feign to be asked for in this case, out of
consideration, it may be, for the family of the sinner.

[434] _cato_: cato of utica, who, after the defeat of pompey at
pharsalia, led his broken army across the libyan desert to join king
juba.

[435] _some
 
 ___________________________
 
d by a fatal
bolt.

[442] _mongibello_: a popular name of etna, under which mountain was
situated the smithy of vulcan and the cyclopes.

[443] _phlegra_: where the giants fought with the gods.

[444] _fit ornament, etc._: even if untouched by the pain he affects to
despise, he would yet suffer enough from the mad hatred of god that
rages in his breast. capaneus is the nearest approach to the satan of
milton found in the _inferno_. from the need of getting law enough by
which to try the heathen dante is led into some inconsistency. after
condemning the virtuous heathen to limbo for their ignorance of the one
true god, he now condemns the wicked heathen to this circle for
despising false gods. jupiter here stands for, as need scarcely be said,
the supreme ruler; and in that sense he is termed god (line 69). but it
remains remarkable that the one instance of blasphemous defiance of god
should be taken from classical fable.

[445] _the forest fence_: they do not trust themselves so much as to

 
 ___________________________
 
ted for baths in the middle ages; and, it is said,
especially by light women. the water boils up into a large pool, whence
it flows by narrow channels; sometimes by one and sometimes by another,
as the purposes of the neighbouring peasants require. sulphurous fumes
rise from the water as it runs. the incrustation of the bottom, sides,
and edges of those channels gives them the air of being solidly built.

[447] _the passage_: on each edge of the canal there is a flat pathway
of solid stone; and dante sees that only by following one of these can a
passage be gained across the desert, for to set foot on the sand is
impossible for him owing to the falling flakes of fire. there may be
found in his description of the solid and flawless masonry of the canal
a trace of the pleasure taken in good building by the contemporaries of
arnolfo. nor is it without meaning that the sterile sands, the abode of
such as despised honest labour, is crossed by a perfect work of art
which they are forbidden ever t
 
 ___________________________
 
o set foot upon.

[448] _the gateway_: at the entrance to inferno.

[449] _whose king_: saturn, who ruled the world in the golden age. he,
as the devourer of his own offspring, is the symbol of time; and the
image of time is therefore set by dante in the island where he reigned.

[450] _her child_: jupiter, hidden in the mountain from his father
saturn.

[451] _feed acheron, etc._: the idea of this image is taken from the
figure in nebuchadnezzar's dream in daniel ii. but here, instead of the
four empires, the materials of the statue represent the four ages of the
world; the foot of clay on which it stands being the present time, which
is so bad that even iron were too good to represent it. time turns his
back to the outworn civilisation
 
 ___________________________
 
s of the east, and his face to rome,
which, as the seat of the empire and the church, holds the secret of the
future. the tears of time shed by every age save that of gold feed the
four infernal streams and pools of acheron, styx, phlegethon, and
cocytus. line 117 indicates that these are all fed by the same water;
are in fact different names for the same flood of tears. the reason why
dante has not hitherto observed the connection between them is that he
has not made a complete circuit of each or indeed of any circle, as
virgil reminds him at line 124, etc. the rivulet by which they stand
drains the boiling phlegethon--where the water is all changed to blood,
because in it the murderers are punished--and flowing through the forest
of the suicides and the desert of the blasphemers, etc., tumbles into
the eighth circle as described in canto xvi. 103. cocytus they are
afterward to re
 
 ___________________________
 
ach. an objection to this account of the infernal rivers
as being all fed by the same waters may be found in the difference of
volume of the great river of acheron (_inf._ iii. 71) and of this
brooklet. but this difference is perhaps to be explained by the
evaporation from the boiling waters of phlegethon and of this stream
which drains it. dante is almost the only poet applied to whom such
criticism would not be trifling. another difficult point is how cocytus
should not in time have filled, and more than filled, the ninth circle.

[452] _to the left hand_: twice only as they descend they turn their
course to the right hand (_inf._ ix. 132, and xvii. 31). the circuit of
the inferno they do not complete till they reach the very base.

[453] _lethe_: found in the earthly paradise, as described in
_purgatorio_ xxviii. 130.




canto xv.


 
 ___________________________
 
ss the waste of sand which that encompasses. to follow it they must
turn to the right, as always when, their general course being to the
left, they have to cross a circle. but such a veering to the right is a
consequence of their leftward course, and not an exception to it.

[455] _cadsand_: an island opposite to the mouth of the great canal of
bruges.

[456] _chiarentana_: what district or mountain is here meant has been
much disputed. it can be taken for carinthia only on the supposition
that dante was ignorant of where the brenta rises. at the source of that
river stands the monte chiarentana, but it may be a question how old
that name is. the district name of it is canzana, or carenzana.

[457] _not so high, etc._: this limitation is very characteristic of
dante's style of thought, which compels him to a precision that will
produce the utmost possible effect of verisimilitude in his description.
most poets would have made the walls far higher and more vast, by way of
lending grandeur to
 
 ___________________________
 
 the conception.

[458] _marvellous_: to find dante, whom he knew, still living, and
passing through the circle.

[459] _with hand, etc._: 'with my face bent to his' is another reading,
but there seems to be most authority for that in the text.--the fiery
shower forbids dante to stoop over the edge of the causeway. to
brunetto, who is some feet below him, he throws out his open hand, a
gesture of astonishment mingled with pity.

[460] _ser brunetto_: brunetto latini, a florentine, was born in 1220.
as a notary he was entitled to be called ser, or messer. as appears from
the context, dante was under great intellectual obligations to him, not,
we may suppose, as to a tutor so much as to an active-minded and
scholarly friend of mature age, and possessed of a ripe exper
 
 ___________________________
 
ience of
affairs. the social respect that dante owed him is indicated by the use
of the plural form of address. see note, _inf._ x. 51. brunetto held
high appointments in the republic. perhaps with some exaggeration,
villani says of him that he was the first to refine the florentines,
teaching them to speak correctly, and to administer state affairs on
fixed principles of politics (_cronica_, viii. 10). a guelf in politics,
he shared in the exile of his party after the ghibeline victory of
montaperti in 1260, and for some years resided in pa
 
 ___________________________
 
ris. there is reason
to suppose that he returned to florence in 1269, and that he acted as
prothonotary of the court of charles of valois' vicar-general in
tuscany. his signature as secretary to the council of florence is found
under the date of 1273. he died in 1294, when dante was twenty-nine, and
was buried in the cloister of santa maria maggiore, where his tombstone
may still be seen. (not in santa maria novella.) villani mentions him in
his chronicle with some reluctance, seeing he was a 'worldly man.' his
life must indeed have been vicious to the last, before dante could have
had the heart to fix him in such company. brunetto's chief works are the
_tesoro_ and _tesoretto_. for the _tesoro_, see note at line 119. the
_tesoretto_, or _little treasure_, is an allego
 
 ___________________________
 
m
an embassy to alphonso of castile, meeting a scholar of bologna of whom
he asks 'in smooth sweet words for news of tuscany.' having been told of
the catastrophe of montaperti he wanders out of the beaten way into the
forest of roncesvalles, where he meets with various experiences; he is
helped by ovid, is instructed by ptolemy, and grows penitent for his
sins. in this, it will be seen, there is a general resemblance to the
action of the _comedy_. there are even turns of expression that recall
dante (_e.g._ beginning of _cap._ iv.); but all together amounts to
little.

[461] _low i bent my head_: but not projecting it beyond the line of
safety, strictly defined by the edge of the causeway. we are to imagine
to ourselves the fire of sodom falling on brunetto's upturned face, and
missing dante's head only by an inch.

[462] _yestermorn_: this is still the saturday. it was friday when dante
met virgil.

[463] _guided by whom_: brunetto has asked who the guide is, and dante
does not tell him. 
 
 ___________________________
 
a reason for the refusal has been ingeniously found
in the fact that among the numerous citations of the _treasure_ brunetto
seldom quotes virgil. see also the charge brought against guido
cavalcanti (_inf._ x. 63), of holding virgil in disdain. but it is
explanation enough of dante's omission to name his guide that he is
passing through inferno to gain experience for himself, and not to
satisfy the curiosity of the shades he meets. see note on line 99.

[464] _thy planet's light_: some think that brunetto had cast dante's
horoscope. in a remarkable passage (_parad._ xxii. 112) dante attributes
any genius he may have to the influence of the twins, which
constellation was in the ascendant when he was born. see also _inf._
xxvi. 23. but here it is more likely that brunetto r
 
 ___________________________
 
efers to his
observation of dante's good qualities, from which he gathered that he
was well starred.

[465] _fiesole_: the mother city of florence, to which also most of the
fiesolans were believed to have migrated at the beginning of the
eleventh century. but all the florentines did their best to establish a
roman descent for themselves; and dante among them. his fellow-citizens
he held to be for the most part of the boorish fiesolan breed, rude and
stony-hearted as the mountain in whose cleft the cradle of their race
was seen from florence.

[466] _both sides_: this passage was most likely written not long after
dante had ceased to entertain any hope of winning his way back to
florence in the company of the whites, whose exile he shared, and when
he was already standing in proud isolation from black and white, from
guelf and ghibeline. 
 
 ___________________________
 
there is nothing to show that his expectation of
being courted by both sides ever came true. never a strong partisan, he
had, to use his own words, at last to make a party by himself, and stood
out an imperialist with his heart set on the triumph of an empire far
nobler than that the ghibeline desired. dante may have hoped to hold a
place of honour some day in the council of a righteous emperor; and this
may be the glorious haven with the dream of which he was consoled in the
wanderings of his exile.

[467] _another text_: ciacco and farinata have already hinted at the
troubles that lie ahead of him (_inf._ vi. 65, and x. 79).

[468] _the clown, etc._: the honest performance of duty is the best
defence against adverse fortune.

[469] _right about_: in traversing the sands they keep upon the
right-h
 
 ___________________________
 
and margin of the embanked stream, virgil leading the way, with
dante behind him on the right so that brunetto may see and hear him
well.

[470] _he hears, etc._: of all the interpretations of this somewhat
obscure sentence that seems the best which applies it to virgil's
_quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est_--'whatever shall
happen, every fate is to be vanquished by endurance' (_æn._ v. 710).
taking this way of it, we have in the form of dante's profession of
indifference to all the adverse fortune that may be in store for him a
refined compliment to his guide; and in virgil's gesture and words an
equally delicate revelation of himself to brunetto, in which is conveyed
an answer to the question at line 48, 'who is this that shows the
way?'--otherwise, the words convey virgil's approbation of dante's
having so well attended to his advice to store farinata's prophecy in
his memory (_inf._ x.127).

[471] _his band_: that is, the company
 
 ___________________________
 
 to which brunetto specially
belongs, and from which for the time he has separated himself.

[472] _stained with one sin_: dante will not make brunetto individually
confess his sin.

[473] _priscian_: the great grammarian of the sixth century; placed here
without any reason, except that he is a representative teacher of youth.

[474] _francis d'accorso_: died about 1294. the son of a great civil
lawyer, he was himself professor of the civil law at bologna, where his
services were so highly prized that the bolognese forbade him, on pain
of the confiscation of his goods, to accept an invitation from edward i.
to go to oxfo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd.

[475] _of him the slave, etc._: one of the pope's titles is _servus
servorum domini_. the application of it to boniface, so hated by dante,
may be ironical: 'fit servant of such a slave to vice!' the priest
referred to so contemptuously is andrea, of the great florentine family
of the mozzi, who was much engaged in the political affairs of his time,
and became bishop of florence in 1286. about ten years later he was
translated to vicenza, which stands on the bacchiglione; and he died
shortly afterwards. according to benvenuto he was a ridiculous preacher
and a man of dissolute manners. what is now most interesting about him
is tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t he was dante's chief pastor during his early manhood, and is
consigned by him to the same disgraceful circle of inferno as his
beloved master brunetto latini--a terrible evidence of the corruption of
life among the churchmen as well as the scholars of the thirteenth
century.

[476] _new dust-clouds_: raised by a band by whom they are about to be
met.

[477] _my treasure_: the _trésor_, or _tesoro_, brunetto's principal
work, was written by him in french as being 'the pleasantest language,
and the most wide
 
 ___________________________
 
ly spread.' in it he treats of things in general in the
encyclopedic fashion set him by alphonso of castile. the first half
consists of a summary of civil and natural history. the second is
devoted to ethics, rhetoric, and politics. to a great extent it is a
compilation, containing, for instance, a translation, nearly complete,
of the ethics of aristotle--not, of course, direct from the greek. it is
written in a plodding style, and speaks to more industry than genius. to
it dante is indebted for some facts and fables.

[478] _the green cloth_: to commemorate a victory won by the veronese
there was instituted a race to be run on the first sunday of lent. the
prize was a piece of green cloth. the competitors ran naked.--brunetto
does not disappear into the gloom without a parting word of applause
from his old pupil. dante's rigorous sentence on his beloved master is
pronounced as softly as it can be. we must still wonder that he has the
heart to bring him to such an awful
 
 ___________________________
 
indistinct with gross obscurity,
    enough to fill the stoutest heart with fear:
  like one who rises having dived to free
    an anchor grappled on a jagged stone,
    or something else deep hidden in the sea;
  with feet drawn in and arms all open thrown.


footnotes:

[479] _the next circle_: the eighth.

[480] _thy garb_: 'almost every city,' says boccaccio, 'had in those
times its peculiar fashion of dress distinct from that of neighboring
cities.'

[481] _as he wheeled round_: virgil and dante have come to a halt upon
the embankment. the three shades, to whom it is forbidden to be at rest
for a moment, clasping one another as in a dance, keep wheeling round in
circle upon the sand.

[482] _guidoguerra_: a descendant of the counts guidi of modigliana.
gualdrada was the daughter of bellincion berti de' ravignani, praised
for his simple habits in the _paradiso_, xv. 112. guidoguerra was a
guelf leader, and after the defeat of montaperti acted as captain of his
party, in this capacity le
 
 ___________________________
 
nding valuable aid to charles of anjou at the
battle of benevento, 1266, when manfred was overthrown. he had no
children, and left the commonwealth of florence his heir.

[483] _tegghiaio_: son of aldobrando of the adimari. his name should be
dear in florence, because he did all he could to dissuade the citizens
from the campaign which ended so disastrously at montaperti.

[484] _james rusticucci_: an accomplished cavalier of humble birth, said
to have been a retainer of dante's friends the cavalcanti. the
commentators have little to tell of him except that he made an unhappy
marriage, which is evident from the text. of the sins of him and his
companions there is nothing known beyond what is to be inferred from the
poet's words, and nothing to say, except that when dante consigned men
of their stamp, frank and amiable, to the infernal circles, we may be
sure that he only executed a verdict already accepted as just by the
whole of florence. and when we find him impart
 
 ___________________________
 
ially damning guelf and
ghibeline we may be equally sure that he looked for the aid of neither
party, and of no family however powerful in the state, to bring his
banishment to a close. he would even seem to be careful to stop any hole
by which he might creep back to florence. when he did return, it was to
be in the train of the emperor, so he hoped, and as one who gives rather
than seeks forgiveness.

[485] _of your city, etc._: at line 32 rusticucci begs dante to tell who
he is. he tells that he is of their city, which they have already
gathered from his _berretta_ and the fashion of his gown; but he tells
nothing, almost, of himself. unless to farinata, indeed, he never makes
an open breast to any one met in inferno. but here he does all that
courtesy requires.

[486] _thy fame_: dante has implied in his answer that he is gifted with
oratorical powers and is the object of a special divine care; and the
illustrious florentine, frankly acknowledging t
 
 ___________________________
 
answer of which it is not
easy to detect either the wit or the courtesy, but which is said to have
converted the churl to liberal ways (_decam._ i. 8). he is here
introduced as an authority on the noble style of manners.

[488] _pride and extravagance_: in place of the nobility of mind that
leads to great actions, and the gentle manners that prevail in a society
where there is a due subordination of rank to rank and well-defined
duties for every man. this, the aristocratic in a noble sense, was
dante's ideal of a social state; for all his instincts were those of a
florentine aristocrat, corrected though they were by his good sense and
his thirst for a reign of perfect justice. during his own time he had
seen florence grow more and more democratic; and he was
irritated--unreasonably, considering that it was only a sign of the
general prosperity--at the spectacle of the amazing growth of wealth in
the hands of low-born traders, who every year were coming more to the
front and monopolising inf
 
 ___________________________
 
luence at home and abroad at the cost of their
neighbours and rivals with longer pedigrees and shorter purses. in
_paradiso_ xvi. dante dwells at length on the degeneracy of the
florentines.

[489] _at other times_: it is hinted that his outspokenness will not in
the future always give equal satisfaction to those who hear.

[490] _there was i, etc._: _forsan et hæc olim meminisse
juvabit._--_æn._ i. 203.

[491] _acquacheta_: the fall of the water of the brook over the lofty
cliff that sinks from the seventh to the eighth circle is compared to
the waterfall upon the montone at the monastery of st. benedict, in the
mountains ab
 
 ___________________________
 
ove forlì. the po rises in monte viso. dante here travels in
imagination from monte viso down through italy, and finds that all the
rivers which rise on the left hand, that is, on the north-east of the
apennine, fall into the po, till the montone is reached, that river
falling into the adriatic by a course of its own. above forlì it was
called acquacheta. the lamone, north of the montone, now follows an
independent course to the sea, having cut a new bed for itself since
dante's time.

[492] _where for a thousand, etc._: in the monastery there was room for
many more monks, say most of the commentators; or something to the like
effect. mr. longfellow's interpretation seems better: where the height
of the fall is so great that it would divide into a thousand falls.

[493] _toward the right_: the attitude of one about to throw.

[494] _the cord_: the services of geryon are wanted to convey them down
the next reach of the pit; and as no voice could be heard for the noise
 
 ___________________________
 

of the waterfall, and no signal be made to catch the eye amid the gloom,
virgil is obliged to call the attention of the monster by casting some
object into the depth where he lies concealed. but, since they are
surrounded by solid masonry and slack sand, one or other of them must
supply something fit to throw down; and the cord worn by dante is fixed
on as what can best be done without. there may be a reference to the
cord of saint francis, which dante, according to one of his
commentators, wore when he was a young man, following in this a fashion
common enough among pious laymen who had no thought of ever becoming
friars. but the simile of the cord, as representing sobriety and
virtuous purpose, is not strange to dante. in _purg._ vii. 114 he
describes pedro of arragon as being girt with the cord of every virtue;
and pedro was no franciscan. dante's cord may therefore be taken as
standing for vigilance or self-control. with it he had hoped t
 
 ___________________________
 
rs of inferno. but although he has been girt
with it ever since he entered by the gate, it has not saved him from a
single fear, far less from a single danger; and now it is cast away as
useless. henceforth, more than ever, he is to confide wholly in virgil
and have no confidence in himself. nor is he to be girt again till he
reaches the coast of purgatory, and then it is to be with a reed, the
emblem of humility.--but, however explained, the incident will always be
somewhat of a puzzle.

[495] dante attributes to virgil full knowledge of all that is in his
own mind. he thus heightens our conception of his dependence on his
guide, with whose will his will is blent, and whose thoughts are always
found to be anticipating his own. few readers will care to be constantly
recalling to mind that virgil represents enlightened human reason. but
even if we confine ourselves to the easiest sense of the narrative, the
study of the relations between him and dante will be found one of the
most interestin
 
 ___________________________
 
g suggested by the poem--perhaps only less so than that
of dante's moods of wonder, anger, and pity.




canto xvii.


  'behold the monster[496] with the pointed tail,
    who passes mountains[497] and can entrance make
    through arms and walls! who makes the whole world ail,
  corrupted by him!' thus my leader spake,
    and beckoned him that he should land hard by,
    where short the pathways built of marble break.
  and that foul image of dishonesty
    moving approached us with his head and chest,
    but to the bank[498] drew not his tail on high.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
rom its master far, sulks angrily:
  so we, by geryon in the deep bestowed,
    were 'neath the sheer-hewn precipice set down:
    he, suddenly delivered from our load,
  like arrow from the string was swiftly gone.


footnotes:

[496] _the monster_: geryon, a mythical king of spain, converted here
into the symbol of fraud, and set as the guardian demon of the eighth
circle, where the fraudulent are punished. there is nothing in the
mythology to justify this account of geryon; and it seems that dante has
created a monster to serve his purpose. boccaccio, in his _genealogy of
the gods_ (lib. i.), repeats the description of geryon given by 'dante
the florentine, in his poem written in the florentine tongue, one
certainly of no little importance among poems;' and adds that geryon
reigned in the balearic isles, and was used to decoy travellers with his
benignant countenance, caressing words, and every kind of friendly lure,
and then to murder them when asleep.

[497] _who passes mountains, etc.
 
 ___________________________
 
ich they
tumble. it was into this funnel that virgil flung the cord, and up it
that geryon was seen to ascend, as if by following up the course of the
water he would find out who had made the signal. to keep to the narrow
causeway where it ran on by the edge of this gulf would seem too full of
risk.

[505] _woful folk_: usurers; those guilty of the unnatural sin of
contemning the legitimate modes of human industry. they sit huddled up
on the sand, close to its bound of solid masonry, from which dante looks
down on them. but that the usurers are not found only at the edge of the
plain is evident from _inf._ xiv. 19.

[506] _could recognise, etc._: though most of the group prove to be from
florence dante recognises none of them; and this denotes that nothing so
surely creates a second nature in a man, in a bad sense, as setting the
heart on money. so in the fourth circle those who, being unable to spend
moderately, are always thinking of how to keep or get money are
represented as 'obscured f
 
 ___________________________
 
ce; the white goose on a red
ground was the arms of the ubriachi of florence; the azure sow, of the
scrovegni of padua.

[508] _vitalian_: a rich paduan noble, whose palace was near that of the
scrovegni.

[509] _pink of chivalry_: 'sovereign cavalier;' identified by his arms
as ser giovanni buiamonte, still alive in florence in 1301, and if we
are to judge from the text, the greatest usurer of all. a northern poet
of the time would have sought his usurers in the jewry of some town he
knew, but dante finds his among the nobles of padua and florence. he
ironically represents them as wearing purses ornamented with their coats
of arms, perhaps to hint that they pursued their dishonourable trade
under shelter of their noble names--their shop signs, as it were. the
whole passage may have been planned by dante so as to afford him the
opportunity of damning the still living buiamonte without mentioning his
name.

[510] _his tongue thrust out_: as if to say: we know well what sort of
fine gentleman
 
 ___________________________
 


[511] _by stairs like this_: the descent from one circle to another
grows more difficult the further down they come. they appear to have
found no special obstacle in the nature of the ground till they reached
the bank sloping down to the fifth circle, the pathway down which is
described as terrible (_inf._ vii. 105). the descent into the seventh
circle is made practicable, and nothing more (_inf._ xii. i).

[512] _heaven was fired_: as still appears in the milky way. in the
_convito_, ii. 15, dante discusses the various explanations of what
causes the brightness of that part of the heavens.

[513] _a terrific roar_: of the water falling to the ground. on
beginning the descent they had left the waterfall on the left hand, but
geryon, after fetching one or more great circles, passes in front of it,
and then they have it on the right. there is no further mention of the
waters of phlegethon till they are found frozen in cocytus (_inf._
xxxii. 23). philalethes suggests that they flow under the
 
 ___________________________
 
 eighth circle.

[514] _lure_: an imitation bird used in training falcons. dante
describes the sulky, slow descent of a falcon which has either lost
sight of its prey, or has failed to discover where the falconer has
thrown the lure. geryon has descended thus deliberately owing to the
command of virgil.




canto xviii.


  of iron colour, and composed of stone,
    a place called malebolge[515] is in hell,
    girt by a cliff of substance like its own.
  in that malignant region yawns a well[516]
    right in the centre, ample and profound;
    of which i duly will the str
 
 ___________________________
 
he ninth
circle. the bolgias or valleys are divided from each other by rocky
banks; and, each bolgia being at a lower level than the one that
encloses it, the inside of each bank is necessarily deeper than the
outside. ribs or ridges of rock--like spokes of a wheel to the
axle-tree--run from the foot of the precipice to the outer rim of the
'well,' vaulting the moats at right angles with the course of them. thus
each rib takes the form of a ten-arched bridge. by one or other of these
virgil and dante now travel towards the centre and the base of inferno;
their general course being downward, though varied by the ascent in turn
of the hog-backed arches over the moats.

[519] _more swift_: the sinners in the first bolgia are divided into two
gangs, moving in opposite directions, the course of those on the outside
being to the right, as looked at by dante. these are the shades of
panders; those in the inner current are such as seduced on their own
account. here a list of the various classes of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld ravine outside the walls of
bologna, where the bodies of felons were thrown. benvenuto says it used
to be a taunt among boys at bologna: your father was pitched into the
salse.

[524] _thy clear accents_: not broken with sobs like his own and those
of his companions.

[525] _whatever, etc._: different accounts seem to have been current
about the affair of ghisola.

[526] _'tween reno, etc._: the reno and savena are streams that flow
past bologna. _sipa_ is bolognese for maybe, or for yes. so dante
describes tuscany as the country where _si_ is heard (_inf._ xxxiii.
80). with regard to the vices of the bolognese, benvenuto says: 'dante
had studied in bologna, and had seen and observed all these things.'

[527] _to the right_: this is only an apparent departure from their
leftward course. moving as they were to the left along the edge of the
bolgia, they required to turn to the right to cross the bridge that
spanned it.

[528] _those eternal circles_: the meaning is not clear; perhaps it o
 
 ___________________________
 
l to
death, with the exception of thoas, saved by his daughter hypsipyle.
when jason deserted her he sailed for colchis, and with the assistance
of medea won the golden fleece. medea, who accompanied him from colchis,
was in turn deserted by him.

[530] _who in the next bolgia wailed_: the flatterers in the second
bolgia.

[531] _alessio interminei_: of the great lucchese family of the
interminelli, to which the famous castruccio castrucani belonged.
alessio is know to have been living in 1295. dante may have known him
personally. benvenuto says he was so liberal of his flattery that he
spent it even on menial servants.

[532] _thais_: in the _eunuch_ of terence, thraso, the lover of that
courtesan, asks gnatho, their go-between, if she really sent him many
thanks for the present of a slave-girl he had sent her. 'enormous!' says
gnatho. it proves what great store dante set on ancient instances when
he thought this worth citing.

[533] _enough, etc._: most readers will agree with virgil.




 
 ___________________________
 
nor was he by his burden so oppressed
    but that he bore me to the bridge's crown,
    which with the fourth joins the fifth rampart's crest.
  and lightly here he set his burden down,                         130
    found light by him upon the precipice,
    up which a goat uneasily had gone.
  and thence another valley met mine eyes.


footnotes:

[534] _simon magus_: the sin of simony consists in setting a price on
the exercise of a spiritual grace or the acquisition of a spiritual
office. dante assails it at headquarters, that is, as it was practised
by the popes; and in their case it took, among other forms, that of
ecclesiastical nepotism.

[535] _the trumpet_: blown at the punishment of criminals, to call
attention to their sentence.

[536] _the next tomb_: the third bolgia, appropriately termed a tomb,
because its manner of punishment is that of a burial, as will be seen.

[537] _st. john_: the church of st. john's, in dante's time, as now, the
baptistery of florence. in _parad._ 
 
 ___________________________
 
xxv. he anticipates the day, if it
should ever come, when he shall return to florence, and in the church
where he was baptized a christian be crowned as a poet. down to the
middle of the sixteenth century all baptisms, except in cases of urgent
necessity, were celebrated in st. john's; and, even there, only on the
eves of easter and pentecost. for protection against the crowd, the
officiating priests were provided with standing-places, circular
cavities disposed around the great font. to these dante compares the
holes of this bolgia, for the sake of introducing a defence of himself
from a charge of sacrilege. benvenuto tells that once when some boys
were playing about the church one of them, to hide himself from his
companions, squeezed himself into a baptizer's standing-place, and made
so tight a fit of it that he could not be rescued till dante with his
own hands plied a hammer upon the marble, and so saved the child from
drowning. the presence of water in the cavity may be explained by 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
fact of the church's being at that time lighted by an unglazed opening
in the roof; and as baptisms were so infrequent the standing-places,
situated as they were in the centre of the floor, may often have been
partially flooded. it is easy to understand how bitterly dante would
resent a charge of irreverence connected with his 'beautiful st.
john's;' 'that fair sheep-fold' (_parad._ xxv. 5).

[538] _that bank, etc._: of each bolgia the inner bank is lower than the
outer; the whole of malebolge sloping towards the centre of the inferno.

[539] _like a friar, etc._: in those times the punishment of an assassin
was to be stuck head downward in a pit, and then to have earth slowly
shovelled in till he was suffocated. dante bends down, the better to
hear what the sin
 
 ___________________________
 
nt of what is now passing on the
earth, he can refer back to his foreknowledge of some years earlier (see
_inf._ x. 99) as if to a prophetic writing, and finds that according to
this it is still three years too soon, it being now only 1300, for the
arrival of boniface. this is the usual explanation of the passage. to it
lies the objection that foreknowledge of the present that can be
referred back to is the same thing as knowledge of it, and with this the
spirits in inferno are not endowed. but dante elsewhere shows that he
finds it hard to observe the limitation. the alternative explanation,
supported by the use of _scritto_ (writing) in the text, is that
nicholas refers to some prophecy once current about his successors in
rome.

[541] _the fair lady_: the church. the guile is that shown by boniface
in getting his predecessor celestine v. to abdicate (_inf._ iii. 60).

[542] _as befooled_: dante does not yet suspect that it is with a pope
he is speaking. he is dumbfounded at being address
 
 ___________________________
 
ten. nicholas says that from
the time boniface arrives till clement relieves him will be a shorter
period than that during which he has himself been in inferno, that is to
say, a shorter time than twenty years. clement died in 1314; and so, it
is held, we find a date before which the _inferno_ was, at least, not
published. but clement was known for years before his death to be ill of
a disease usually soon fatal. he became pope in 1305, and the wonder was
that he survived so long as nine years. dante keeps his prophecy
safe--if it is a prophecy; and there does seem internal evidence to
prove the publication of the _inferno_ to have taken place long before
1314.--it is needless to point out how the censure of clement gains in
force if read as having been published before his death.

[545] _jason_: or joshua, who purchased the office of high priest from
antiochus epiphanes, and innovated the customs of the jews (2 maccab.
iv. 7).

[546] _punished well_: at line 12 dante has admired the propri
 
 ___________________________
 
multiplying benefices for their kindred; boniface, for
example, besides cardinals, appointed about twenty archbishops and
bishops from among his own relatives. here all the simoniacal popes have
to be contented with one place among them. they paid no regard to
whether a post was well filled or not: here they are set upside down.

[547] _charles_: nicholas was accused of taking a bribe to assist peter
of arragon in ousting charles of anjou from the kingdom of sicily.

[548] _by reverence, etc._: dante distinguishes between the office and
the unworthy holder of it. so in purgatory he prostrates himself before
a pope (_purg._ xix. 131).

[549] _her spouse_: in the preceding lines the vision of the woman in
the apocalypse is applied to the corruption of the church, represented
under the figure of the seven-hilled rome seated in honour among the
nations and receiving observance from the kings of the earth till her
spouse, the pope, began to prostitute her by making merchandise of her
spiritual g
 
 ___________________________
 
ifts. of the beast there is no mention here, his qualities
being attributed to the woman.

[550] _ah, constantine, etc._: in dante's time, and for some centuries
later, it was believed that constantine, on transferring the seat of
empire to byzantium, had made a gift to the pope of rights and
privileges almost equal to those of the emperor. rome was to be the
pope's; and from his court in the lateran he was to exercise supremacy
over all the west. the donation of constantine, that is, the instrument
conveying these rights, was a forgery of the middle ages.




canto xx.


  now of new torment must my verses tell,
    and m
 
 ___________________________
 
cean line.
  the moon was full already yesternight;
    which to recall thou shouldst be well content,
    for in the wood she somewhat helped thy plight.'
  thus spake he to me while we forward went.                       130


footnotes:

[551] _lay the first_: the _inferno_.

[552] _the visible profound_: the fourth bolgia, where soothsayers of
every kind are punished. their sin is that of seeking to find out what
god has made secret. that such discoveries of the future could be made
by men, dante seems to have had no doubt; but he regards the exercise of
the power as a fraud on providence, and also credits the adepts in the
black art with ruining others by their spells (line 123).

[553] _nor uttering, etc._: they who on earth told too much are now
condemned to be for ever dumb. it will be noticed that with none of them
does dante converse.

[554] _more downcast gaze_: standing as he does on the crown of the
arch, the nearer they come to him the more he has to decline his eyes.

[555] _
 
 ___________________________
 
stepping backward_: once they peered far into the future; now
they cannot see a step before them.

[556]_ as, reader, etc._: some light may be thrown on this unusual, and,
at first sight, inexplicable display of pity, by the comment of
benvenuto da imola:--'it is the wisest and most virtuous of men that are
most subject to this mania of divination; and of this dante is himself
an instance, as is well proved by this book of his.' dante reminds the
reader how often since the journey began he has sought to have the veil
of the future lifted; and would have it understood that he was seized by
a sudden misgiving as to whether he too had not overstepped the bounds
of what, in that respect, is allowed and right.

[557] _of the other fools_: dante, weeping like the sinners in the
bolgia, is asked by virgil: 'what, art thou then one of them?' he had
been suffered, without reproof, to show pity for francesca and ciacco.
the terrors of
 
 ___________________________
 
g marbles_: aruns, a tuscan diviner, is introduced by
lucan as prophesying great events to come to pass in rome--the civil war
and the victories of cæsar. his haunt was the deserted city of luna,
situated on the gulf of spezia, and under the carrara mountains
(_phars._ i. 586).

[561] _manto_: a prophetess, a native of thebes the city of bacchus, and
daughter of tiresias.--here begins a digression on the early history of
mantua, the native city of virgil. in his account of the foundation of
it dante does not agree with virgil, attributing to a greek manto what
his master attributes to an italian one (_æn._ x. 199).

[562] _benacus_: the ancient benacus, now known as the lake of garda.

[563] _the pastors, etc._: about half-way down the western side of the
lake a stream falls into it, one of whose banks, at its mouth, is in the
diocese of trent, and the other in that of brescia, while the waters of
the lake are in that of verona. the three bishops, standing together,
could give a blessing 
 
 ___________________________
 
a great troop of armed followers; and, the nobility
being at that time in bad odour with the people at large, he persuaded
the count albert that it would be a popular measure to banish the
suspected nobles for a time. hardly was this done when he usurped the
lordship; and by expelling some of the citizens and putting others of
them to death he greatly thinned the population of the city.

[567] _all my thoughts, etc._: the reader's patience is certainly abused
by this digression of virgil's, and dante himself seems conscious that
it is somewhat ill-timed.

[568] _the land of greece, etc._: all the greeks able to bear arms being
engaged in the trojan expedition.

[569] _an augur_: eurypylus, mentioned in the second _æneid_ as being
employed by the greeks to consult the oracle of apollo regarding their
return to greece. from the auspices calchas had found at what hour they
should set sail for troy. eurypylus can be said only figuratively to
have had to do with cutting the cable.

[570] _trage
 
 ___________________________
 
dy_: the _æneid_. dante defines comedy as being written in a
style inferior to that of tragedy, and as having a sad beginning and a
happy ending (epistle to can grande, 10). elsewhere he allows the comic
poet great licence in the use of common language (_vulg. el._ ii. 4). by
calling his own poem a comedy he, as it were, disarms criticism.

[571] _michael scott_: of balwearie in scotland, familiar to english
readers through the _lay of the last minstrel_. he flourished in the
course of the thirteenth century, and made
 
 ___________________________
 
_ (iv. 16) as an instance
that a man may be very notorious without being truly noble.

[573] _herb and image_: part of the witch's stock in trade. all that was
done to a waxen image of him was suffered by the witch's victim.

[574] _cain and the thorns_: the moon. the belief that the spots in the
moon are caused by cain standing in it with a bundle of thorns is
referred to at _parad._ ii. 51. although it is now the morning of the
saturday, the 'yesternight' refers to the night of thursday, when dante
found some use of the moon in the forest. the moon is now setting on the
line dividing the hemisphere of jerusalem, in which they are, from that
of the mount of purgatory. according to dante's scheme of the world,
purgatory is the true opposite of jerusalem; and seville is ninety
degrees from jerusalem. as it was full moon the night before last, and
the moon is now setting, it is now fully an hour after sunrise. but, as
has already been said, it is not possible to reconcile the astronomical
ind
 
 ___________________________
 
ications thoroughly with one another.--virgil serves as clock to
dante, for they can see nothing of the skies.




canto xxi.


  conversing still from bridge to bridge[575] we went;
    but what our words i in my comedy
    care not to tell. the top of the ascent
  holding, we halted the next pit to spy
    of malebolge, with plaints bootless all:
    there, darkness[576] full of wonder met the eye.
  as the venetians[577] in their arsenal
    boil the tenacious pitch at winter-tide,
    to caulk the ships with for repairs that call;
  for then they cannot sail; 
 
 ___________________________
 
y can;
    'tis at the wretches in the pitch confined.'
  they wheeled and down the left hand bank began
    to march, but first each bit his tongue,[593] and passed
    the signal on to him who led the van.
  he answered grossly as with trumpet blast.


footnotes:

[575] _from bridge to bridge_: they cross the barrier separating the
fourth from the fifth bolgia, and follow the bridge which spans the
fifth until they have reached the crown of it. we may infer that the
conversation of virgil and dante turned on foreknowledge of the future.

[576] _darkness, etc._: the pitch with which the trench of the bolgia is
filled absorbs most of the scanty light accorded to malebolge.

[577] _the venetians_: but for this picturesque description of the old
arsenal, and a passing mention of the rialto in one passage of the
_paradiso_, and of the venetian coinage in another, it could not be
gathered from the _comedy_, with all its wealth of historical and
geographical references, that there was such a pla
 
 ___________________________
 
ce as venice in the
italy of dante. unlike the statue of time (_inf._ xiv.), the queen of
the adriatic had her face set eastwards. her back was turned and her
ears closed as in a proud indifference to the noise of party conflicts
which filled the rest of italy.

[578] _a sinner_: this is the only instance in the _inferno_ of the
arrival of a sinner at his special place of punishment. see _inf._ v.
15, _note_.

[579] _malebranche_: evil claws, the name of the devils who have the
sinners of this bolgia in charge.

[580] _santa zit
 
 ___________________________
 
a's town_: zita was a holy serving-woman of lucca, who
died some time between 1270 and 1280, and whose miracle-working body is
still preserved in the church of san frediano. most probably, although
venerated as a saint, she was not yet canonized at the time dante writes
of, and there may be a florentine sneer hidden in the description of
lucca as her town. even in lucca there was some difference of opinion as
to her merits, and a certain unlucky ciappaconi was pitched into the
serchio for making fun of the popular enthusiasm about her. see
philalethes, _gött. com._ in lucca the officials that were called priors
in florence, were named elders. the commentators give a name to this
sinner, but it is only guesswork.

[581] _save bonturo_, _barrates, etc._:
 
 ___________________________
 
to receive the victim. the punishment of the barrators bears a
relation to their sins. they wrought their evil deeds under all kinds of
veils and excuses, and are now themselves effectually buried out of
sight. the pitch sticks as close to them as bribes ever did to their
fingers. they misused wards and all subject to them, and in their turn
are clawed and torn by their devilish guardians.

[585] _formerly, etc._: on the occasion of his previous descent (_inf._
ix. 22).

[586] _the sixth bank_: dante remains on the crown of the arch
overhanging the pitch-filled moat. virgil descends from the bridge by
the left hand to the bank on the inner side of the fifth bolgia.

[587] _what will this, etc._: as if he said: what good will this delay
do him in the long-run?

[588] _at caprona_: dante was one of the mounted militia sent by
florence in 1289 to help the lucchese against the pisans, and was
present at the surrender by the pisan garrison of the castle of caprona.
some make the reference to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
on the inner edge of the
pitch-filled moat. but, as appears further on, he is misleading them. it
will be remembered that from the precipice enclosing the malebolge there
run more than one series of bridges or ribs into the central well of
inferno.

[590] _yestreen, etc._: this is the principal passage in the _comedy_
for fixing the date of the journey. it is now, according to the text,
twelve hundred and sixty-six years and a day since the crucifixion.
turning to the _convito_, iv. 23, we find dante giving his reasons for
believing that jesus, at his death, had just completed his thirty-fourth
year. this brings us to the date of 1300 a.d. but according to church
tradition the crucifixion happened on the 25th march, and to get
thirty-four years his life must be counted from the incarnation, which
was held to have taken place on the same date, namely the 25th march. it
was in dante's time optional to reckon from the incarnation or the birth
of christ. the journey must therefore be taken to h
 
 ___________________________
 
ave begun on friday
the 25th march, a fortnight before the good friday of 1300; and,
counting strictly from the incarnation, on the first day of 1301--the
first day of the new century. so we find boccaccio in his unfinished
commentary saying in _inf._ iii. that it will appear from canto xxi.
that dante began his journey in mccci.--the hour is now five hours
before that at which the earthquake happened which took place at the
death of jesus. this is held by dante (_convito_ iv. 23), who professes
to follow the account by saint luke, to have been at the sixth hour,
that is, at noon; thus the time is now seven in the morning.

[591] _alichino, etc._: the names of the devils are all descriptive:
alichino, for instance, is the swooper; but in this and the next canto
we have enough of the horrid crew without considering too closely how
they are called.

[592] _unbroken_: malacoda repeats his lie.

[593] _each bit his tongue, etc._: the demons, aware of the c
 
 ___________________________
 
heat played
by malacoda, show their devilish humour by making game of virgil and
dante.--benvenuto is amazed that a man so involved in his own thoughts
as dante was, should have been such a close observer of low life as this
passage shows him. he is sure that he laughed to himself as he wrote the
canto.




canto xxii.


  horsemen i've seen in march across the field,
    hastening to charge, or, answering muster, stand,
    and sometimes too when forced their ground to yield;
  i have seen skirmishers upon your land,
    o aretines![594] and those on foray sent;
    with trumpet and with bell[595] to sound command
  have seen jousts run and well-fough
 
 ___________________________
 
they had no power[609] to rise again,
    so were their wings all plastered o'er with glue.
  then barbariccia, mourning with his train,
    caused four to fly forth to the other side
    with all their grapplers. swift their flight was ta'en.
  down to the place from either hand they glide,
    reaching their hooks to those who were limed fast,
    and now beneath the scum were being fried.                     150
  and from them thus engaged we onward passed.


footnotes:

[594] _o aretines_: dante is mentioned as having taken part in the
campaign of 1289 against arezzo, in the course of which the battle of
campaldino was fought. but the text can hardly refer to what he
witnessed in that campaign, as the field of it was almost confined to
the casentino, and little more than a formal entrance was made on the
true aretine territory; while the chronicles make no mention of jousts
and forays. there is, however, no reason to think but that dante was
engaged in the attack made by florence on th
 
 ___________________________
 
e ghibeline arezzo in the
early summer of the preceding year. in a few days the florentines and
their allies had taken above forty castles and strongholds, and
devastated the enemy's country far and near; and, though unable to take
the capital, they held all kinds of warlike games in front of it. dante
was then twenty-three years of age, and according to the florentine
constitution of that period would, in a full muster of the militia, be
required to serve as a cavalier without pay, and providing his own horse
and arms.

[595] _bell_: the use of the bell for martial music was common in the
italy of the thirteenth century. the great war-bell of the florentines
was carried with them into the field.

[596] _beneath the bubbles, etc._: as the barrators took toll of the
administration of justice a
 
 ___________________________
 
 _he first, etc._: cagnazzo. see line 106.

[608] _he the most, etc._: alichino, whose confidence in his agility had
led to the outwitting of the band.

[609] _no power_: the foolish ineptitude of the devils for anything
beyond their special function of hooking up and flaying those who appear
on the surface of the pitch, and their irrational fierce playfulness as
of tiger cubs, convey a vivid impression of the limits set to their
diabolical power, and at the same time heighten the sense of what
dante's feeling of insecurity must have been while in such inhuman
companionship.




canto xxiii.


  silent, alone, not now with company
    we onward went, one first and one behind,
    as minor friars[610] use to make their way.
  on æsop's fable[611] wholly was my mind
    intent, by reason of that contest new--
    the fable where the frog and mouse we find;
  for _mo_ and _issa_[612] are not more of hue
    than like the fable shall the fact appear,
    if but considered with attention due.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
burdened throng,
  stepping where those dear feet had left their trace.


footnotes:

[610] _minor friars_: in the early years of their order the franciscans
went in couples upon their journeys, not abreast but one behind the
other.

[611] _æsop's fable_: this fable, mistakenly attributed to æsop, tells
of how a frog enticed a mouse into a pond, and how they were then both
devoured by a kite. to discover the aptness of the simile would scarcely
be reward enough for the continued mental effort dante enjoins. so much
was everything greek or roman then held in reverence, that the mention
even of æsop is held to give dignity to the page.

[612] _mo_ and _issa_: two words for _now_.

[613] _through us_: the quarrel among the fiends arose from dante's
insatiable desire to confer with 'tuscan or lombard.'

[614] _to the next bolgia_: the sixth. they are now on the top of the
circular ridge that divides it from the fifth. from the construction of
malebolge the ridge is deeper on the inner side t
 
 ___________________________
 
han on that up which
they have travelled from the pitch.

[615] _no more a cause of dread_: there seems some incongruity between
virgil's dread of these smaller devils and the ease with which he cowed
minos, charon, and pluto. but his character gains in human interest the
more he is represented as sympathising with dante in his terrors; and in
this particular case the confession of fellow-feeling prepares the way
for the beautiful passage which follows it (line 38, etc.), one full of
an almost modern tenderness.

[616] _cologne_: some make it clugny, the great benedictine monastery;
but all the old commentators and most of the mss. read cologne. all that
the text necessarily carries is that the cloaks had great hoods. if, in
addition, a reproach of clumsiness is implied, it would agree well
enough with the ital
 
 ___________________________
 
hey were of a sad countenance, trying to seem better than they were,
and the load which to deceive others they voluntarily assumed in life is
now replaced by a still heavier weight, and one they cannot throw off if
they would. the choice of garb conveys an obvious charge of hypocrisy
against the friars, then greatly fallen away from the purity of their
institution, whether franciscans or dominicans.

[619] _an eye askance_: they cannot turn their heads.

[620] _his heaving throat_: in purgatory dante is known for a mortal by
his casting a shadow. here he is known to be of flesh and blood by the
act of respiration; yet, as appears from line 113, the shades, too,
breathe as well as perform other functions of living bodies. at least
they seem so to do, but this is all only in appearance. they only seem
to be flesh and blood, having no weight, casting no shadow, and drawing
breath in a way of their own. dante, as has been said (_inf._ vi. 36),
is hard put to it to make them subject to corporal 
 
 ___________________________
 
ross the path, unburdened by
the leaden cloak, it is true, but only that they may feel the more
keenly the weight of the punishment of all the hypocrites of the world.

[624] _virgil_: on virgil's earlier journey through inferno caiaphas and
the others were not here, and he wonders as at something out of a world
to him unknown.

[625] _on the right_: as they are moving round the bolgia to the left,
the rocky barrier between them and the seventh bolgia is on their right.

[626] _we, both of us_: dante, still in the body, as well as virgil, the
shade.

[627] _the encircling wall_: that which encloses all the malebolge.

[628] _he warned us_: malacoda (_inf._ xxi. 109) had assured him that
the next rib of rock ran unbroken across all the bolgias, but it too,
like all the other bridges, proves to have been, at the time of the
earthquake, shattered where it crossed this gulf of the hypocrites. the
earthquake told most on this bolgia, because the death of christ and the
attendant earthquake were,
 
 ___________________________
 
 high;
    the mist by it shall suddenly be rent,
    and every bianco[648] smitten be thereby:                      150
  and i have told thee that thou mayst lament.'


footnotes:

[630] _aquarius_: the sun is in the constellation of aquarius from the
end of january till the end of february; and already, say in the middle
of february, the day is nearly as long as the night.

[631] _where i ailed, etc._: as the peasant is in despair at seeing the
earth white with what he thinks is snow, so was dante at the signs of
trouble on virgil's face. he has mistaken anger at the cheat for
perplexity as to how they are to escape from the bolgia; and his
master's smile is grateful and reassuring to him as the spectacle of the
green earth to the despairing shepherd.

[632] _the broken bridge_: they are about to escape from the bottom of
the sixth bolgia by climbing the wall between it and the seventh, at the
point where the confused fragments of the bridge friar catalano told
them of (_inf._ xxiii. 133
 
 ___________________________
 
nd behind
them.

[642] _the ashes, etc._: the sufferings of the thieves, if looked
closely into, will be found appropriate to their sins. they would fain
but cannot steal themselves away, and in addition to the constant terror
of being found out they are subject to pains the essence of which
consists in the deprivation--the theft from them--of their unsubstantial
bodies, which are all that they now have to lose. in the case of this
victim the deprivation is only temporary.

[643] _the phoenix_: dante here borrows very directly from ovid
(_metam._ xv.).

[644] _vanni fucci_: natural son of a pistoiese noble and a poet of some
merit, who bore a leading part in the ruthless feuds of blacks and
whites which distracted pistoia towards the close of the thirteenth
century.

[645] _and ask, etc._: dante wishes to find out why fucci is placed
among the thieves, and not in the circle of the violent. the question is
framed so as to compel confession of a crime for which the sinner had
not been condemn
 
 ___________________________
 
at being found
among the cowardly thieves.

[646] _i'm plunged, etc._: fucci was concerned in the theft of treasure
from the cathedral church of st. james at pistoia. accounts vary as to
the circumstances under which the crime was committed, and as to who
suffered for it. neither is it certainly known when fucci died, though
his recent arrival in the bolgia agrees with the view that he was still
active on the side of the blacks in the last year of the century. in the
fierceness of his retort to dante we have evidence of their old
acquaintance and old enmity.

[647] _lest thou shouldst joy_: vanni, a _nero_ or black, takes his
revenge for being found here by dante, who was, as he knew, associated
with the _bianchi_ or whites, by prophesying an event full of disaster
to these.

[648] _every bianco, etc._: the blacks, according to villani (viii. 45),
were driven from pistoia in may 1301. they took refuge in florence,
where their party, in the following november under the protection of
charles 
 
 ___________________________
 
of valois, finally gained the upper hand, and began to persecute
and expel the whites, among whom was dante. mars, the god of war, or,
more probably, the planet of war, draws a vapour from the valley of the
magra, a small stream which flows into the mediterranean on the northern
confine of tuscany. this vapour is said to signify moroello malaspina, a
noble of that district and an active leader of the blacks, who here
figure as murky clouds. the campo piceno is the country west of pistoia.
there moroello bursts on his foes like a lightning-flash out of its
cloud. this seems to refer to a pitched battl
 
 ___________________________
 
eme,[666] if swerves my pen astray.
  and though these things mine eyesight might confuse
    a little, and my mind with fear divide,
    such secrecy they fleeing could not use
  but that puccio sciancatto plain i spied;
    and he alone of the companions three
    who came at first, was left unmodified.                        150
  for the other, tears, gaville,[667] are shed by thee.


footnotes:

[649] _the robber, etc._: by means of his prophecy fucci has, after a
fashion, taken revenge on dante for being found by him among the
cheating thieves instead of among the nobler sinners guilty of blood and
violence. but in the rage of his wounded pride he must insult even
heaven, and this he does by using the most contemptuous gesture in an
italian's repertory. the fig is made by thrusting the thumb between the
next two fingers. in the english 'a fig for him!' we have a reference to
the gesture.

[650] _pistoia_: the pistoiese bore the reputation of being hard and
pitiless. the tradition was 
 
 ___________________________
 
that their city had been founded by such of
catiline's followers as survived his defeat on the campo piceno. 'it is
no wonder,' says villani (i. 32) 'that, being the descendants as they
are of catiline and his followers, the pistoiese have always been
ruthless and cruel to strangers and to one another.'

[651] _who down thebes' wall_: capaneus (_inf._ xiv. 63).

[652] _maremma_: see note, _inf._ xiii. 8.

[653] _cacus_: dante makes him a centaur, but virgil (_æn._ viii.) only
describes him as half human. the pool was fed with the blood of his
human victims. the herd was the spoil hercules took from geryon. in the
_æneid_ cacus defends himself from hercules by vomiting a fiery smoke;
and this doubtless suggested the dragon of the text.

[654] _his brethren_: the centaurs who guard the river of blood (_inf._
xii. 56). in fucci, as a sinner guilty of blood and violence above most
of the thieves, the centaur cacus tak
 
 ___________________________
 
es a special malign interest.

[655] _our tale_: of cacus. it is interrupted by the arrival of three
sinners whom dante does not at first recognise as he gazes down on them,
but only when they begin to speak among themselves. they are three noble
citizens of florence: agnello brunelleschi, buoso degli abati, and
puccio sciancatto de' galigai--all said to have pilfered in private
life, or to have abused their tenure of high office by plundering the
commonwealth. what is certainly known of them is that they were
florentine thieves of quality.

[656] _cianfa_: another florentine gentleman, one of the donati. since

 
 ___________________________
 
his companions lost sight of him he has been transformed into a
six-footed serpent. immediately appearing, he darts upon agnello.

[657] _on chin, etc._: a gesture by which silence is requested. the
mention of cianfa shows dante that he is among florentines.

[658] _papyrus_: the original is _papiro_, the word used in dante's time
for a wick made out of a reed like the papyrus; _papér_ being still the
name for a wick in some dialects.--(scartazzini.) it cannot be shown
that _papiro_ was ever employed for paper in italian. this, however,
does not prove that dante may not so use it in this instance, adopting
it from the latin _papyrus_. besides, he says that the brown colour
travels up over the _papiro_; while it goes downward on a burning wick.
nor would the simile, if drawn from a slowly burning lamp-wick, agree

 
 ___________________________
 
with the speed of the change described in the text.

[659] _a little snake_: as transpires from the last line of the canto,
this is francesco, of the florentine family of the cavalcanti, to which
dante's friend guido belonged. he wounds buoso in the navel, and then,
instead of growing into one new monster as was the case with cianfa and
agnello, they exchange shapes, and when the transformation is complete
buoso is the serpent and francesco is the human shade.

[660] _rooted he stood, etc._: the description agrees with the symptoms
of snake-bite, one of which is extreme drowsiness.

[661] _sabellus and nassidius_: were soldiers of cato's army whose death
by snake-bite in the libyan desert is 
 
 ___________________________
 
described by lucan, _pharsal._ ix.
sabbellus was burned up by the poison, bones and all; nassidius swelled
up and burst.

[662] _cadmus_: _metam._ iv.

[663] _arethusa_: _metam._ v.

[664] _the forms, etc._: the word _form_ is here to be taken in its
scholastic sense of _virtus formativa_, the inherited power of modifying
matter into an organised body. 'this, united to the divinely implanted
spark of reason,' says philalethes, 'constitutes, on dante's system, a
human soul. even after death this power continues to be an essential
constituent of the soul, and constructs out of the elements what seems
to be a body. here the sinners exchange the matter they have thus made
their own, each retaining, however, his proper plastic energy as part of
his soul.' dante in his _convito_ (iii. 2) says that 'the human soul is
the noblest form of all that are made under the heavens, receiving more
of the divine nature than any other.'

[665] _the smoke has
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the only one of those five florentine
thieves not yet named in the text, is he who came at first in the form
of a little black snake, and who has now assumed the shape of buoso. in
reality he is francesco cavalcanti, who was slain by the people of
gaville in the upper valdarno. many of them were in their turn
slaughtered in revenge by the cavalcanti and their associates. it should
be remarked that some of these five florentines were of one party, some
of the other. it is also noteworthy that dante recruits his thieves as
he did his usurers from the great florentine families.--as the 'shifting
and changing' of this rubbish is apt to be found confusing, the
following may be useful to some readers:--there first came on the scene
agnello, buoso, and puccio. cianfa, in the shape of a six-footed
serpent, comes and throws himself on agnello, and then, grown
incorporate in a new strange monster, two in one, they disappear. buoso
is next wounded by francesco, and they exchange members and bodies.
 
 ___________________________
 
 the prow, as pleased another,[687] down was hurled;
  and then above us did the ocean close.'


footnotes:

[668] _whence i ashamed, etc._: there is here a sudden change from irony
to earnest. 'five members of great florentine families, eternally
engaged among themselves in their shameful metamorphoses--nay, but it is
too sad!'

[669] _toward the morning, etc._: there was a widespread belief in the
greater truthfulness of dreams dreamed as the night wears away. see
_purg._ ix. 13. the dream is dante's foreboding of what is to happen to
florence. of its truth he has no doubt, and the only question is how
soon will it be answered by the fact. soon, he says, if it is near to
the morning that we dream true dreams--morning being the season of
waking reality in which dreams are accomplished.

[670] _even prato_: a small neighbouring city, much under the influence
of florence, and somewhat oppressed by it. the commentators reckon up
the disasters that afflicted florence in the first years of the

 
 ___________________________
 
fourteenth century, between the date of dante's journey and the time he
wrote--fires, falls of bridges, and civil strife. but such misfortunes
were too much in keeping with the usual course of florentine history to
move dante thus deeply in the retrospect; and as he speaks here in his
own person the 'soon' is more naturally counted from the time at which
he writes than from the date assigned by him to his pilgrimage. he is
looking forward to the period when his own return in triumph to florence
was to be prepared by grievous national reverses; and, as a patriot, he
feels that he cannot be wholly reconciled by his private advantage to
the public misfortune. but it was all only a dream.

[671] _some while ago_: see no
 
 ___________________________
 
te, _inf._ xxiv. 79.

[672] _'mong splinters, etc._: they cross the wall or barrier between
the seventh and eighth bolgias. from _inf._ xxiv. 63 we have learned
that the rib of rock, on the line of which they are now proceeding, with
its arches which overhang the various bolgias, is rougher and worse to
follow than that by which they began their passage towards the centre of
malebolge.

[673] _happy star_: see note, _inf._ xv. 55. dante seems to have been
uncertain what credence to give to the claims of astrology. in a passage
of the _purgatorio_ (xvi. 67) he tries to establish that whatever
influence the stars may possess over us we can never, except with our
own consent, be influenced by them to evil.--his sorrow here, as
elsewhere, is not wholly a feeling of pity for the suffering shades, but
is largely mingled with misgivings for himself. the punishment of those
to whose sins he feels no inclination he always beholds with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ended in the settlement of the trojans in italy.

[679] _deïdamia_: that achilles might be kept from joining the greek
expedition to troy he was sent by his mother to the court of lycomedes,
father of deïdamia. ulysses lured him away from his hiding-place and
from deïdamia, whom he had made a mother.

[680] _the palladium_: the trojan sacred image of pallas, stolen by
ulysses and diomed (_æn._ ii.). ulysses is here upon his own ground.

[681] _they were greek_: some find here an allusion to dante's ignorance
of the greek language and literature. but virgil addresses them in the
lombard dialect of italian (_inf._ xxvii. 21). he acts as spokesman
because those ancient greeks were all so haughty that to a common modern
mortal they would have nothing to say. he, as the author of the _æneid_,
has a special claim on their good-nature. it is but seldom that the
shades are told who virgil is, and never directly. here ulysses may
infer it from the mention of the 'lofty verse.'

[682] _from circ
 
 ___________________________
 
gean.

[684] _which ne'er deserted me_: there seems no reason for supposing,
with philalethes, that ulysses is here represented as sailing on his
last voyage from the island of circe and not from ithaca. ulysses, on
the contrary, represents himself as breaking away afresh from all the
ties of home. according to homer, ulysses had lost all his companions
ere he returned to ithaca; and in the _odyssey_ tiresias prophesies to
him that his last wanderings are to be inland. but any acquaintance that
dante had with homer can only have been vague and fragmentary. he may
have founded his narrative of how ulysses ended his days upon some
floating legend; or, eager to fill up what he took to be a blank in the
world of imagination, he may have drawn wholly on his own creative
power. in any case it is his ulysses who, through the version of him
given by a living poet, is most familiar to the english reader.

[685] _the mighty main_: the atlantic ocean. they bear to the left as
they sail, till their cou
 
 ___________________________
 
rse is due south, and crossing the equator,
they find themselves under the strange skies of the southern hemisphere.
for months they have seen no land.

[686] _a lofty mountain_: this is the mountain of purgatory, according
to dante's geography antipodal to jerusalem, and the only land in the
southern hemisphere.

[687] _as pleased another_: ulysses is proudly resigned to the failure
of his enterprise, 'for he was greek.'




canto xxvii.


  now, having first erect and silent grown
    (for it would say no more), from us the flame,
    the poet sweet consenting,[688] had moved on;
  and then our eyes were turned to one that came[689]
    behind it on the way, by sounds that burst
    out of its crest in a confusèd stream
 
 ___________________________
 
urst_: not in the original. 'rime in english hath such
scarcity,' as chaucer says.

[692] _as moved the tongue, etc._: the shade being enclosed in the
hollow fire all his words are changed into a sound like the roaring of a
flame. at last, when an opening has been worked through the crested
point, the speech becomes articulate.

[693] _depart, etc._: one at least of the words quoted as having been
used by virgil is lombard. there is something very quaint in making him
use the lombard dialect of dante's time.

[694] _'tween springs, etc._: montefeltro lies between urbino and the
mountain where the tiber has its source.

[695] _already_: dante knew that virgil would refer to him for an answer
to guido's question, bearing as it did on modern italian affairs.

[696] _romagna_: the district of italy lying on the adriatic, south of
the po and east of tuscany, of which bologna and the cities named in the
text were the principal towns. during the last quarter of the thirteenth
century it was the sc
 
 ___________________________
 
ene of constant wars promoted in the interest of
the church, which claimed romagna as the gift of the emperor rudolf, and
in that of the great nobles of the district, who while using the guelf
and ghibeline war-cries aimed at nothing but the lordship of the various
cities. foremost among these nobles was he with whose shade dante
speaks. villani calls him 'the most sagacious and accomplished warrior
of his time in italy' (_cronica_, vii. 80). he was possessed of lands of
his own near forlì and cesena, and was lord in turn of many of the
romagnese cities. on the whole he appears to have remained true to his
ghibeline colours in spite of papal fulminations, although once and
again he was reconciled to the church; on the last occasion in 1294. in
the years immediately before this he had greatly distinguished himself
as a 
 
 ___________________________
 
wise governor and able general in the service of the ghibeline
pisa--or rather as the paid lord of it.

[697] _ravenna_: ravenna and the neighbouring town of cervia were in
1300 under the lordship of members of the polenta family--the father and
brothers of the ill-fated francesca (_inf._ v.). their arms were an
eagle, half white on an azure and half red on a gold field. it was in
the court of the generous guido, son of one of these brothers, that
dante was to find his last refuge and to die.

[698] _over the city, etc._: forlì. the reference is to one of the most
brilliant feats of war performed by guido of montefeltro. frenchmen
formed great part of an army sent in 1282 against forlì by the pope,
martin iv., himself a frenchman. guido, then lord of the city, led them
into a trap and overthrew them with great slaughter. like most men of
his time guido was a believer in astrology, and is said on this occasion
to have acted on the counsel of 
 
 ___________________________
 
guido bonatti, mentioned among the
diviners in the fourth bolgia (_inf._ xx. 118).

[699] _the green paws_: in 1300 the ordelaffi were lords of forlì. their
arms were a green lion on a gold ground. during the first years of his
exile dante had to do with scarpetta degli ordelaffi, under whose
command the exiled florentines put themselves for a time, and there is
even a tradition that he acted as his secretary.

[700] _the mastiffs of verrucchio_: verrucchio was the castle of the
malatestas, lords of rimini, called the mastiffs on account of their
cruel tenacity. the elder was the father of francesca's husband and
lover; the younger was a brother of these.

[701] _montagna_: montagna de' parcitati, one of a ghibeline family that
c
 
 ___________________________
 
e changed his party as often as his interest required. he was a guelf
in florence and a ghibeline in romagna, say some.

[703] _savio_: cesena, on the savio, was distinguished among the cities
of romagna by being left more frequently than the others were to manage
its own affairs. the malatestas and montefeltros were in turn possessed
of the tyranny of it.

[704] _but since, etc._: the shades, being enveloped in fire, are unable
to see those with whom they speak; and so guido does not detect in dante
the signs of a living man, but takes him to be like himself a denizen of
inferno. he would not have the truth regarding his fate to be known in
the world, where he is supposed to have departed life in the odour of
sanctity. dante's promise to refresh his fame he either regards as
meaningless, or as one made without the power of fulfilling it. dante
leaves him in his error, for he is there to learn all he can, and not to
bandy personal confessions with the shades.

[705] _a cordelier_: in 1296 g
 
 ___________________________
 
et hope that he may have been saved.'

[706] _the high priest_: boniface viii.

[707] _the pharisees new_: the members of the court of rome. saint
jerome calls the dignified roman clergy of his day 'the senate of the
pharisees.'

[708] _for christian, etc._: the foes of boniface, here spoken of, were
the cardinals peter and james colonna. he destroyed their palace in rome
(1297) and carried the war against them to their country seat at
palestrina, the ancient præneste, then a great stronghold. dante here
bitterly blames boniface for instituting a crusade against christians at
a time when, by the recent loss of acre, the gate of the holy land had
been lost to christendom. the colonnas were innocent, too, of the crime
of supplying the infidel with munitions of war--a crime condemned by the
lateran council of 1215, and by boniface himself, who excluded those
guilty of it from the benefits of the great jubilee of 1300.

[709] _which used, etc._: in former times, when the rule of the order
was 
 
 ___________________________
 
faithfully observed. dante charges the franciscans with degeneracy
in the _paradiso_, xi. 124.

[710] _from soracte_: referring to the well-known legend. the fee for
the cure was the fabulous donation. see _inf._ xix. 115.

[711] _my predecessor_: celestine v. see _inf._ iii. 60.

[712] _the scant performance, etc._: that guido gave such counsel is
related by a contemporary chronicler: 'the pope said: tell me how to get
the better of those mine enemies, thou who art so knowing in these
things. then he answered: promise m
 
 ___________________________
 
uch, and perform little; which he
did.' but it seems odd that the wily and unscrupulous boniface should
have needed to put himself to school for such a simple lesson.

[713] _thou didst not think, etc._: guido had forgot that others could
reason besides the pope. with regard to the inefficacy of the papal
absolution an old commentator says, following origen: 'the popes that
walk in the footsteps of peter have this power of binding and loosing;
but only such as do so walk.' but on dante's scheme of what fixes the
fate of the soul absolution matters little to save, or priestly curses
to damnify. see _purg._ iii. 133. it is unfeigned repentance that can
help a sinner even at the last; and it is remarkable that in the case of
buonconte, the gallant son of this same guido, the infernal angel who
comes for him as he expires complains that he has been cheated of his
victim by one poor tear. see _purg._ v. 88, etc. why then is no
indulgence shown in dante's court to guido, who might 
 
 ___________________________
 
well have been
placed in purgatory and made to have repented effectually of this his
last sin? that dante had any personal grudge against him we can hardly
think. in the fourth book of the _convito_ (written, according to
fraticelli, in 1297), he calls him 'our most noble guido montefeltrano;'
and praises him as one of the wise and noble souls that refuse to run
with full sails into the port of death, but furl the sails of their
worldly undertakings, and, relinquishing all earthly pleasures and
business, give themselves up in their old age to a religious life.
either, then, he sets guido here in or
 
 ___________________________
 
us, or to their
losses in general in the course of the samnite war.

[718] _war procrastinate_: the second punic war lasted fully fifteen
years, and in the course of it the battle of cannæ was gained by
hannibal, where so many roman knights fell that the spoil of rings
amounted to a peck.

[719] _guiscard_: one of the norman conquerors of the regions which up
to our own time constituted the kingdom of naples. in apulia he did much
fighting against lombards, saracens, and greeks. he is found by dante in
paradise among those who fought for the faith (_par._ xviii. 48). his
death happened in cephalonia in 1085, at the age of seventy, when he was
engaged on an expedition against constantinople.

[720] _ceperan_: in the swift and decisive campaign undertaken by
charles of anjou against manfred, king of sicily and naples, the first
victory was obtained at ceperano; but it was won owing to the treachery
of manfred's lieutenant, and not by the sword. the true battle was
fought at benevento (_purg.
 
 ___________________________
 
_ iii. 128). ceperano may be named by dante
as the field where the defeat of manfred was virtually begun, and where
the apulians first failed in loyalty to their gallant king. dante was a
year old at the time of manfred's overthrow (1266).

[721] _tagliacozzo_: the crown charles had won from manfred he had to
defend against manfred's nephew conradin (grandson and last
representative of frederick ii. and the legitimate heir to the kingdom
of sicily), whom, in 1268, he defeated near tagliacozzo in the abruzzi.
he made his victory the more complete by acting on the advice of alardo
or erard de valery, an old crusader, to hold good part of his force in
reserve. charles wrote t
 
 ___________________________
 
o the pope that the slaughter was so great as
far to exceed that at benevento. the feet of all the low-born prisoners
not slain on the field were cut off, while the gentlemen were beheaded
or hanged.

[722] _mahomet_: it has been objected to dante by m. littré that he
treats mahomet, the founder of a new religion, as a mere schismatic. the
wonder would have been had he dwelt on the good qualities of the prophet
at a time when islam still threatened europe. he goes on the fact that
mahomet and his followers rent great part of the east and south from
christendom; and for this the prophet is represented as being mutilated
in a sorer degree than the other schismatics.

[723] _ali_: son-in-law of mahomet.

[724] _fra dolcin_: at the close of
 
 ___________________________
 
ng derived from writers in the papal interest. among other crimes he
was charged with that of teaching the lawfulness of telling an
inquisitor a lie to save your life, and with prophesying the advent of a
pious pope. a holy war on a small scale was preached against him. after
suffering the extremities of famine, snowed up as he was among the
mountains, he was taken prisoner and cruelly put to death (1307). it may
have been in order to save himself from being suspected of sympathy with
him, that dante, whose hatred of boniface and the new pharisees was
equal to dolcino's, provides for him by anticipation a place with
mahomet.

[725] _pier da medicin_: medicina is in the territory of bologna. piero
is said to have stirred up dissensions between the polentas of ravenna
and the malatestas of rimini.

[726] _from vercelli, etc._: from the district of vercelli to where the
castle of marcabò once stood, at the mouth of the po, is a distance of
two hundred miles. the plain is lombardy.

[727] _maj
 
 ___________________________
 
of a promontory near cattolica, subject to
squalls. the victims were never to double the headland.

[730] _curio_: the roman tribune who, according to lucan--the incident
is not historically correct--found cæsar hesitating whether to cross the
rubicon, and advised him: _tolle moras: semper nocuit differre paratis_.
'no delay! when men are ready they always suffer by putting off.' the
passage of the rubicon was counted as the beginning of the civil
war.--curio gets scant justice, seeing that in dante's view cæsar in all
he did was only carrying out the divine purpose regarding the empire.

[731] _mosca_: in 1215 one of the florentine family of the buondelmonti
jilted a daughter of the amidei. when these with their friends met to
take counsel touching revenge for the insult, mosca, one of the uberti
or of the lamberti, gave his opinion in the proverb, _cosa fatta ha
capo_: 'a thing once done is done with.' the hint was approved of, and
on the following easter morning the young buondelmonte,
 
 ___________________________
 
 as, mounted on a
white steed and dressed in white he rode across the ponte vecchio, was
dragged to the ground and cruelly slain. all the great florentine
families took sides in the feud, and it soon widened into the civil war
between florentine guelf and ghibeline.

[732] _bertrand de born_: is mentioned by dante in his treatise _de
vulgari eloquio_, ii. 2, as specially the poet of warlike deeds. he was
a gascon noble who used his poetical gift very much to stir up strife.
for patron he had the prince henry, son of henry ii. of england. though
henry never came to the throne he was, during his father's lifetime,
crowned as his successor, and was known as the young king. after the
death of the prince, bertrand was taken prisoner by the king, and,
according to the legend, was loaded with favours because he
 
 ___________________________
 
ane_, the young king, being a
comparatively modern emendation. in favour of adopting this it may be
mentioned that in his poems bertrand calls prince henry _lo reys joves_,
the young king; that it was henry and not john that was his friend and
patron; and that in the old _cento novelle_ henry is described as the
young king: in favour of the older reading, that john as well as his
brother was a rebel to henry; and that the line is hurt by the change
from _giovanni_ to _giovane_. considering that dante almost certainly
wrote _giovanni_ it seems most reasonable to suppose that he may have
confounded the _re giovane_ with king john.

[733] _from what, etc._: the spinal cord, as we should now say, though
dante may have meant the heart.

[734] _pain for pain_: in the city of dis we found the heresiarchs,
those who lead others to think falsely. the lower depth of the malebolge
is reserved for such as needlessly rend any divinely-constituted order
of society, civil or religious. conduct counts more
 
 ___________________________
 
 with dante than
opinion--in this case.




canto xxix.


  the many folk and wounds of divers kind
    had flushed mine eyes and set them on the flow,
    till i to weep and linger had a mind;
  but virgil said to me: 'why gazing so?
    why still thy vision fastening on the crew
    of dismal shades dismembered there below?
  thou didst not[735] thus the other bolgias view:
    think, if to count them be thine enterprise,
    the valley circles twenty miles and two.[736]
  beneath our feet the moon[737] 
 
 ___________________________
 
whom away did throw
    his wit the abbagliato.[757] but whose ghost
  it is, that thou mayst weet, that backs thee so
    against the sienese, make sharp thine eyes
    that thou my countenance mayst surely know.
  in me capocchio's[758] shade thou'lt recognise,
    who forged false coin by means of alchemy:
    thou must remember, if i well surmise,
  how i of nature very ape could be.'


footnotes:

[735] _thou didst not, etc._: it is a noteworthy feature in the conduct
of the poem that when dante has once gained sufficient knowledge of any
group in the inferno he at once detaches his mind from it, and, carrying
on as little arrear of pity as he can, gives his thoughts to further
progress on the journey. the departure here made from his usual
behaviour is presently accounted for. virgil knows why he lingers, but
will not seem to approve of the cause.

[736] _twenty miles and two_: the ninth bolgia has a circumference of
twenty-two miles, and as the procession of the shades is slow it wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld
indeed involve a protracted halt to wait till all had passed beneath the
bridge. virgil asks ironically if he wishes to count them all. this
precise detail, taken along with one of the same kind in the following
canto (line 86), has suggested the attempt to construct the inferno to a
scale. dante wisely suffers us to forget, if we will, that--taking the
diameter of the earth at 6500 miles, as given by him in the
_convito_--he travels from the surface of the globe to the centre at the
rate of more than two miles a minute, counting downward motion alone. it
is only when he has come to the lowest rings that he allows himself to
give details of size; and probably the mention of the extent of the
ninth bolgia, which comes on the reader as a surprise, is thrown out in
order to impress on the 
 
 ___________________________
 
imagination some sense of the enormous extent of
the regions through which the pilgrim has already passed. henceforth he
deals in exact measurement.

[737] _the moon_: it is now some time after noon on the saturday. the
last indication of time was at canto xxi. 112.

[738] _the time, etc._: before nightfall they are to complete their
exploration of the inferno, and they will have spent twenty-four hours
in it.

[739] _geri del bello_: one of the alighieri, a full cousin of dante's
father. he was guilty of encouraging dissension, say the commentators;
which is to be clearly inferred from the place assigned him in inferno:
but they do not agree as to how he met his death, nor do they mention
the date of it. 'not avenged till thirty years after,' says landino; but
does not say if this was after his death or the time at which dante
writes.

[740] _hautefort_: bertrand de born's castle in gascony.

[741] _my ruth_: enlightened moralist though dante is, he yet shows
himself 
 
 ___________________________
 
man of his age enough to be keenly alive to the extremest claims
of kindred; and while he condemns the _vendetta_ by the words put into
virgil's mouth, he confesses to a feeling of meanness not to have
practised it on behoof of a distant relative. there is a high art in
this introduction of geri del bello. had they conferred together dante
must have seemed either cruel or pusillanimous, reproaching or being
reproached. as it is, all the poetry of the situation comes out the
stronger that they do not meet face to face: the threatening finger, the
questions hastily put to geri by the astonished shades, and his
disappearance under the dark vault when by the law of his punishment the
sinner can no longer tarry.

[742] _with but clearer light_: they have crossed the rampart dividing
the ninth bolgia from the tenth, of which they would
 
 ___________________________
 
 now command a view,
were it not so dark.

[743] _the brotherhood_: the word used properly describes the lay
brothers of a monastery. philalethes suggests that dante may regard the
devils as the true monks of the monastery of malebolge. the simile
involves no contempt for the monastic life, but is naturally used with
reference to those who live secluded and under a fixed rule. he
elsewhere speaks of the college of the hypocrites (_inf._ xxiii. 91) and
of paradise as the cloister where christ is abbot (_purg._ xxvi.129).

[744] _valdichiana_: the district lying between arezzo and chiusi; in
dante's time a hotbed of malaria, but now, owing to drainage works
p
 
 ___________________________
 
romoted by the enlightened tuscan minister fossombroni (1823), one of
the most fertile and healthy regions of italy.

[745] _sardinia_: had in the middle ages an evil reputation for its
fever-stricken air. the maremma has been already mentioned (_inf._
xxv.19). in dante's time it was almost unpeopled.

[746] _the long ridge_: one of the ribs of rock which, like the spokes
of a wheel, ran from the periphery to the centre of malebolge, rising
into arches as they crossed each successive bolgia. the utmost brink is
the inner bank of the tenth and last bolgia. to the edge of this moat
they descend, bearing as usual to the left hand.

[747] _doomed on earth, etc._: 'whom she here registers.' while they are
still on earth their doom is fixed by divine justice.

[748]
 
 ___________________________
 
 _ægina_: the description is taken from ovid (_metam._ vii.).

[749] _the scab, etc._: as if by an infernal alchemy the matter of the
shadowy bodies of these sinners is changed into one loathsome form or
another.

[750] _to all eternity_: this may seem a stroke of sarcasm, but is not.
himself a shade, virgil cannot, like dante, promise to refresh the
memory of the shades on earth, and can only wish for them some slight
alleviation of their suffering.

[751] _an aretine_: called griffolino, and burned at florence or siena
on a charge of heresy. albert of siena is said to have been a relative,
some say the natural son, of the bishop of siena. a man of the name
figures as hero in some of sacchetti's novels, always in a ridiculous
light. there seems to be no authentic testimony regarding the incident
in the text.

[752] 
 
 ___________________________
 
_dædalus_: who escaped on wings of his invention from the cretan
labyrinth he had made and lost himself in.

[753] _the sienese_: the comparison of these to the french would have
the more cogency as siena boasted of having been founded by the gauls.
'that vain people,' says dante of the sienese in the _purgatory_ (xiii.
151). among their neighbours they still bear the reputation of
light-headedness; also, it ought to be added, of great urbanity.

[754] _the stricca_: the exception in his favour is ironical, as is that
of all the others mentioned.

[755] _nicholas_: 'the lavish custom of the clove' which he invented is
variously described. i have chosen the version which makes it consist of
stuffing pheasants with cloves, then very costly.

[756] _the club_: the commenta
 
 ___________________________
 
d were members of a society formed for the purpose
of living luxuriously together. twelve of them contributed a fund of
above two hundred thousand gold florins; they built a great palace and
furnished it magnificently, and launched out into every other sort of
extravagance with such assiduity that in a few months their capital was
gone. as that amounted to more than a hundred thousand pounds of our
money, equal in those days to a million or two, the story must be held
to savour of romance. that dante refers to a prodigal's club that
actually existed some time before he wrote we cannot doubt. but it seems
uncertain, to say the least, whether the sonnets addressed by the tuscan
poet folgore da gemignano to a jovial crew in siena can be taken as
having been inspired by the club dante speaks of. a translation of them
is given by mr. rossetti in his _circle of dante_. (see mr. symonds's
_renaissance_, vol. iv. page 54, _note_, for doubts as to the date of
folgore.)--_caccia d' ascian_: whose sho
 
 ___________________________
 
rt and merry club life cost him
his estates near siena.

[757] _the abbagliato_: nothing is known, though a great deal is
guessed, about this member of the club. it is enough to know that,
having a scant supply of wit, he spent it freely.

[758] _capocchio_: some one whom dante knew. whether he was a florentine
or a sienese is not ascertained, but from the strain of his mention of
the sienese we may guess florentine. he was burned in siena in
1293.--(scartazzini.) they had studied together, says the _anonimo_.
benvenuto tells of him that one good friday, while in a cloister, he
painted on his nail with marvellous completeness a picture of the
crucifixion. dante came up, and was lost in wonder, when capocchio
suddenly licked his nail clean--which may be taken for what 
 
 ___________________________
 
frenzies of athamas and hecuba, wild with which one of them slew his
son, and the other scratched out the eyes of the thracian king.

[763] _capocchio_: see close of the preceding canto. here as elsewhere
sinners are made ministers of vengeance on one another.

[764] _the aretine_: griffolino, who boasted he could fly; already
represented as trembling (_inf._ xxix. 97).

[765] _gianni schicchi_: giovanni schicchi, one of the cavalcanti of
florence.

[766] _myrrha_: this is a striking example of dante's detestation of
what may be called heartless sins. it is covered by the classification
of canto xi. yet it is almost with a shock that we find myrrha here for
personation, and not rather condemned to some other circle for another
sin.

[767] _buoso donati_: introduced as a thief in the seventh bolgia
(_inf._ xxv. 140). buoso was possessed of a peerless mare, known as the
lady of the herd. to make some amends for his unscrupulous acquisition
of wealth, he made a will bequeathing legacies to var
 
 ___________________________
 
wed them to have a factory there. 'and this,' adds villani, who had
himself been agent abroad for a great florentine house of business, 'we
had at first hand from the aforesaid pera, a man worthy of credit, and
with whom we were associated in the priorate.'

[771] _guido, etc._: the guidi of romena were a branch of the great
family of the counts guidi. the father of the three brothers in the text
was grandson of the old guido that married the good gualdrada, and
cousin of the guidoguerra met by dante in the seventh circle (_inf._
xvi. 38). how the third brother was called is not settled, nor which of
the three was already dead in the beginning of 1300. the alexander of
romena, who for some time was captain of the banished florentine whites,
was, most probably, he of the text. a letter is extant professing to be
written by dante to two of alexander's nephews on the occasion of his
death, in which the poet excuses himself for absence from the funeral on
the plea of poverty. by the time he wro
 
 ___________________________
 
te the _inferno_ he may, owing to
their shifty politics, have lost all liking for the family, yet it seems
harsh measure that is here dealt to former friends and patrons.

[772] _fonte branda_: a celebrated fountain in the city of siena. near
romena is a spring which is also named fonte branda; and this, according
to the view now most in favour, was meant by master adam. but was it so
named in dante's time? or was it not so called only when the _comedy_
had begun to awaken a natural interest in the old coiner, which local
ingenuity did its best to meet? the early commentators know nothing of
the casentino fonte branda, and, though it is found mentioned under the
date of 1539, that does not take us far enough back. in favour of the
sienese fountain is the consideration that it was the richest of any in
the tuscan cities; that it was a great architectural as well as
engineering work; and tha
 
 ___________________________
 
ch as it
is, of being true to the life.

[776] _one, etc._: potiphar's wife.

[777] _sinon_: called of troy, as being known through his conduct at the
siege. he pretended to have deserted from the greeks, and by a false
story persuaded the trojans to admit the fatal wooden horse.

[778] _when trojans, etc._: when king priam sought to know for what
purpose the wooden horse was really constructed.

[779] _narcissus' mirror_: the pool in which narcissus saw his form
reflected.

[780] _'tis shame_: dante knows that virgil would have scorned to
portray such a scene of low life as this, but he must allow himself a
wider licence and here as elsewhere refuses nothing, even in the way of
mean detail, calculated to convey to his readers 'a full experience of
the inferno' as he conceived of it--the place 'where all the vileness of
the world is cast.'




canto xxxi.


  the very tongue that first had caused me pain,
    biting till both my cheeks were crimsoned o'er,
    with healing medicine me resto
 
 ___________________________
 
ssa, left roland to bring up his rear-guard. the
enemy fell on this in superior strength, and slew the christians almost
to a man. then roland, mortally wounded, sat down under a tree in
roncesvalles and blew upon his famous horn a blast so loud that it was
heard by charles at a distance of several miles.--the _chansons de
geste_ were familiarly known to italians of all classes.

[784] _then tenderly, etc._: the wound inflicted by his reproof has been
already healed, but virgil still behaves to dante with more than his
wonted gentleness. he will have him assured of his sympathy now that
they are about to descend into the 'lowest depth of all wickedness.'

[785] _montereggioni_: a fortress about six miles from siena, of which
ample ruins still exist. it had no central keep, but twelve towers rose
from its circular wall like spikes from the rim of a coronet. they had
been added by the sienese in 1260, and so were comparatively new in
dante's time.--as the towers stood round montereggioni so t
 
 ___________________________
 
he giants at
regular intervals stand round the central pit. they have their foothold
within the enclosing mound; and thus, to one looking at them from
without, they are hidden by it up to their middle. as the embodiment of
superhuman impious strength and pride they stand for warders of the
utmost reach of hell.

[786] _st. peter's cone_: the great pine cone of bronze, supposed to
have originally crowned the mausoleum of hadrian, lay in dante's time in
the forecourt of st peter's. when the new church was built it was
removed to the gardens of the vatican, where it still remains. its size,
it will be seen, is of importance as helping us to a notion of the
stature of the giants; and, though the accounts of its height are
strangely at variance with one another, i think the measurement made
specially for philalethes may be accepted as substantially correct.
according to that, the cone is ten palms long--about six feet. allowing
somethin
 
 ___________________________
 
g for the neck, down to 'where a man clasps his cloak' (line
66), and taking the thirty palms as eighteen feet, we get twenty-six
feet or so for half his height. the giants vary in bulk; whether they do
so in height is not clear. we cannot be far mistaken if we assume them
to stand from fifty to sixty feet high. virgil and dante must throw
their heads well back to look up into the giant's face; and virgil must
raise his voice as he speaks.--with regard to the height of the cone it
may be remarked that murray's handbook for rome makes it eleven feet
high; gsell-fels two and a half metres, or eight feet and three inches.
it is so placed as to be difficult of measurement.

[787] _three frisians_: three very tall men, as dante took frisians to
be, if standing one on the head of the other would not have reached his
hair.

[
 
 ___________________________
 
788] _rafel, etc._: these words, like the opening line of the seventh
canto, have, to no result, greatly exercised the ingenuity of scholars.
from what follows it is clear that dante meant them to be meaningless.
part of nimrod's punishment is that he who brought about the confusion
of tongues is now left with a language all to himself. it seems strange
that commentators should have exhausted themselves in searching for a
sense in words specially invented to have none.--in his _de vulg. el._,
i. 7, dante enlarges upon the confusion of tongues, and speaks of the
tower of babel as having been begun by men on the persuasion of a giant.

[789] _ephialtes_: one of the giants who
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the war with the gods piled
ossa on pelion.

[790] _antæus_: is to be asked to lift them over the wall, because,
unlike nimrod, he can understand what is said to him, and, unlike
ephialtes, is not bound. antæus is free-handed because he took no part
in the war with the gods.

[791] _the one thou'dst see_: briareus. virgil here gives dante to know
what is the truth about briareus (see line 97, etc.). he is not, as he
was fabled, a monster with a hundred hands, but is like ephialtes, only
fiercer to see. hearing himself thus made light of ephialtes trembles
with anger, like a tower rocking in an earthquake.

[792] _five ell_: five ells make about thirty palms, so that antæus is
of the same stature as that assigned to nimrod at line 65. this supports
the view that the 'huger' of line 84 may apply to breadth rather than to
height.

 
 ___________________________
 

[793] _the fortune-haunted dell_: the valley of the bagrada near utica,
where scipio defeated hannibal and won the surname of africanus. the
giant antæus had, according to the legend, lived in that neighbourhood,
with the flesh of lions for his food and his dwelling in a cave. he was
son of the earth, and could not be vanquished so long as he was able to
touch the ground; and thus ere hercules could give him a mortal hug he
needed to swing him aloft. in the _monarchia_, ii. 10, dante refers to
the combat between hercules and antæus as an instance of the wager of
battle corresponding to that between david and goliath. lucan's
_pharsalia_, a favourite authority with dante, supplies him with these
references to scipio and antæus.

[794] _cocytus_: the frozen lake fed by the waters of phlegethon. see
canto xiv. at the end.

[795] _tityus, etc._: these were other giants, stated by lucan to be
less strong than antæus. this introduction of their names is therefore a
piece of fl
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the twelfth century, and, like many others of its kind in
the city, erected not for strength but merely in order to dignify the
family to whom it belonged. by way of further distinction to their
owners, some of these towers were so constructed as to lean from the
perpendicular. carisenda, like its taller neighbour the asinelli, still
supplies a striking feature to the near and distant views of bologna.
what is left of it hangs for more than two yards off the plumb. in the
half-century after dante's time it had, according to benvenuto, lost
something of its height. it would therefore as the poet saw it seem to
be bending down even more than it now does to any one standing under it
on the side it slopes to, when a cloud is drifting over it in the other
direction.




canto xxxii.


  had i sonorous rough rhymes at command,
    such as would suit the cavern terrible
    rooted on which all the other ramparts stand,
  the sap of fancies which within me swell
    closer i'd press; but since 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by all
who would write nobly in italian.

[798] _amphion_: who with his music charmed rocks from the mountain and
heaped them in order for walls to thebes.

[799] _the giant's feet_: antæus. a bank slopes from where the giants
stand inside the wall down to the pit which is filled with the frozen
cocytus. this is the ninth and inmost circle, and is divided into four
concentric rings--caïna, antenora, ptolomæa, and judecca--where traitors
of different kinds are punished.

[800] _thy steps_: dante alone is addressed, the speaker having seen him
set heavily down upon the ice by antæus.

[801] _a frozen lake_: cocytus. see _inf._ xiv. 119.

[802] _tabernicch_: it is not certain what mountain is here meant;
probably yavornick near adelsberg in carniola. it is mentioned, not for
its size, but the harshness of its name.

[803] _pietrapana_: a mountain between modena and lucca, visible from
pisa: petra apuana.

[804] _time of year_: at harvest-time, when in the warm summer nights
the wearied 
 
 ___________________________
 
i_: see _inf._ x. 86. the speaker is bocca, of the great
florentine family of the abati, who served as one of the florentine
cavaliers at montaperti. when the enemy was charging towards the
standard of the republican cavalry bocca aimed a blow at the arm of the
knight who bore it and cut off his hand. the sudden fall of the flag
disheartened the florentines, and in great measure contributed to the
defeat.

[817] _cleared of doubt_: the mention of montaperti in this place of
traitors suggests to dante the thought of bocca. he would fain be sure
as to whether he has the traitor at his feet. montaperti was never very
far from the thoughts of the florentine of that day. it is never out of
bocca's mind.

[818] _antenora_: the second ring of the ninth circle, where traitors to
their country are punished, named after antenor the trojan prince who,
according to the belief of the middle ages, betrayed his native city to
the greeks.

[819] _should i thy name, etc._: 'should i put thy name among the o
 
 ___________________________
 
ther
notes.' it is the last time that dante is to offer such a bribe; and
here the offer is most probably ironical.

[820] _not silent keep, etc._: like all the other traitors bocca finds
his only pleasure in betraying his neighbours.

[821] _the frenchmen's money_: he who had betrayed the name of bocca was
buoso of duera, one of the ghibeline chiefs of cremona. when guy of
montfort was leading an army across lombardy to recruit charles of anjou
in his war against manfred in 1265 (_inf._ xxviii. 16 and _purg._ iii.),
buoso, who had been 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a pig, sent a cast of the key of the
city gate to john of apia, then prowling about romagna in the interest
of the french pope, martin iv. he was slain at the battle of forlì in
1282 (_inf._ xxvii. 43).

[826] _frozen in a hole, etc._: the two are the count ugolino and the
archbishop roger.

[827] _tydeus_: one of the seven against thebes, who, having been
mortally wounded by menalippus the theban, whom he slew, got his friends
to bring him the head of his foe and gnawed at it with his teeth. dante
found the incident in his favourite author statius (_theb._ viii.).

[828] _i in the world, etc._: dante has learned from bocca that the
prospect of having their memory refreshed on earth has no charm for the
sinners met with here. the bribe he offers is that of loading the name
of a foe with ignominy--but only if from the tale it shall be plain that
the ignominy is deserved.




canto xxxiii.


  his mouth uplifting from the savage feast,
    the sinner[829] rubbed and wiped it free of gore
  
 
 ___________________________
 
e matter of this note i am chiefly
indebted to the careful epitome of the pisan history of that time by
philalethes in his note on this canto (_göttliche comödie_).


footnotes:

[829] _the sinner_: count ugolino. see note at the end of the canto.

[830] _mingle speech, etc._: a comparison of these words with those of
francesca (_inf._ v. 124) will show the difference in moral tone between
the second circle of inferno and the ninth.

[831] _a florentine_: so farinata (_inf._ x. 25) recognises dante by his
florentine speech. the words heard by ugo are those at xxxii. 133.

[832] _the archbishop roger_: ruggieri, of the tuscan family of the
ubaldini, to which the cardinal of _inf._ x. 120 also belonged. towards
the end of his life he was summoned to rome to give an account of his
evil deeds, and on his refusal to go was declared a rebel to the church.
ugolino was a traitor to his country; roger, having entered into some
sort of alliance with ugolino, was a traitor to him. this has led some

 
 ___________________________
 
 traitor to his
friend, is fixed in ptolomæa. against this view is the fact that they
are described as being in the same hole (xxxii. 125), and also that in
ptolomæa the shades are set with head thrown back, and with only the
face appearing above the ice, while ugo is described as biting his foe
at where the skull joins the nape. from line 91 it is clear that
ptolomæa lay further on than where roger is. like ugo he is therefore
here as a traitor to his country.

[833] _were waste, etc._: for dante knows it already, all tuscany being
familiar with the story of ugo's fate.

[834] _whose epithet of famine_: it was called the tower of famine. its
site is now built over. buti, the old pisan commentator of dante, says
it was called the mew because the eagles of the republic were kept in it
at moulting-time. but this may have been an after-thought to give local
truth to dante's verse, which it does at the expense of the poetry.

[835] _many moons_: the imprisonment having already lasted for eig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht
months.

[836] _the height, etc._: lucca is about twelve miles from pisa, mount
giuliano rising between them.

[837] _lanfranchi, etc._: in the dream, these, the chief ghibeline
families of pisa, are the huntsmen, roger being master of the hunt, and
the populace the hounds. ugo and his sons and grandsons are the wolf and
wolf-cubs. in ugo's dream of himself as a wolf there may be an allusion
to his having engaged in the guelf interest.

[838] _my sons_: according to dante, taken literally, four of ugo were
imprisoned with him. it would have hampered him to explain that two were
grandsons--anselmuccio and nino, called the brigata at line 89,
grandsons by their mother of king enzo, natural son of frederick
ii.--the sons being gaddo and uguccione, the latter ugo's youngest son.

[839] _each was fearful, etc._: all the sons had been troubled by dreams
of famine. had their rations been already reduced?

[840] _the under gate, etc._: the word translated _made fast_
(_
 
 ___________________________
 
ur faces, etc._: despairing like his own, or possibly that,
wasted by famine, the faces of the young men had become liker than ever
to ugo's own time-worn face.

[842] _famine, etc._: this line, quite without reason, has been held to
mean that ugo was driven by hunger to eat the flesh of his children. the
meaning is, that poignant though his grief was it did not shorten his
sufferings from famine.

[843] _where the si, etc._: italy, _si_ being the italian for _yes_.
in his _de vulg. el._, i. 8, dante distinguishes the latin
languages--french, italian, etc.--by their words of affirmation, and so
terms italian the language of _si_. but tuscany may here be meant,
where, as a tuscan commentator says, the _si_ is more sweetly pronounced
than in any other part of italy. in canto xviii. 61 the bolognese are
distinguished as the people who say _sipa_. if pisa be taken as being
specially the opprobrium of tuscany the outburst against genoa at the
close of the canto gains in distinctness and force.


 
 ___________________________
 
[844] _gorgona and capraia_: islands not far from the mouth of the arno.

[845] _that he betrayed, etc._: dante seems here to throw doubt on the
charge. at the height of her power pisa was possessed of many hundreds
of fortified stations in italy and scattered over the mediterranean
coasts. the charge was one easy to make and difficult to refute. it
seems hard on ugo that he should get the benefit of the doubt only after
he has been, for poetical ends, buried raging in cocytus.

[846] _modern thebes_: as thebes was to the race of cadmus, so was pisa
to that of ugolino.

[847] _another crew_: they are in 
 
 ___________________________
 
ptolomæa, the third division of the
circle, and that assigned to those treacherous to their friends, allies,
or guests. here only the faces of the shades are free of the ice.

[848] _is any vapour_: has the sun, so low down as this, any influence
upon the temperature, producing vapours and wind? in dante's time wind
was believed to be the exhalation of a vapour.

[849] _to the bottom, etc._: dante is going there in any case, and his
promise is nothing but a quibble.

[850] _friar alberic_: alberigo of the manfredi, a gentleman of faenza,
who late in life became one of the merry friars. see _inf._ xxiii. 103.
in the course of a dispute with his relative manfred he got a hearty box
on the ear from him. feigning to have forgiven the insult he invited
manfred with a youthful son to dinner in his house, having first
arranged that when they had finished their meat, and he called for
fruit, arm
 
 ___________________________
 
s the thread of life and sets the soul
free from the body.

[853] _branca d'oria_: a genoese noble who in 1275 slew his
father-in-law michael zanche (_inf._ xxii. 88) while the victim sat at
table as his invited guest.--this mention of branca is of some value in
helping to ascertain when the _inferno_ was finished. he was in
imprisonment and exile for some time before and up to 1310. in 1311 he
was one of the citizens of genoa heartiest in welcoming the emperor
henry to their city. impartial as dante was, we can scarcely think that
he would have loaded with infamy one who had done what he could to help
the success of henry, on whom all dante's hopes were long set, and by
their reception of whom on his descent into italy he continued to judge
his fellow-countrymen. there is considerable reason to believe that the
_inferno_ was published in 1309; this introduction of branca helps to
prove that at least it was published before 1311. if this was so, then
branca d'oria lived long enough to read 
 
 ___________________________
 
or hear that for thirty-five
years his soul had been in hell.--it is significant of the detestation
in which dante held any breach of hospitality, that it is as a
treacherous host and not as a treacherous kinsman that branca is
punished--in ptolomæa and not in caïna. cast as the poet was on the
hospitality of the world, any disloyalty to its obligations came home to
him. for such disloyalty he has invented one of the most appalling of
the fierce retributions with the vision of which he satisfied his
craving for vengeance upon prosperous sin.--it may be that the idea of
this demon-possession of the traitor
 
 ___________________________
 
 is taken from the words, 'and after
the sop satan entered into judas.'

[854] _of his kinsmen one_: a cousin or nephew of branca was engaged
with him in the murder of michael zanche. the vengeance came on them so
speedily that their souls were plunged in ptolomæa ere zanche breathed
his last.

[855] _to yield him none_: alberigo being so unworthy of courtesy. see
note on 117. but another interpretation of the words has been suggested
which saves dante from the charge of cruelty and mean quibbling; namely,
that he did not clear the ice from the sinner's eyes because then he
would have been seen to be a living man--one who could take back to the
world the awful news that alberigo's body was the dwelling-place of a
devil.

[856] _ah, genoese, etc._: the genoese, indeed, held no good character.
one of their annalists, under the date of 1293, describes the city as
suffering from all kinds of crime.

[857] _romagna's blackest soul_: friar alberigo
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, and no thought of resting knew.
  he first, i second, still ascending held
    our way until the fair celestial train
    was through an opening round to me revealed:
  and, issuing thence, we saw the stars[880] again.


footnotes:

[858] _vexilla, etc._: '_the banners of the king of hell advance._' the
words are adapted from a hymn of the cross used in holy week; and they
prepare us to find in lucifer the opponent of 'the emperor who reigns on
high' (_inf._ i. 124). it is somewhat odd that dante should have put a
christian hymn into virgil's mouth.

[859] _now was i where_: in the fourth and inner division or ring of the
ninth circle. here are punished those guilty of treachery to their
lawful lords or to their benefactors. from judas iscariot, the
arch-traitor, it takes the name of judecca.

[860] _some stood, etc._: it has been sought to distinguish the degrees
of treachery of the shades by means of the various attitudes assigned to
them. but it is difficult to make more out of it th
 
 ___________________________
 
 poor relief of intercourse with their
fellow-sinners.

[861] _the creature once, etc._: lucifer, guilty of treachery against
the highest, at _purg._ xii. 25 described as 'created noble beyond all
other creatures.' virgil calls him dis, the name used by him for pluto
in the _æneid_, and the name from which that of the city of unbelief is
taken (_inf._ viii. 68).

[862] _judge then what bulk_: the arm of lucifer was as much longer than
the stature of one of the giants as a giant was taller than dante. we
have seen (_inf._ xxxi. 58) that the giants were more than fifty feet in
height--nine times the stature of a man. if a man's arm be taken as a
third of his stature, then satan is twenty-seven times as tall as a
giant, that is, he is fourteen hundred feet or so. for a fourth of this,
or nearly so--from the middle of the breast upwards--he stands out of
the ice, that is, some three hundred and fifty feet. it seems almost too
great a height for dante's purpose; and yet on the calculations of s
 
 ___________________________
 
nf._ iii. 5). see also note on line 1.

[864] _a bat's wing_: which flutters and flaps in dark and noisome
places. the simile helps to bring more clearly before us the dim light
and half-seen horrors of the judecca.

[865] _a heckle_: or brake; the instrument used to clear the fibre of
flax from the woody substance mixed with it.

[866] _sometimes nude_: we are to imagine that the frame of judas is
being for ever renewed and for ever mangled and torn.

[867] _cassius_: it has been surmised that dante here confounds the pale
and lean cassius who was the friend of brutus with the l. cassius
described as corpulent by cicero in the third catiline oration. brutus
and cassius are set with judas in this, the deepest room of hell,
because, as he was guilty of high treason against his divine master, so
they were guilty of it against julius cæsar, who, according to dante,
was chosen and ordained by god to found the roman empire. as the great
rebel against the spiritual authority judas has allotted t
 
 ___________________________
 
o him the
fiercer pain. to understand the significance of this harsh treatment of
the great republicans it is necessary to bear in mind that dante's
devotion to the idea of the empire was part of his religion, and far
surpassed in intensity all we can now well imagine. in the absence of a
just and strong emperor the divine government of the world seemed to him
almost at a stand.

[868] _night is rising_: it is saturday evening, and twenty-four hours
since they entered by the gate of inferno.

[869] _i thought to hell, etc._: virgil, holding on to lucifer's hairy
sides, descends the dark and narrow space between him and the ice as far
as t
 
 ___________________________
 
o his middle, which marks the centre of the earth. here he swings
himself round so as to have his feet to the centre as he emerges from
the pit to the southern hemisphere. dante now feels that he is being
carried up, and, able to see nothing in the darkness, deems they are
climbing back to the inferno. virgil's difficulty in turning himself
round and climbing up the legs of lucifer arises from his being then at
the 'centre to which all weights tend from every part.' dante shared the
erroneous belief of the time, that things grew heavier the nearer they
were to the centre of the earth.

[870] _his upturned legs_: lucifer's feet are as far above where virgil
and dante are as was his head above the level of the judecca.

[871] _what point, etc._: the centre of the earth. dante here feigns to
have been himself confused--a fiction which helps to fasten attention on
the wonderful fact that if we could make our way through the earth we
should require at the centre to r
 
 ___________________________
 
everse our posture. this was more of a
wonder in dante's time than now.

[872] _mid tierce_: the canonical day was divided into four parts, of
which tierce was the first and began at sunrise. it is now about
half-past seven in the morning. the night was beginning when they took
their departure from the judecca: the day is now as far advanced in the
southern hemisphere as they have spent time on the passage. the journey
before them is long indeed, for they have to ascend to the surface of
the earth.

[873] _to morn from night_: dante's knowledge of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the time of day is
wholly derived from what virgil tells him. since he began his descent
into the inferno he has not seen the sun.

[874] _'neath whose summit_: jerusalem is in the centre of the northern
hemisphere--an opinion founded perhaps on _ezekiel_ v. 5: 'jerusalem i
have set in the midst of the nations and countries round about her.' in
the _convito_, iii. 5, we find dante's belief regarding the distribution
of land and sea clearly given: 'for those i write for it is enough to
know that the earth is fixed and does not move, and that, with the
ocean, it is the centre of the heavens. the heavens, as we see, are for
ever revolving around it as a centre; and in these revolutions they must
of necessity have two fixed poles.... of these one is visible to almost
all the dry land of the earth; and that is our north pole [star]. the
other, that is, the south, is out of si
 
 ___________________________
 
purification, rose out of the very realms of
darkness and sin.--but, as todeschini points out, the question here
arises of whether the inferno was not created before the earth. at
_parad_. vii. 124, the earth, with the air and fire and water, is
described as 'corruptible and lasting short while;' but the inferno is
to endure for aye, and was made before all that is not eternal (_inf._
iii. 8).

[877] _belzebub_: called in the gospel the prince of the devils. it may
be worth mentioning here that dante sees in purgatory (_purg._ viii. 99)
a serpent which he says may be that which tempted eve. the
identification of the great tempter with satan is a miltonic, or at any
rate a comparatively modern idea.

[878] _the sepulchre_: the inferno, tomb of satan and all the wicked.

[879] _a brook_: some make this to be the same as lethe, one of the
rivers of the earthly paradise. it certainly descends from the mount of
purgatory.

[880] _the stars_: each of the three divisions of the comedy closes with

 
 ___________________________
 
9.

  chiron, xii. 65, etc.

  christ, iv. 53, xxxiv. 115.

  ciacco, vi. 52.

  cianfa de' donati, xxv. 43.

  circe, xxvi. 91.

  ciriatto, xxi. 122, xxii. 55.

  city of dis, viii. 68, etc.

  clement v., xix. 83.

  cleopatra, v. 63.

  clergy, vii. 46, xv. 106.

  cocytus, xiv. 119, xxxi. 123, xxxiii. 156, xxxiv. 52.

  coiners, false, xxix.

  colchians, xviii. 87.

  cologne, xxiii. 63.

  colonna, family, xxvii. 86.

  comedy, the, xvi. 128.

  constantine, xix. 115, xxvii. 94.

  cord, dante's, xvi. 106.

  cornelia, iv. 128.

  corneto, xiii. 8.

  ---- rinier da, xii. 136.

  counsellors, false, xxvi. xxvii.

  counterfeiters of all kinds, xxix. xxx.

  crete, xii. 12, xiv. 95.

  crucifixion, xxi. 112.

  curio, xxviii. 93, etc.

  cyclopes, xiv. 55.

  cyprus, xxviii. 82.


  dædalus, xvii. 111, xxix. 116.

  damietta, xiv. 104.

  danube, xxxii. 25.

  david, iv. 58, xxviii. 137.

  deidamia, xxvi. 61.

  dejanira, xii. 68.

  democritus, iv. 136.

  demons, viii. 82, etc., x
 
 ___________________________
 
deus, xxxii. 130.

  tyrants, xii. 103, etc.

  typhon, xxxi. 124.


  ubaldini, the cardinal octavian, x. 120.

  ---- archbishop roger, xxxiii. 14.

  uberti, farinata, vi. 79, x. 32.

  ugolino, xxxii. 125, etc.

  uguccione, xxxiii. 89.

  ulysses, xxvi. 55, etc.

  unbelievers, x.

  urbino, xxvii. 30.

  usurers, xvii. 45.

  usury, xi. 95.


  val camonica, xx. 65.

  valdichiana, xxix. 46.

  valdimagra, xxiv. 145.

  vanni fucci, xxiv. 125.

  veltro, the, i. 101.

  vendetta, the, and dante, xxix. 32.

  venetians, xxi. 7.

  vercelli, xxviii. 75.

  verona, xv. 122, xx. 68.

  verucchio, xxvii. 46.

  vigne, pier delle, xiii. 58.

  violent, the, against others, xii.;
    against themselves, xiii.;
    against god and nature, xiv., etc.

  virgil, i. 79.
    and elsewhere in the _inferno_ mentioned by name, though usually
    by some title, as, _e.g._ master, leader, or lord.

  viso, monte, xvi. 95.

  vitaliano, xvii. 68.

  volto, the santo, xxi. 48.


  wain, charles's, xi. 1