r the cliff into the seventh
  bolgia, where the thieves are tormented by serpents, and are
  constantly undergoing a hideous metamorphosis--vanni fucci,        176

  canto xxv.

  the eighth circle--seventh bolgia continued--cacus--agnello
  brunelleschi, buoso degli abati, puccio sciancato, cianfa donati,
  and guercio cavalcanti,                                            184

  canto xxvi.

  the eighth circle--eighth bolgia, where are the evil counsellors,
  wrapped each in his own flame--ulysses tells how he met with
  death,                                                             192

  canto xxvii.

  the eighth circle--eighth bolgia continued--guido of montefeltro--
  the cities of romagna--guido and boniface viii.,                   200

  canto xxviii.

  the eighth circle--ninth bolgia, where the schismatics in church
  and state are for ever being dismembered--mahomet--fra dolcino--
  pier da medicina--curio--mosca--bertrand de born,                  209

  canto xxix.

  th
 
 ___________________________
 
rish on earth again, freed from unmerited
disgrace. he died about 1249.

[424] _the harlot_: envy.

[425] _of what thou thinkest, etc._: virgil never asks a question for
his own satisfaction. he knows who the spirits are, what brought them
there, and which of them will speak honestly out on the promise of
having his fame refreshed in the world. it should be noted how, by a
hint, he has made peter aware of who he is (line 48); a delicate
attention yielded to no other shade in the inferno, except ulysses
(_inf._ xxvi. 79), and, perhaps, brunetto latini (_inf._ xv. 99).

[426] _in them shall ne'er be clad_: boccaccio is here at great pains to
save dante from a charge of contradicting the tenet of the resurrection
of the flesh.

[427] _naked_: these are the prodigals; their nakedness representing the
state to which in life they had reduced themselves.

[428] _lano_: who made one of a club of prodigals in siena (_inf._ xxix.
130) and soon ran through his fortune. joining in a florentine
expedition
 
 ___________________________
 
 though neither thrust nor thrown.
  my leader me beholding lost in thought:
    'in all the fires are spirits,' said to me;
    'his flame round each is for a garment wrought.'
  'o master!' i replied, 'by hearing thee
    i grow assured, but yet i knew before                           50
    that thus indeed it was, and longed to be
  told who is in the flame which there doth soar,
    cloven, as if ascending from the pyre
    where with eteocles[676] there burned of yore
  his brother.' he: 'ulysses in that fire
    and diomedes[677] burn; in punishment
    thus held together, as they held in ire.
  and, wrapped within their flame, they now repent
    the ambush of the horse, which oped the door
    through which the romans' noble seed[678] forth went.           60
  for guile deïdamia[679] makes deplore
    in death her lost achilles, tears they shed,
    and bear for the palladium[680] vengeance sore.'
  'master, i pray thee fervently,' i said,
    'if from those flames they still can u
 
 ___________________________
 
had
existed between them (_theb._ xii.).

[677] _and diomedes_: the two are associated in deeds of blood and guile
at the siege of troy.

[678] _the romans' noble seed_: the trick of the wooden horse led to the
capture of troy, and that led æneas to wander forth on the adventures
that ended in the settlement of the trojans in italy.

[679] _deïdamia_: that achilles might be kept from joining the greek
expedition to troy he was sent by his mother to the court of lycomedes,
father of deïdamia. ulysses lured him away from his hiding-place and
from deïdamia, whom he had made a mother.

[680] _the palladium_: the trojan sacred image of pallas, stolen by
ulysses and diomed (_æn._ ii.). ulysses is here upon his own ground.

[681] _they were greek_: some find here an allusion to dante's ignorance
of the greek language and literature. but virgil addresses them in the
lombard dialect of italian (_inf._ xxvii. 21). he acts as spokesman
because those ancient greeks were all so haughty that to a comm
 
 ___________________________
 
on modern
mortal they would have nothing to say. he, as the author of the _æneid_,
has a special claim on their good-nature. it is but seldom that the
shades are told who virgil is, and never directly. here ulysses may
infer it from the mention of the 'lofty verse.'

[682] _from circe_: it is ulysses that speaks.

[683] _the open main_: the mediterranean as distinguished from the
ægean.

[684] _which ne'er deserted me_: there seems no reason for supposing,
with philalethes, that ulysses is here represented as sailing on his
last voyage from the island of circe and not from ithaca. ulysses, on
the contrary, represents himself as breaking away afresh from all the
ties of home. according to homer, ulysses had lost all his companions
ere he returned to ithaca; and in the _odyssey_ tiresias prophesies to
him that his last wanderings are to be inland. but any acquaintance that
dante had with homer can only have been vague and fragmentary. he may
have founded his narrative of how uly
 
 ___________________________
 
sses ended his days upon some
floating legend; or, eager to fill up what he took to be a blank in the
world of imagination, he may have drawn wholly on his own creative
power. in any case it is his ulysses who, through the version of him
given by a living poet, is most familiar to the english reader.

[685] _the mighty main_: the atlantic ocean. they bear to the left as
they sail, till their course is due south, and crossing the equator,
they find themselves under the strange skies of the southern hemisphere.
for months they have seen no land.

[686] _a lofty mountain_: this is the mountain of purgatory, according
to dante's geography antipodal to jerusalem, and the only land in the
southern hemi
 
 ___________________________
 
sphere.

[687] _as pleased another_: ulysses is proudly resigned to the failure
of his enterprise, 'for he was greek.'




canto xxvii.


  now, having first erect and silent grown
    (for it would say no more), from us the flame,
    the poet sweet consenting,[688] had moved on;
  and then our eyes were turned to one that came[689]
    behind it on the way, by sounds that burst
    out of its crest in a confusèd stream.
  as the sicilian bull,[690] which bellowed first
    with his lamenting--and it was but right--
    who had prepared
 
 ___________________________
 
book of the _convito_ (written, according to
fraticelli, in 1297), he calls him 'our most noble guido montefeltrano;'
and praises him as one of the wise and noble souls that refuse to run
with full sails into the port of death, but furl the sails of their
worldly undertakings, and, relinquishing all earthly pleasures and
business, give themselves up in their old age to a religious life.
either, then, he sets guido here in order that he may have a modern
false counsellor worthy to be ranked with ulysses; or because, on longer
experience, he had come to reprobate more keenly the abuse of the
franciscan habit; or, most likely of all, that he might, even at the
cost of guido, load the hated memory of boniface with another reproach.

[714] _minos_: here we have minos represented in the act of pronouncing
judgment in words as well as by the figurative rolling of his tail
around his body (_inf._ v. 11).




canto xxviii.


  could any, even in words unclogged by rhyme
    recount the wounds that now
 
 ___________________________
 
ello, xxxii. 122.

  tristam, v. 67.

  trojan furies, xxx. 22.

  trojans, xxviii. 10, xxx. 14.

  troy, i. 74, xxx. 98.

  tully, iv. 140.

  turks, xvii. 16.

  turnus, i. 108.

  tuscan, xxii. 99, xxiii. 76, 91, xxiv. 122, xxviii. 108, xxxii. 66.

  tydeus, xxxii. 130.

  tyrants, xii. 103, etc.

  typhon, xxxi. 124.


  ubaldini, the cardinal octavian, x. 120.

  ---- archbishop roger, xxxiii. 14.

  uberti, farinata, vi. 79, x. 32.

  ugolino, xxxii. 125, etc.

  uguccione, xxxiii. 89.

  ulysses, xxvi. 55, etc.

  unbelievers, x.

  urbino, xxvii. 30.

  usurers, xvii. 45.

  usury, xi. 95.


  val camonica, xx. 65.

  valdichiana, xxix. 46.

  valdimagra, xxiv. 145.

  vanni fucci, xxiv. 125.

  veltro, the, i. 101.

  vendetta, the, and dante, xxix. 32.

  venetians, xxi. 7.

  vercelli, xxviii. 75.

  verona, xv. 122, xx. 68.

  verucchio, xxvii. 46.

  vigne, pier delle, xiii. 58.

  violent, the, against others, xii.;
    against themselves, xiii.;
    against god and nature, xiv.