a--
  ugolino,                                                           241

  canto xxxiii.

  the ninth circle--antenora continued--ugolino and his tale--the
  third ring, or ptolomæa, where are those treacherous to their
  friends--friar alberigo--branca d'oria,                           249

  canto xxxiv.

  the ninth circle--the fourth ring or judecca, the deepest point
  of the inferno and the centre of the universe--it is the place
  of those treacherous to their lords or benefactors--lucifer with
  judas, brutus, and cassius hanging from his mouths--passage
  through the centre of the earth--ascent from the depths to the
  light of the stars in the southern hemisphere,                     260

  index,                                                             269




florence and dante.


dante is himself the hero of the _divine comedy_, and ere many stages of
the _inferno_ have been passed the reader feels that all his steps are
being taken in a familiar companionship. when ever
 
 ___________________________
 
the pope their strongest natural ally.

the leader of the exiles was farinata, one of the uberti, a family
which, so long ago as 1180, had raised a civil war to force their way
into the consulship. ever since, they had been the most powerful,
perhaps, and certainly the most restless, clan in florence, rich in men
of strong character, fiercely tenacious of their purpose. such was
farinata. to the florentines of a later age he was to stand for the type
of the great ghibeline gentleman, haughty as lucifer, a christian in
name though scarcely by profession, and yet almost beloved for his frank
excess of pride. it detracted nothing from the grandeur of his
character, in the judgment of his countrymen, that he could be cunning
as well as brave. manfred was coy to afford help to the tuscan
ghibelines, standing out for an exorbitant price for the loan of his
men-at-arms; and to farinata was attributed the device by which his
point of honour was effectually touched.[12] when at last a
reinforcement of
 
 ___________________________
 
, as dante conceived of
it, contains only such sinners as have been guilty of wicked acts. drift
and bent of heart and mind are taken no account of. the evil seed must
have borne a harvest, and the guilt of every victim of justice must be
plain and open. now, pride and envy are sins indeed, but sins that a man
may keep to himself. if they have betrayed the subject of them into the
commission of crimes, in those crimes they are punished lower down, as
is indicated at xii. 49. and so we find that lucifer is condemned as a
traitor, though his treachery sprang from envy: the greater guilt
includes the less. for sluggishness in the pursuit of good the vestibule
of the caitiffs seems the appropriate place.--there are two kinds of
wrath. one is vehement, and declares itself in violent acts; the other
does not blaze out, but is grudging and adverse to all social good--the
wrath that is nursed. one as much as the other affects behaviour. so in
this circle, as in the preceding, we have represented the 
 
 ___________________________
 
es the sixth circle, and, as
immediately appears, is populated by demons. the sinners punished in it
are not mentioned at all in this canto, and it seems more reasonable to
apply _burghers_ to the demons than to the shades. they are called
_gravi_, generally taken to mean sore burdened, and the description is
then applicable to the shades; but _grave_ also bears the sense of
cruel, and may describe the fierceness of the devils. though the city is
inhabited by the subjects of dis, he is found as lucifer at the very
bottom of the pit. by some critics the whole of the lower inferno, all
that lies beyond this point, is regarded as being the city of dis. but
it is the sixth circle, with its minarets, that is the city; its walls,
however, serving as bulwarks for all the lower inferno. the shape of the
city is, of course, that of a circular belt. here it may be noted that
the fifth and sixth circles are on the same level; the water of styx,
which as a marsh covers the fifth, is gathered into a moat 
 
 ___________________________
 
e was wrung.
  and virgil when he felt them round him cast
    said: 'that i may embrace thee, hither tend,'
    and in one bundle with him made me fast.
  and as to him that under carisend[796]
    stands on the side it leans to, while clouds fly
    counter its slope, the tower appears to bend;
  even so to me who stood attentive by
    antæus seemed to stoop, and i, dismayed,                       140
    had gladly sought another road to try.
  but us in the abyss he gently laid,
    where lucifer and judas gulfed remain;
    nor to it thus bent downward long time stayed,
  but like a ship's mast raised himself again.


footnotes:

[781] _achilles_: the rust upon his lance had virtue to heal the wound.

[782] _from that sad valley_: leaving the tenth and last bolgia they
climb the inner bank of it and approach the ninth and last circle, which
consists of the pit of the inferno.

[783] _roland_: charles the great, on his march north after defeating
the saracens at saragossa, left roland t
 
 ___________________________
 
und his head to where his feet had been,
    and like a climber closely clutched the hair:                   80
    i thought to hell[869] that we returned again.
  'hold fast to me; it needs by such a stair,'
    panting, my leader said, like man foredone,
    'that we from all that wretchedness repair.'
  right through a hole in a rock when he had won,
    the edge of it he gave me for a seat
    and deftly then to join me clambered on.
  i raised mine eyes, expecting they would meet
    with lucifer as i beheld him last,
    but saw instead his upturned legs[870] and feet.                90
  if in perplexity i then was cast,
    let ignorant people think who do not see
    what point[871] it was that i had lately passed.
  'rise to thy feet,' my master said to me;
    'the way is long and rugged the ascent,
    and at mid tierce[872] the sun must almost be.'
  'twas not as if on palace floors we went:
    a dungeon fresh from nature's hand was this;
    rough underfoot, and of light indig
 
 ___________________________
 
ide and i, our journey to pursue
    to the bright world, upon this road concealed
    made entrance, and no thought of resting knew.
  he first, i second, still ascending held
    our way until the fair celestial train
    was through an opening round to me revealed:
  and, issuing thence, we saw the stars[880] again.


footnotes:

[858] _vexilla, etc._: '_the banners of the king of hell advance._' the
words are adapted from a hymn of the cross used in holy week; and they
prepare us to find in lucifer the opponent of 'the emperor who reigns on
high' (_inf._ i. 124). it is somewhat odd that dante should have put a
christian hymn into virgil's mouth.

[859] _now was i where_: in the fourth and inner division or ring of the
ninth circle. here are punished those guilty of treachery to their
lawful lords or to their benefactors. from judas iscariot, the
arch-traitor, it takes the name of judecca.

[860] _some stood, etc._: it has been sought to distinguish the degrees
of treachery of the shades b
 
 ___________________________
 
y means of the various attitudes assigned to
them. but it is difficult to make more out of it than that some are
suffering more than others. all of them are the worst of traitors,
hard-hearted and cold-hearted, and now they are quite frozen in the ice,
sealed up even from the poor relief of intercourse with their
fellow-sinners.

[861] _the creature once, etc._: lucifer, guilty of treachery against
the highest, at _purg._ xii. 25 described as 'created noble beyond all
other creatures.' virgil calls him dis, the name used by him for pluto
in the _æneid_, and the name from which that of the city of unbelief is
taken (_inf._ viii. 68).

[862] _judge then what bulk_: the arm of lucifer was as much longer than
the stature of one of the giants as a giant was taller than dante. we
have seen (_inf._ xxxi. 58) that the giants were more than fifty feet in
height--nine 
 
 ___________________________
 
s as tall as a
giant, that is, he is fourteen hundred feet or so. for a fourth of this,
or nearly so--from the middle of the breast upwards--he stands out of
the ice, that is, some three hundred and fifty feet. it seems almost too
great a height for dante's purpose; and yet on the calculations of some
commentators his stature is immensely greater--from three to five
thousand feet.

[863] _three faces_: by the three faces are represented the three
quarters of the world from which the subjects of lucifer are drawn:
vermilion or carnation standing for europe, yellow for asia, and black
for africa. or the faces may symbolise attributes opposed to the wisdom,
power, and love of the trinity (_inf._ iii. 5). see also note on line 1.

[864] _a bat's wing_: which flutters and flaps in dark and noisome
places. the simile helps to bring more clearly before us the dim light
and half-seen horrors of the judecca.

[865] _a heckle_: or brake; the instrument used to clear the fibre of
flax from the woody sub
 
 ___________________________
 
e of this harsh treatment of
the great republicans it is necessary to bear in mind that dante's
devotion to the idea of the empire was part of his religion, and far
surpassed in intensity all we can now well imagine. in the absence of a
just and strong emperor the divine government of the world seemed to him
almost at a stand.

[868] _night is rising_: it is saturday evening, and twenty-four hours
since they entered by the gate of inferno.

[869] _i thought to hell, etc._: virgil, holding on to lucifer's hairy
sides, descends the dark and narrow space between him and the ice as far
as to his middle, which marks the centre of the earth. here he swings
himself round so as to have his feet to the centre as he emerges from
the pit to the southern hemisphere. dante now feels that he is being
carried up, and, able to see nothing in the darkness, deems they are
climbing back to the inferno. virgil's difficulty in turning himself
round and climbing up the legs of lucifer arises from his being then at
 
 ___________________________
 

the 'centre to which all weights tend from every part.' dante shared the
erroneous belief of the time, that things grew heavier the nearer they
were to the centre of the earth.

[870] _his upturned legs_: lucifer's feet are as far above where virgil
and dante are as was his head above the level of the judecca.

[871] _what point, etc._: the centre of the earth. dante here feigns to
have been himself confused--a fiction which helps to fasten attention on
the wonderful fact that if we could make our way through the earth we
should require at the centre to reverse our posture. this was more of a
wonder in dante's time than now.

[872] _mid tierce_: the canonical day was divided into four parts, of
which ti
 
 ___________________________
 
, and that, with the
ocean, it is the centre of the heavens. the heavens, as we see, are for
ever revolving around it as a centre; and in these revolutions they must
of necessity have two fixed poles.... of these one is visible to almost
all the dry land of the earth; and that is our north pole [star]. the
other, that is, the south, is out of sight of almost all the dry land.'

[875] _the man_: the name of christ is not mentioned in the _inferno_.

[876] _land, as of yore, etc._: on the fall of lucifer from the southern
sky all the dry land of that hemisphere fled before him under the ocean
and took refuge in the other; that is, as much land emerged in the
northern hemisphere as sank in the southern. but the ground in the
direct line of his descent to the centre of the earth heaped itself up
into the mount of purgatory--the only dry land left in the southern
hemisphere. the inferno was then also hollowed out; and, as mount
calvary is exactly antipodal to purgatory, we may understand that on t
 
 ___________________________
 
 brunetto, xv. 30, etc.

  lavinia, iv. 126.

  learchus, xxx. 10.

  lemnos, xviii. 88.

  leopard, i. 32.

  lethe, xiv. 130, 136.

  libicocco, xxi. 121, xxii. 70.

  libya, xxiv. 85.

  limbo, iv. 24, etc.

  linus, iv. 141.

  lion, i. 45.

  livy, xxviii. 12.

  loderingo, friar, xxiii. 104.

  logodoro, xxii. 89.

  lombard, i. 68, xxii. 99.

  ---- dialect, xxvii. 20.

  lombardy, xxviii. 74.

  lucan, iv. 90, xxv. 94.

  lucca, xviii. 122, xxi. 38, xxxiii. 30.

  lucia, ii. 97, 100.

  lucifer, xxxi. 143, xxxiv. 89.

  lucretia, iv. 128.

  luni, xx. 47.


  maccabees, xix. 86.

  magra, val di, xxiv. 145.

  magus, simon, xix. 1.

  mahomet, xxviii. 31, etc.

  mainardo pagani, xxvii. 50.

  majorca, xxviii. 82.

  malacoda, xxi. 76, xxiii. 140.

  malatestas of rimini, v. 97, xxvii. 46, xxviii. 85.

  malebolge, xviii. 1, xxi. 5, xxiv. 37, xxix. 41.

  malebranche, xxi. 37, xxii. 100, xxiii. 23.

  manfredi, alberigo, xxxiii. 118.

  manto, xx. 55.

  mantua, xx. 93.

  mantuans, i