                  cx

the inferno.

  canto i.

  the slumber--the wood--the hill--the three beasts--virgil--the
  veltro or greyhound,                                                 1

  canto ii.

  dante's misgivings--virgil's account of how he was induced to
  come to his help--the three heavenly ladies--the beginning of
  the journey,                                                         9

  canto iii.

  the gate of inferno--the vestibule of the caitiffs--the great
  refusal--acheron--charon--the earthquake--the slumber of dante,     17

  canto iv.

  the first circle, which is the limbo of the unbaptized and of
  the virtuous heathen--the great poets--the noble castle--the
  sages and worthies of the ancient world,                            24

  canto v.

  the second circle, which is that of carnal sinners--minos--the
  tempest--the troop of those who died because of their love--
  francesca da rimini--dante's swoon,                                 32

  canto vi.

  the third
 
 ___________________________
 
 filled with fear.
  hope never more of heaven to win the sight;
    i come to take you to the other strand,
    to frost and fire and everlasting night.
  and thou, o living soul, who there dost stand,
    from 'mong the dead withdraw thee.' then, aware
    that not at all i stirred at his command,                       90
  'by other ways,[215] from other ports thou'lt fare;
    but they will lead thee to another shore,
    and 'tis a skiff more buoyant must thee bear.'
  and then my leader: 'charon, be not sore,
    for thus it has been willed where power ne'er came
    short of the will; thou therefore ask no more.'
  and hereupon his shaggy cheeks grew tame
    who is the pilot of the livid pool,
    and round about whose eyes glowed wheels of flame.
  but all the shades, naked and spent with dool,                   100
    stood chattering with their teeth, and changing hue
    soon as they heard the words unmerciful.
  god they blasphemed, and families whence they grew;
    mankind, t
 
 ___________________________
 
he time, place, seed in which began
    their lives, and seed whence they were born. then drew
  they crowding all together, as they ran,
    bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore
    predestinate for every godless man.
  the demon charon, with eyes evermore
    aglow, makes signals, gathering them all;                      110
    and whoso lingers smiteth with his oar.
  and as the faded leaves of autumn fall
    one after the other, till at last the bough
    sees on the ground spread all its coronal;
  with adam's evil seed so haps it now:
    at signs each falls in turn from off the coast,
    as fowls[216] into the ambush fluttering go.
  the gloomy waters thus by them are crossed,
    and ere upon the further side they la
 
 ___________________________
 
nd,
    on this, anew, is gathering a host.                            120
  'son,' said the courteous master,[217] 'understand,
    all such as in the wrath of god expire,
    from every country muster on this strand.
  to cross the river they are all on fire;
    their wills by heavenly justice goaded on
    until their terror merges in desire.
  this way no righteous soul has ever gone;
    wherefore[218] of thee if charon should complain,
    now art thou sure what by his words is shown.'
  when he had uttered this the dismal plain                        130
    trembled[219] so violently, my terror past
    recalling now, i'm bathed in sweat again.
  out of the tearful ground there moaned a blast
    whence lightning flashed forth red and terrible,
    which vanquished all my senses; and, as cast
  in sudden slumber, to the ground i fell.


footnotes:

[203] _power divine, etc._: the persons of the trinity, des
 
 ___________________________
 
uke is to be like the wind, which
strikes most fiercely on the loftiest summits (_parad._ xvii. 133); and
it agrees well with such a profession, that the first stroke he deals in
the _comedy_ is at a pope.

[213] _caitiffs_: to one who had suffered like dante for the frank part
he took in affairs, neutrality may well have seemed the unpardonable sin
in politics; and no doubt but that his thoughts were set on the trimmers
in florence when he wrote, 'let us not speak of them!'

[214] _a veteran_: charon. in all this description of the passage of the
river by the shades, dante borrows freely from virgil. it has been
already remarked on _inf._ ii. 28 that he draws illustrations from pagan
sources. more than that, as we begin to find, he boldly introduces
legendary and mythological characters among the persons of his drama.
with milton in mind, it surprises, on a first acquaintance with the
_comedy_, to discover how nearly independent of angels is the economy
invented by dante for the other world
 
 ___________________________
 
.

[215] _other ways, etc._: the souls bound from earth to purgatory gather
at the mouth of the tiber, whence they are wafted on an angel's skiff to
their destination (_purg._ ii. 100). it may be here noted that never
does dante hint a fear of one day becoming a denizen of inferno. it is
only the pains of purgatory that oppress his soul by anticipation. so
here charon is made to see at a glance that the pilgrim is not of those
'who make descent to acheron.'

[216] _as fowls, etc._: 'as a bird to its lure'--generally interpreted
of the falcon when called back. but a witness of the sport of netting
thrushes in tuscany describes them as 'flying into the vocal ambush in a
hurried, half-reluctant, and very remarkable manner.'

[217] _courteous master_: virgil here gives the answer promised at line
76; and dante by the epithet he uses removes any impression that h
 
 ___________________________
 
is
guide had been wanting in courtesy when he bade him wait.

[218] _wherefore_: charon's displeasure only proves that he feels he has
no hold on dante.

[219] _trembled, etc._: symbolical of the increase of woe in inferno
when the doomed souls have landed on the thither side of acheron. hell
opens to receive them. conversely, when any purified soul is released
from purgatory the mountain of purification trembles to its base with
joy (_purg._ xxi. 58).




canto iv.


  resounding thunder broke the slumber deep
    that drowsed my senses, and myself i shook
    like one by force a
 
 ___________________________
 
ology are by him,
into a demon. unlike the fallen angels of milton, dante's devils have no
interest of their own. their only function is to help in working out
human destinies.

[250] _downward hurled_: each falls to his proper place without
lingering by the way. all through inferno there is an absence of direct
divine interposition. it is ruled, as it were, by a course of nature.
the sinners, compelled by a fatal impulse, advance to hear their doom,
just as they fall inevitably one by one into charon's boat. minos by a
sort of devilish instinct sentences each sinner to his appropriate
punishment. in _inf._ xxvii. 127 we find the words in which minos utters
his judgment. in _inf._ xxi. 29 a devil bears the sinner to his own
place.

[251] _why also, etc._: like charon. if minos represents conscience, as
some would have it, dante is here again assailed by misgivings as to his
enterprise, and is quieted by reason in the person of virgil.

[252] _thus 'tis willed, etc._: these two lines are the 
 
 ___________________________
 
same as those to
charon, _inf._ iii. 95, 96.

[253] _precipitous extreme_: opinions vary as to what is meant by
_ruina_. as dante is certainly still on the outer edge of the second
circle or terrace, and while standing there hears distinctly the words
the spirits say when they reach the _ruina_, it most likely denotes the
steep slope falling from the first to the second circle. the spirits,
driven against the wall which hems them in, burst into sharp
lamentations against their irremediable fate.

[254] _i understood, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e quarrel among the fiends arose from dante's
insatiable desire to confer with 'tuscan or lombard.'

[614] _to the next bolgia_: the sixth. they are now on the top of the
circular ridge that divides it from the fifth. from the construction of
malebolge the ridge is deeper on the inner side than on that up which
they have travelled from the pitch.

[615] _no more a cause of dread_: there seems some incongruity between
virgil's dread of these smaller devils and the ease with which he cowed
minos, charon, and pluto. but his character gains in human interest the
more he is represented as sympathising with dante in his terrors; and in
this particular case the confession of fellow-feeling prepares the way
for the beautiful passage which follows it (line 38, etc.), one full of
an almost modern tenderness.

[616] _cologne_: some make it clugny, the great benedictine monastery;
but all the old commentators and most of the mss. read cologne. all that
the text necessarily carries is that the cloaks had
 
 ___________________________
 
, xiv. 15.

  cattolica, xxviii. 80.

  caurus, xi. 114.

  cavalcanti, cavalcante, x. 53.

  ---- francesco, xxv. 151.

  ---- gianni, xxx. 32, 42.

  ---- guido, x. 63.

  cecina, xiii. 9.

  celestine v., iii. 59, xxvii. 105.

  centaurs, xii. 56, etc., xxv. 17.

  centre of the universe, xxxiv. 110.

  ceperano, xxviii. 16.

  cerberus, vi. 13, ix. 98.

  cervia, xxvii. 41.

  cesena, xxvii. 52.

  ceuta, xxvi. 111.

  chaos, xii. 43.

  charlemagne, xxxi. 17.

  charles's wain, xi. 114.

  charon, iii. 94, etc.

  charybdis, vii. 22.

  cherubim, black, xxvii. 113.

  chiana, val di, xxix. 46.

  chiarentana, xv. 9.

  chiron, xii. 65, etc.

  christ, iv. 53, xxxiv. 115.

  ciacco, vi. 52.

  cianfa de' donati, xxv. 43.

  circe, xxvi. 91.

  ciriatto, xxi. 122, xxii. 55.

  city of dis, viii. 68, etc.

  clement v., xix. 83.

  cleopatra, v. 63.

  clergy, vii. 46, xv. 106.

  cocytus, xiv. 119, xxxi. 123, xxxiii. 156, xxxiv. 52.

  coiners, false, xxix.

  colchians, xviii. 87.

  col