ourage doing what he dared.
  in the same furious and tempestuous mood
    in which the dogs upon the beggar leap,
    who, halting suddenly, seeks alms or food,
  they issued forth from underneath the deep                        70
    vault of the bridge, with grapplers 'gainst him stretched;
    but he exclaimed: 'aloof, and harmless keep!
  ere i by any of your hooks be touched,
    come one of you and to my words give ear;
    and then advise you if i should be clutched.'
  all cried: 'let malacoda then go near;'
    on which one moved, the others standing still.
    he coming said: 'what will this[587] help him here?'
  'o malacoda, is it credible
    that i am come,' my master then replied,                        80
    'secure your opposition to repel,
  without heaven's will, and fate, upon my side?
    let me advance, for 'tis by heaven's behest
    that i on this rough road another guide.'
  then was his haughty spirit so depressed,
    he let his hook drop sudden to his feet,
    a
 
 ___________________________
 
a sent by
florence in 1289 to help the lucchese against the pisans, and was
present at the surrender by the pisan garrison of the castle of caprona.
some make the reference to be to a siege of the same stronghold by the
pisans in the following year, when the lucchese garrison, having
surrendered on condition of having their lives spared, were met as they
issued forth with cries of 'hang them! hang them!' but of this second
siege it is only a pisan commentator that speaks.

[589] _the next rib_: malacoda informs them that the arch of rock across
the sixth bolgia in continuation of that by which they have crossed the
fifth is in ruins, but that they will find a whole bridge if they keep
to the left hand along the rocky bank on the inner edge of the
pitch-filled moat. but, as appears further on, he is misleading them. it
will be remembered that from the precipice enclosing the malebolge there
run more than one series of bridges or ribs into the central well of
inferno.

[590] _yestreen, etc._: th
 
 ___________________________
 
ch the earthquake happened which took place at the
death of jesus. this is held by dante (_convito_ iv. 23), who professes
to follow the account by saint luke, to have been at the sixth hour,
that is, at noon; thus the time is now seven in the morning.

[591] _alichino, etc._: the names of the devils are all descriptive:
alichino, for instance, is the swooper; but in this and the next canto
we have enough of the horrid crew without considering too closely how
they are called.

[592] _unbroken_: malacoda repeats his lie.

[593] _each bit his tongue, etc._: the demons, aware of the cheat played
by malacoda, show their devilish humour by making game of virgil and
dante.--benvenuto is amazed that a man so involved in his own thoughts
as dante was, should have been such a close observer of low life as this
passage shows him. he is sure that he laughed to himself as he wrote the
canto.




canto xxii.


  horsemen i've seen in march across the field,
    hastening to charge, or, answering muster, st
 
 ___________________________
 
rites of the world.

[624] _virgil_: on virgil's earlier journey through inferno caiaphas and
the others were not here, and he wonders as at something out of a world
to him unknown.

[625] _on the right_: as they are moving round the bolgia to the left,
the rocky barrier between them and the seventh bolgia is on their right.

[626] _we, both of us_: dante, still in the body, as well as virgil, the
shade.

[627] _the encircling wall_: that which encloses all the malebolge.

[628] _he warned us_: malacoda (_inf._ xxi. 109) had assured him that
the next rib of rock ran unbroken across all the bolgias, but it too,
like all the other bridges, proves to have been, at the time of the
earthquake, shattered where it crossed this gulf of the hypocrites. the
earthquake told most on this bolgia, because the death of christ and the
attendant earthquake were, in a sense, caused by the hypocrisy of
caiaphas and the rest.

[629] _at bologna_: even in inferno the merry friar must have his joke.
he is a gentlem
 
 ___________________________
 
n, i. 45.

  livy, xxviii. 12.

  loderingo, friar, xxiii. 104.

  logodoro, xxii. 89.

  lombard, i. 68, xxii. 99.

  ---- dialect, xxvii. 20.

  lombardy, xxviii. 74.

  lucan, iv. 90, xxv. 94.

  lucca, xviii. 122, xxi. 38, xxxiii. 30.

  lucia, ii. 97, 100.

  lucifer, xxxi. 143, xxxiv. 89.

  lucretia, iv. 128.

  luni, xx. 47.


  maccabees, xix. 86.

  magra, val di, xxiv. 145.

  magus, simon, xix. 1.

  mahomet, xxviii. 31, etc.

  mainardo pagani, xxvii. 50.

  majorca, xxviii. 82.

  malacoda, xxi. 76, xxiii. 140.

  malatestas of rimini, v. 97, xxvii. 46, xxviii. 85.

  malebolge, xviii. 1, xxi. 5, xxiv. 37, xxix. 41.

  malebranche, xxi. 37, xxii. 100, xxiii. 23.

  manfredi, alberigo, xxxiii. 118.

  manto, xx. 55.

  mantua, xx. 93.

  mantuans, i. 69, ii. 58.

  marcab√≤, xxviii. 75.

  marcia, iv. 128.

  maremma, xxv. 19, xxix. 48.

  marquis of este, xviii. 56.

  mars, xiii. 144, xxiv. 145, xxxi. 51.

  mascheroni, sassol, xxxii. 65.

  matthias, apostle, xix. 95.

  medea,