       32

  canto vi.

  the third circle, which is that of the gluttonous--the hail and
  rain and snow--cerberus--ciacco and his prophecy,                   40

  canto vii.

  the fourth circle, which is that of the avaricious and the
  thriftless--plutus--the great weights rolled by the sinners in
  opposite directions--fortune--the fifth circle, which is that
  of the wrathful--styx--the lofty tower,                             47

  canto viii.

  the fifth circle continued--the signals--phlegyas--the skiff--
  philip argenti--the city of dis--the fallen angels--the rebuff
  of virgil,                                                          55

  canto ix.

  the city of dis, which is the sixth circle and that of the
  heretics--the furies and the medusa head--the messenger of heaven
  who opens the gates for virgil and dante--the entrance to the
  city--the red-hot tombs,                                            62

  canto x.

  the sixth circle continued--farinata degli uberti--ca
 
 ___________________________
 
 yield
    that other light, and who have it displayed?'
  'thou shouldst upon the impure watery field,'                     10
    he said, 'already what approaches know,
    but that the fen-fog holds it still concealed.'
  never was arrow yet from sharp-drawn bow
    urged through the air upon a swifter flight
    than what i saw a tiny vessel show,
  across the water shooting into sight;
    a single pilot served it for a crew,
    who shouted: 'art thou come, thou guilty sprite?'[314]
  'o phlegyas, phlegyas,[315] this thy loud halloo!
    for once,' my lord said, 'idle is and vain.                     20
    thou hast us only till the mud we're through.'
  and, as one cheated inly smarts with pain
    when the deceit wrought on him is betrayed,
    his gathering ire could phlegyas scarce contain.
  into the bark my leader stepped, and made
    me take my place beside him; nor a jot,
    till i had entered, was it downward weighed.
  soon as my guide and i were in the boat,
    to cleave 
 
 ___________________________
 
d to hold
that dante began the poem while he was a prosperous citizen.--boccaccio
himself in his comment on the _comedy_ points out the difficulty of
reconciling the story with ciacco's prophecy.

[313] _two flames_: denoting the number of passengers who are to be
conveyed across the stygian pool. it is a signal for the ferryman, and
is answered by a light hung out on the battlements of the city of dis.

[314] _guilty sprite_: only one is addressed; whether virgil or dante is
not clear.

[315] _phlegyas_: who burnt the temple of apollo at delphi in revenge
for the violation of his daughter by the god.

[316] _deeper, etc._: because used to carry only shades.

[317] _ere thy period_: the curiosity of the shade is excited by the
sinking of the boat in the water. he assumes that dante will one day be
condemned to inferno. neither francesca nor ciacco made a like mistake.

[318] _one who weeps_: he is ashamed to tell his name, and hopes in his
vile disguise to remain unknown by dante, whose floren
 
 ___________________________
 
lwarks for all the lower inferno. the shape of the
city is, of course, that of a circular belt. here it may be noted that
the fifth and sixth circles are on the same level; the water of styx,
which as a marsh covers the fifth, is gathered into a moat to surround
the walls of the sixth.

[324] _mosques_: the feature of an infidel city that first struck
crusader and pilgrim.

[325] _the gate_: they have floated across the stagnant marsh into the
deeper waters of the moat, and up to the gate where phlegyas is used to
land his passengers. it may be a question whether his services are
required for all who are doomed to the lower inferno, or only for those
bound to the city.

[326] _from heaven_: 'rained from heaven.' fallen angels.

[327] _seven times_: given as a round number.

[328] _yes and no_: he will return--he will not return. the demons have
said that virgil shall remain, and he has promised dante not to desert
him.

[329] _who dare, etc._: virgil knows the hindrance is only temporary,
but 
 
 ___________________________
 
.

  pazzi, camicion de', xxxii. 68.

  ---- rinier de', xii. 137.

  peculators, xxi. xxii.

  penelope, xxvi. 96.

  pennine alps, xx. 66.

  penthesilea, iv. 125.

  perillus, xxvii. 8.

  peschiera, xx. 70.

  peter, apostle, i. 134, ii. 24, xix. 91, 94.

  peter's, st., church, xviii. 32, xxxi. 59.

  phaÃ«thon, xvii. 106.

  phalaris, xxvii. 7.

  pharisees, xxiii. 116, xxvii. 85.

  philip argenti, viii. 61.

  ---- the fair, xix. 87.

  phlegethon, xiv. 116, 131.

  phlegra, xiv. 58.

  phlegyas, viii. 19, 24.

  phoenix, xxiv. 107.

  pholus, xii. 72.

  photinus, xi. 9.

  piceno, campo, xxiv. 148.

  pier da medicina, xxviii. 73.

  ---- delle vigne, xiii. 58.

  pietrapana, xxxii. 29.

  pinamonte, xx. 96.

  pine cone of st. peter's, xxxi. 59.

  pisa, xxxiii. 79.

  pisans, xxxiii. 30.

  pistoia, xxiv. 126, 143, xxv. 10.

  plato, iv. 134.

  plutus, vi. 115, vii. 2.

  po, v. 98, xx. 78.

  pola, ix. 113.

  pole, south, xxvi. 127.

  polenta, v. 97, xxvii. 42.

  polydorus, xx