ed--the signals--phlegyas--the skiff--
  philip argenti--the city of dis--the fallen angels--the rebuff
  of virgil,                                                          55

  canto ix.

  the city of dis, which is the sixth circle and that of the
  heretics--the furies and the medusa head--the messenger of heaven
  who opens the gates for virgil and dante--the entrance to the
  city--the red-hot tombs,                                            62

  canto x.

  the sixth circle continued--farinata degli uberti--cavalcante dei
  cavalcanti--farinata's prophecy--frederick ii.,                     69

  canto xi.

  the sixth circle continued--pope anastasius--virgil explains on
  what principle sinners are classified in inferno--usury,            77

  canto xii.

  the seventh circle, first division--the minotaur--the river
  of blood, which forms the outer ring of the seventh circle--
  in it are those guilty of violence against others--the
  centaurs--tyrants--robbers and murderers--ezz
 
 ___________________________
 
 even to the guelf chronicler villani the terrible defeat of
montaperti seemed no more than a just vengeance taken by heaven upon a
crime so heinous.[11] in the meantime the city was laid under interdict,
and those concerned in the abbot's death were excommunicated; while the
ghibelines, taking refuge in siena, began to plot and scheme with the
greater spirit against foes who, in the very face of a grave peril, had
offended in the pope their strongest natural ally.

the leader of the exiles was farinata, one of the uberti, a family
which, so long ago as 1180, had raised a civil war to force their way
into the consulship. ever since, they had been the most powerful,
perhaps, and certainly the most restless, clan in florence, rich in men
of strong character, fiercely tenacious of their purpose. such was
farinata. to the florentines of a later age he was to stand for the type
of the great ghibeline gentleman, haughty as lucifer, a christian in
name though scarcely by profession, and yet almost be
 
 ___________________________
 
loved for his frank
excess of pride. it detracted nothing from the grandeur of his
character, in the judgment of his countrymen, that he could be cunning
as well as brave. manfred was coy to afford help to the tuscan
ghibelines, standing out for an exorbitant price for the loan of his
men-at-arms; and to farinata was attributed the device by which his
point of honour was effectually touched.[12] when at last a
reinforcement of eight hundred cavalry entered siena, the exiles and
their allies felt themselves more than a match for the militia of
florence, and set themselves to decoy it into the field. earlier in the
same year the florentines had encamped before siena, and sought in vain
to bring on a general engagement. they were now misled by false
messengers, primed by farinata, into a belief that the si
 
 ___________________________
 
; while it was among the men of high
degree that the traitors were found. on one of them, bocca degli abati,
who struck off the right hand of the standard-bearer of the cavalry, and
so helped on the confusion and the rout, dante takes vengeance in his
pitiless verse.[16]

the fortifications of florence had been recently completed and
strengthened, and it was capable of a long defence. but the spirit of
the people was broken for the time, and the conquerors found the gates
open. then it was that farinata almost atoned for any wrong he ever did
his native town, by withstanding a proposal made by the ghibelines of
the rival tuscan cities, that florence should be destroyed, and empoli
advanced to fill her room. 'alone, with open face i defended her,' dante
makes him say.[17] but the wonder would rather be if he had voted to
destroy a city of which he was about to be one of the tyrants. florence
had now a fuller experience than ever of the oppression which it was in
the character of the ghibelines 
 
 ___________________________
 
shamed of his base
extraction.[24] in paradise he meets his great crusading ancestor
cacciaguida, and feigns contrition for the pleasure with which he
listens to a declaration of the unmixed purity of their common
blood.[25] in inferno he catches a glimpse, sudden and terrible, of a
kinsman whose violent death had remained unavenged; and, for the nonce,
the philosopher-poet is nothing but the member of an injured florentine
clan, and winces at the thought of a neglected blood feud.[26] and when
farinata, the great ghibeline, and haughtiest of all the florentines of
the past generation, asks him, 'who were thine ancestors?' dante says
with a proud pretence of humility, 'anxious to obey, i hid nothing, but
told him all he demanded.'[27]

dante was born in florence in the may of 1265.[28] a brother of his
father had been one of the guards of the florentine caroccio, or
standard-bearing car, at the battle of montaperti (1260). whether
dante's father necessarily shared in the exile of his party may
 
 ___________________________
 
appearance, open-handed, and of popular manners. he
and they who went with him affected a violent guelfism, their chance of
recovering the control of domestic affairs being the better the more
they could frighten the florentines with threats of evils like those
incurred by the aretines and pisans from ghibeline oppression. it may be
imagined what meaning the cry of ghibeline possessed in days when there
was still a class of beggars in florence--men of good names--whose eyes
had been torn out by farinata and his kind.

one strong claim which corso donati had on the goodwill of his
fellow-townsmen was that by his ready courage in pushing on the
reserves, against superior orders, at the battle of campaldino,[79] the
day had been won to florence and her allies. as he rode gallantly
through the streets he was hailed as the baron (_il barone_), much as in
the last generation the victor of waterloo was sufficiently
distinguished as the duke. at the same battle, vieri dei cerchi, the
leader of the opp
 
 ___________________________
 
 villani throws doubt on the guilt of the abbot. there were some
cases of churchmen being ghibelines, as for instance that of the
cardinal ubaldini (_inf._ x. 120). twenty years before the abbot's death
the general of the franciscans had been jeered at in the streets of
florence for turning his coat and joining the emperor. on the other
hand, many civilians were to be found among the guelfs.

[12] manfred, says john villani (_cronica_, vi. 74 and 75), at first
sent only a hundred men. having by farinata's advice been filled with
wine before a skirmish in which they were induced to engage, they were
easily cut in pieces by the florentines; and the royal standard was
dragged in the dust. the truth of the story matters less than that it
was believed in florence.

[13] provenzano is found by dante in purgatory, which he has been
admitted to, in spite of his sins, because of his self-sacrificing
devotion to a friend (_purg._ xi. 121).

[14] for this good advice he gets a word of praise in inferno (
 
 ___________________________
 
  long time, with heads held high, they'll make to bend
    the other party under burdens dire,                             71
    howe'er themselves in tears and rage they spend.
  there are two just[285] men, at whom none inquire.
    envy, and pride, and avarice, even these
    are the three sparks have set all hearts on fire.'
  with this the tearful sound he made to cease:
    and i to him, 'yet would i have thee tell--
    and of thy speech do thou the gift increase--
  tegghiaio[286] and farinata, honourable,
    james rusticucci,[287] mosca, arrigo,                           80
    with all the rest so studious to excel
  in good; where are they? help me this to know;
    great hunger for the news hath seiz√®d me;
    delights them heaven, or tortures hell below?'
  he said: 'among the blackest souls they be;
    them to the bottom weighs another sin.
    shouldst thou so far descend, thou mayst them see.
  but when[288] the sweet world thou again dost win,
    i pray thee bring me amo
 
 ___________________________
 
er, unknown. he thus distinctly puts
from himself any blame for the evil turn things had taken in florence.
how thoroughly he had broken with his party ere he wrote this is proved
by his exclusion of the irresolute but respectable vieri dei cerchi from
the number of the just men. he, in dante's judgment, was only too much
listened to.--it will be borne in mind that, at the time assigned to the
action of the _comedy_, dante was still resident in florence.

[286] _tegghiaio_: see _inf._ xvi. 42. _farinata_: _inf._ x. 32.

[287] _rusticucci_: _inf._ xvi. 44. _mosca_: _inf._ xxviii. 106.
_arrigo_: cannot be identified. all these distinguished florentines we
may assume to have been hospitable patrons of ciacco's.

[288] _but when, etc._: in the inferno many such prayers are addressed
to dante. the shades in purgatory ask to have their friends on earth
stirred to offer up petitions for their speedy purification and
deliverance; but the only alleviation possible for the doomed spirits is
to know that
 
 ___________________________
 
 mak'st thy way,
    modest of speech, through the abode of flame,
    be pleased[358] a little in this place to stay.
  the accents of thy language thee proclaim
    to be a native of that state renowned
    which i, perchance, wronged somewhat.' sudden came
  these words from out a tomb which there was found
    'mongst others; whereon i, compelled by fright,
    a little toward my leader shifted ground.                       30
  and he: 'turn round, what ails thee? lo! upright
    beginneth farinata[359] to arise;
    all of him 'bove the girdle comes in sight.'
  on him already had i fixed mine eyes.
    towering erect with lifted front and chest,
    he seemed inferno greatly to despise.
  and toward him i among the tombs was pressed
    by my guide's nimble and courageous hand,
    while he, 'choose well thy language,' gave behest.
  beneath his tomb when i had ta'en my stand                        40
    regarding me a moment, 'of what house
    art thou?' as if in scorn, he made deman
 
 ___________________________
 
duct as does the
denial of the divine government--than on intellectual divergence from
orthodox belief.

[356] _as well as, etc._: the question is: 'may they be seen?' the wish
is a desire to speak with them.

[357] _nor only now, etc._: virgil has on previous occasions imposed
silence on dante, as, for instance, at _inf._ iii. 51.

[358] _be pleased, etc._: from one of the sepulchres, to be imagined as
a huge sarcophagus, come words similar to the _siste viator!_ common on
roman tombs.

[359] _farinata_: of the great florentine family of the uberti, and, in
the generation before dante, leader of the ghibeline or imperialist
party in florence. his memory long survived among his fellow-townsmen as
that of the typical noble, rough-mannered, unscrupulous, and arrogant;
but yet, for one good action that he did, he at the same time ranked in
the popular estimation as a patriot and a hero. boccaccio, misled
perhaps by the mention of epicurus, says that he loved rich and delicate
fare. it is because 
 
 ___________________________
 
all his thoughts were worldly that he is condemned
to the city of unbelief. dante has already (_inf._ vi. 79) inquired
regarding his fate. he died in 1264.

[360] _his brows_: when dante tells he is of the alighieri, a guelf
family, farinata shows some slight displeasure. or, as a modern
florentine critic interprets the gesture, he has to think a moment
before he can remember on which side the alighieri ranged
themselves--they being of the small gentry, while he was a great noble,
but this gloss requires dante to have been more free from pride of
family than he really was.

[361] _twice disperse_: the alighieri shared in the exile of the guelfs
in 1248 and 1260.

[362] _you_: see also line 95. dante never uses the plural form to a

 
 ___________________________
 
single person except when desirous of showing social as distinguished
from, or over and above, moral respect.

[363] _guido_: farinata's companion in the tomb is cavalcante
cavalcanti, who, although a guelf, was tainted with the more specially
ghibeline error of epicureanism. when in order to allay party rancour
some of the guelf and ghibeline families were forced to intermarry, his
son guido took a daughter of farinata's to wife. this was in 1267, so
that guido was much older than dante. yet they were very intimate, and,
intellectually, had much in common. with him dante exchanged poems of
occasion, and he terms him more than once in the _vita nuova_ his chief
friend. the disdain of virgil need not mean more than is on the surface.
guido died in 1301. he is the hero of the _decameron_, vi. 9.

[364] _the lady_: proserpine; _i.e._ the moon. ere fifty months from
march 1300 were past, dante was to see the failu
 
 ___________________________
 
re of more than one
attempt made by the exiles, of whom he was one, to gain entrance to
florence. the great attempt was in the beginning of 1304.

[365] _ruth for my race_: when the ghibeline power was finally broken in
florence the uberti were always specially excluded from any amnesty.
there is mention of the political execution of at least one descendant
of farinata's. his son when being led to the scaffold said, 'so we pay
our fathers' debts!'--it has been so long common to describe dante as a
ghibeline, though no careful writer does it now, that it may be worth
while here to remark that ghibelinism, as farinata understood it, was
practically extinct in florence ere dante entered political life.

[366] _the arbia_: at montaperti, on the arbia, a few miles from siena,
was fought in 1260 a great battle between the guelf florence and her
allies on the one ha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd, and on the other the ghibelines of florence,
then in exile, under farinata; the sienese and tuscan ghibelines in
general; and some hundreds of men-at-arms lent by manfred.
notwithstanding the gallant behaviour of the florentine burghers, the
guelf defeat was overwhelming, and not only did the arbia run red with
florentine blood--in a figure--but the battle of montaperti ruined for a
time the cause of popular liberty and general improvement in florence.

[367] _our fane_: the parliament of the people used to meet in santa
reparata, the cathedral; and it is possible tha
 
 ___________________________
 
rmed by the general
body of the citizens. the use of the word is in any case accounted for
by the frequency of political conferences in churches. and the temple
having been introduced, edicts are converted into 'prayers.'

[368] _'twas i, etc._: some little time after the victory of montaperti
there was a great ghibeline gathering from various cities at empoli,
when it was proposed, with general approval, to level florence with the
ground in revenge for the obstinate guelfism of the population. farinata
roughly declared that as long as he lived and had a sword he would
defend his native place, and in the face of this protest the resolution
was departed from. it is difficult to understand how of all the
florentine nobles, whose wealth consisted largely in house property,
farinata should have stood alone in protesting against the ruin of the
city. but so it seems to have been; and in this great passage farinata
is repaid for his service, in despite of inferno.

[369] _other laws_: ciacco, in can
 
 ___________________________
 
to vi., prophesied what was to happen
in florence, and farinata has just told him that four years later than
now he will have failed in an attempt to return from exile: yet farinata
does not know if his family is still being persecuted, and cavalcanti
fears that his son guido is already numbered with the dead. farinata
replies that like the longsighted the shades can only see what is some
distance off, and are ignorant of what is going on, or about to happen;
which seems to imply that they forget what they once foresaw. guido was
to die within a few months, and the event was too close at hand to come
within the range of his father's vision.

[370] _the second frederick_: the emperor of that name who reigned from
1220 to 1250, and waged a life-long war with the popes for supremacy in
italy. it is not however f
 
 ___________________________
 
or his enmity with rome that he is placed in
the sixth circle, but for his epicureanism--as dante understood it. from
his sicilian court a spirit of free inquiry spread through the
peninsula. with men of the stamp of farinata it would be converted into
a crude materialism.

[371] _the cardinal_: ottaviano, of the powerful tuscan family of the
ubaldini, a man of great political activity, and known in tuscany as
'the cardinal.' his sympathies were not with the roman court. the news
of montaperti filled him with delight, and later, when the tuscan
ghibelines refused him money he had asked for, he burst out with 'and
yet i have lost my soul for the ghibelines--if i have a soul.' he died
not earlier than 1273. after thes
 
 ___________________________
 
e illustrious names farinata scorns to
mention meaner ones.

[372] _ominous words_: those in which farinata foretold dante's exile.

[373] _the stages, etc._: it is cacciaguida, his ancestor, who in
paradise instructs dante in what his future life is to be--one of
poverty and exile (_parad._ xvii.). this is, however, done at the
request of beatrice.

[374] _to the middle_: turning to the left they cut across the circle
till they reach the inner boundary of the city of tombs. here there is
no wall.




canto xi.


  we at the margin of a lofty steep
    made of great shattered stones in circle bent,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
ation of
being courted by both sides ever came true. never a strong partisan, he
had, to use his own words, at last to make a party by himself, and stood
out an imperialist with his heart set on the triumph of an empire far
nobler than that the ghibeline desired. dante may have hoped to hold a
place of honour some day in the council of a righteous emperor; and this
may be the glorious haven with the dream of which he was consoled in the
wanderings of his exile.

[467] _another text_: ciacco and farinata have already hinted at the
troubles that lie ahead of him (_inf._ vi. 65, and x. 79).

[468] _the clown, etc._: the honest performance of duty is the best
defence against adverse fortune.

[469] _right about_: in traversing the sands they keep upon the
right-hand margin of the embanked stream, virgil leading the way, with
dante behind him on the right so that brunetto may see and hear him
well.

[470] _he hears, etc._: of all the interpretations of this somewhat
obscure sentence that seems the 
 
 ___________________________
 
uished by endurance' (_√¶n._ v. 710).
taking this way of it, we have in the form of dante's profession of
indifference to all the adverse fortune that may be in store for him a
refined compliment to his guide; and in virgil's gesture and words an
equally delicate revelation of himself to brunetto, in which is conveyed
an answer to the question at line 48, 'who is this that shows the
way?'--otherwise, the words convey virgil's approbation of dante's
having so well attended to his advice to store farinata's prophecy in
his memory (_inf._ x.127).

[471] _his band_: that is, the company to which brunetto specially
belongs, and from which for the time he has separated himself.

[472] _stained with one sin_: dante will not make brunetto individually
confess his sin.

[473] _priscian_: the great grammarian of the sixth century; placed here
without any reason, except that he is a representative teacher of youth.

[474] _francis d'accorso_: died about 1294. the son of a great civil
lawyer, he was himse
 
 ___________________________
 
ing his
banishment to a close. he would even seem to be careful to stop any hole
by which he might creep back to florence. when he did return, it was to
be in the train of the emperor, so he hoped, and as one who gives rather
than seeks forgiveness.

[485] _of your city, etc._: at line 32 rusticucci begs dante to tell who
he is. he tells that he is of their city, which they have already
gathered from his _berretta_ and the fashion of his gown; but he tells
nothing, almost, of himself. unless to farinata, indeed, he never makes
an open breast to any one met in inferno. but here he does all that
courtesy requires.

[486] _thy fame_: dante has implied in his answer that he is gifted with
oratorical powers and is the object of a special divine care; and the
illustrious florentine, frankly acknowledging the claim he makes,
adjures him by the fame which is his in store to appease an eager
curiosity about the florence which even in inferno is the first thought
of every not ignoble florentine.

[487] 
 
 ___________________________
 
r to a pitched battle that should have happened
soon after the blacks recovered their strength; but the chroniclers tell
of none such, though some of the commentators do. the fortress of
seravalle was taken from the pistoiese, it is true, in 1302, and
moroello is said to have been the leader of the force which starved it
into submission. he was certainly present at the great siege of pistoia
in 1305, when the citizens suffered the last rigours of famine.--this
prophecy by fucci recalls those by farinata and ciacco.




canto xxv.


  the robber,[649] when his words were ended so,
    made both the figs and lifted either fist,
    shouting: 'there, god! for them at thee i throw.'
  then were the snakes my friends; for one 'gan twist
    and coiled itself around the sinner's throat,
    as if to say: 'now would i have thee whist.'
  another seized his arms and made a knot,
    clinching itself upon them in such wise
    he had no power to move them by a jot.
  pistoia![650] thou, pistoia, should
 
 ___________________________
 

ugo's overthrow and death.--for the matter of this note i am chiefly
indebted to the careful epitome of the pisan history of that time by
philalethes in his note on this canto (_g√∂ttliche com√∂die_).


footnotes:

[829] _the sinner_: count ugolino. see note at the end of the canto.

[830] _mingle speech, etc._: a comparison of these words with those of
francesca (_inf._ v. 124) will show the difference in moral tone between
the second circle of inferno and the ninth.

[831] _a florentine_: so farinata (_inf._ x. 25) recognises dante by his
florentine speech. the words heard by ugo are those at xxxii. 133.

[832] _the archbishop roger_: ruggieri, of the tuscan family of the
ubaldini, to which the cardinal of _inf._ x. 120 also belonged. towards
the end of his life he was summoned to rome to give an account of his
evil deeds, and on his refusal to go was declared a rebel to the church.
ugolino was a traitor to his country; roger, having entered into some
sort of alliance with ugolino, was a tr
 
 ___________________________
 
, iv. 121.

  elijah, xxvi. 35.

  elisha, xxvi. 34.

  empedocles, iv. 137.

  ephialtes, xxxi. 94, 108.

  epicurus, x. 13.

  erichtho, ix. 23.

  erinnyes, ix. 45.

  este, obizzo d', xii. 111.

  eteocles, xxvi. 54.

  ethiopia, xxiv. 89, xxxii. 44.

  euclid, iv. 142.

  euryalus, i. 108.

  eurypylus, xx. 112.

  ezzelino, xii. 110.


  faenza, xxvii. 49, xxxiii. 123.

  false coiners, xxix. xxx.

  ---- counsellors, xxvi. xxvii.

  fano, xxviii. 76.

  farfarello, xxi. 123, xxii. 94.

  farinata, vi. 79, x. 32.

  fishes, the, xi. 113.

  flatterers, xviii.

  flemings, xv. 4.

  florence, x. 92, xiii. 143, xvi. 75, xxiii. 95, xxiv. 144, xxvi. 1,
  xxxii. 120.

  florentines, viii. 62, xv. 61, xvi. 73, xvii. 70, xxxiii. 11.

  florin, xxx. 89.

  focara, xxviii. 89.

  foccaccia, xxxii. 63.

  forl√¨, xvi. 99, xxvii. 43.

  fortune, vii. 62, etc.

  france, xix. 87.

  francesca da rimini, v. 116.

  francis d'accorso, xv. 110.

  francis of assisi, xxvii. 112.

  frederick ii., x. 119
 
 ___________________________
 
ii., etc.

  _treasure_ of b. latini, xv. 119.

  trent, xii. 5, xx. 68.

  tribaldello, xxxii. 122.

  tristam, v. 67.

  trojan furies, xxx. 22.

  trojans, xxviii. 10, xxx. 14.

  troy, i. 74, xxx. 98.

  tully, iv. 140.

  turks, xvii. 16.

  turnus, i. 108.

  tuscan, xxii. 99, xxiii. 76, 91, xxiv. 122, xxviii. 108, xxxii. 66.

  tydeus, xxxii. 130.

  tyrants, xii. 103, etc.

  typhon, xxxi. 124.


  ubaldini, the cardinal octavian, x. 120.

  ---- archbishop roger, xxxiii. 14.

  uberti, farinata, vi. 79, x. 32.

  ugolino, xxxii. 125, etc.

  uguccione, xxxiii. 89.

  ulysses, xxvi. 55, etc.

  unbelievers, x.

  urbino, xxvii. 30.

  usurers, xvii. 45.

  usury, xi. 95.


  val camonica, xx. 65.

  valdichiana, xxix. 46.

  valdimagra, xxiv. 145.

  vanni fucci, xxiv. 125.

  veltro, the, i. 101.

  vendetta, the, and dante, xxix. 32.

  venetians, xxi. 7.

  vercelli, xxviii. 75.

  verona, xv. 122, xx. 68.

  verucchio, xxvii. 46.

  vigne, pier delle, xiii. 58.

  violent, the, aga