y studious to complete a virtual independence of both.
florence had been matilda's favourite place of residence; and,
benefiting largely as it did by her easy rule, it is no wonder that her
name should have been cherished by the florentines for ages after as a
household word.[1] nor is the greatest florentine unmindful of her. foe
of the empire though she was, he only remembers her piety; and it is by
matilda, as representing the active religious life, that dante is
ushered into the presence of beatrice in the earthly paradise.[2]

it was a true instinct which led florence and other cities to side
rather with the pope than with the emperor in the long-continued
struggle between them for predominance in italy. with the pope for
overlord they would at least have a master who was an italian, and one
who, his title being imperfect, would in his own interest be led to
treat them with indulgence; while, in the permanent triumph of the
emperor, italy must have become subject and tributary to germany,
 
 ___________________________
 
le the fugitive guelfs were mostly accompanied by their wives, and
did not return till 1267, we have dante's own word for it that he was
born in the great city by the arno,[29] and was baptized in the
baptistery, his beautiful st. john's.[30] at the font he received the
name of durante, shortened, as he bore it, into dante. it is in this
form that it finds a place in the _comedy_,[31] once, and only once,
written down of necessity, the poet says--the necessity of being
faithful in the report of beatrice's words: from the wider necessity, we
may assume, of imbedding in the work itself the name by which the author
was commonly known, and by which he desired to be called for all time.

when dante was about ten years old he lost his father. of his mother
nothing but her christian name of bella is known. neither of them is
mentioned in the _comedy_,[32] nor indeed are his wife and children.
boccaccio describes the alighieri as having been in easy though not in
wealthy circumstances; and leonardo br
 
 ___________________________
 
round
him too, and the world within. the poet was formed before the theologian
and philosopher. from his earliest years he was used to write in verse;
and he seems to have esteemed as one of his best endowments the easy
command of his mother tongue acquired by him while still in boyhood.

of the poems written in his youth he made a selection, and with a
commentary gave them to the world as his first work.[38] all the sonnets
and canzoni contained in it bear more or less directly on his love for
beatrice portinari. this lady, whose name is so indissolubly associated
with that of dante, was the daughter of a rich citizen of good family.
when dante saw her first he was a child of nine, and she a few months
younger. it would seem fabulous, he says, if he related what things he
did, and of what a passion he was the victim during his boyhood. he
seized opportunities of beholding her, but for long never passed beyond
a silent worship; and he was eighteen before she spoke to him, and then
only in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
asterpiece of italian
prose, as well as of italian verse. in the simple title of _vita nuova_,
or _the new life_,[39] we can fancy that a claim is laid to originality
of both subject and treatment. through the body of the work, though not
so clearly as in the _comedy_, there rings the note of assurance of
safety from present neglect and future oblivion.

it may be owing to the free use of personification and symbol in the
_vita nuova_ that some critics, while not denying the existence of a
real beatrice, have held that she is introduced only to help out an
allegory, and that, under the veil of love for her, the poet would
express his youthful passion for truth. others, going to the opposite
extreme, are found wondering why he never sought, or, seeking, failed to
win, the hand of beatrice. to those who would refine the beatrice of the
early work into a being as purely allegorical as she of the _comedy_, it
may be conceded that the _vita nuova_ is not so much the history of a
first love as of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e new emotional and intellectual life to which a
first love, as dante experienced it, opens the door. out of the
incidents of their intercourse he chooses only such as serve for motives
to the joys and sorrows of the passionate aspiring soul. on the other
hand, they who seek reasons why dante did not marry beatrice have this
to justify their curiosity, that she did marry another man. but her
husband was one of the rich and powerful bardi; and her father was so
wealthy that after providing for his children he could endow a hospital
in florence. the marriage was doubtless arranged as a matter of family
convenience, due regard being had to her dower and her husband's
fortune; and we may assume that when dante, too, was married later on,
his wife was found for him by the good offices of his friends.[40] our
m
 
 ___________________________
 
anners as regards these things are not those of the italy of the
thirteenth century. it may safely be said that dante never dreamed of
beatrice for his wife; that the expectation of wedding her would have
sealed his lips from uttering to the world any word of his love; and
that she would have lost something in his esteem if, out of love for
him, she had refused the man her father chose for her.

we must not seek in the _vita nuova_ what it does not profess to give.
there was a real beatrice portinari, to a careless glance perhaps not
differing much from other florentine ladies of her age and condition;
but her we do not find in dante's pages. these are devoted to a record
of the dreams and visions, the new thoughts and feelings of which she
was the occasion or the object. he worshipped at a distance, and in a
single glance found reward enough for months of adoration; he read all
heaven into a smile. so high strung is the narrative, that did we come
on any hint of loving dalliance 
 
 ___________________________
 
ical. it is a
mine of materials illustrative of the author's mental and emotional
development, but as regards historical details it is wanting in fulness
and precision. yet, even in such a sketch of dante's life as this tries
to be, it is necessary to dwell on the turning-points of the narrative
contained in the _vita nuova_; the reader always remembering that on one
side dante says more than the fact that so he may glorify his love, and
less on another that he may not fail in consideration for beatrice. she
is first a maiden whom no public breath is to disturb in her virgin
calm; and afterwards a chaste wife, whose lover is as jealous of her
reputation as any husband could be. the youthful lover had begun by
propounding the riddle of his love so obscurely that even by his
fellow-poets it had been found insoluble, adepts though they themselves
were in the art of smothering a thought. then, though all his longing is
for beatrice, lest she become the subject of common talk he feigns that
he is i
 
 ___________________________
 
n love first with one lady and then with another.[41] he even
pushes his deceit so far that she rebukes him for his fickleness to one
of his sham loves by denying him the customary salutation when they
meet--this salutation being the only sign of friendship she has ever
shown. it is already some few years since the first sonnet was written.
now, in a ballad containing a more direct avowal of his love than he has
yet ventured on,[42] he protests that it was always beatrice his heart
was busy with, and that to her, though his eyes may have seemed to
wander, his affection was always true. in the very next poem we find him
as if debating with himself whether he shall persevere. he weighs the
ennobling influence of a pure love and the sweetness it gives to life,
against the pains and self-denial to which it condemns its servant.
here, he tells us in his commentary, he was like a traveller who has
come to where the ways divide. his only means of escape--and he feels i
 
 ___________________________
 
t
is a poor one--is to throw himself into the arms of pity.

from internal evidence it seems reasonably certain that the marriage of
beatrice fell at the time when he describes himself as standing at the
parting of the ways. before that he has been careful to write of his
love in terms so general as to be understood only by those in possession
of the key. now he makes direct mention of her, and seeks to be in her
company; and he even leads us to infer that it was owing to his poems
that she became a well-known personage in the streets of florence.
immediately after the sonnet in which he has recourse to pity, he tells
how he was led 
 
 ___________________________
 
by a friend into the house of a lady, married only that
day, whom they find surrounded by her lady friends, met to celebrate her
home-coming after marriage. it was the fashion for young gentlemen to
offer their services at such a feast. on this occasion dante for one can
give no help. a sudden trembling seizes him; he leans for support
against the painted wall of the chamber; then, lifting his eyes to see
if the ladies have remarked his plight, he is troubled at beholding
beatrice among them, with a smile on her lips, as, leaning towards her,
they mock at her lover's weakness. to his friend, who, as he leads him
from the chamber, asks what ails him, he replies: 'my feet have reached
that point beyond which if they pass they can never return.' it was only
matrons that gathered round a bride at her home-coming; beatrice was
therefore by this time a married woman. that she was but newly married
we may infer from dante's confusion on finding her there.[43] his secret
has now
 
 ___________________________
 
 been discovered, and he must either renounce his love, or, as he
is at length free to do, beatrice being married, declare it openly, and
spend his life in loyal devotion to her as the mistress of his
imagination and of his heart.[44]

but how is he to pursue his devotion to her, and make use of his new
privilege of freer intercourse, when the very sight of her so unmans
him? he writes three sonnets explaining what may seem pusillanimity in
him, and resolves to write no more. now comes the most fruitful episode
in the history. questioned by a bevy of fair ladies what is the end of a
love like
 
 ___________________________
 
by which he shows forth the
praises of his mistress. he has now discovered that his passion is its
own reward. in other words, he has succeeded in spiritualising his love;
although to a careless reader it might seem in little need of passing
through the process. then, soon after, as he walks by a crystal brook,
he is inspired with the words which begin the noblest poem he had yet
produced,[45] and that as the author of which he is hailed by a
fellow-poet in purgatory. it is the first to glorify beatrice as one in
whom heaven is more concerned than earth; and in it, too, he anticipates
his journey through the other world. she dies,[46] and we are surprised
to find that within a year of her death he wavers in his allegiance to
her memory. a fair face, expressing a tender compassion, looks down on
him from a window as he goes nursing his great sorrow; and he loves the
owner of the face because she pities him. but seeing beatrice in a
vision he is restored, and the closing sonnet tells how his who
 
 ___________________________
 
who was often merely a creature of fancy,
set up to act as queen of beauty while the poet ran his intellectual
jousts. but dante dealt in no feigned inspiration, and distinguishes
himself from the whole school of philosophical and artificial poets as
'one who can only speak as love inspires.'[48] he may deal in allegory
and utter sayings dark enough, but the first suggestions of his thoughts
are obtained from facts of emotion or of real life. his lady was no
creature of fancy, but his neighbour beatrice portinari: and she who
ends in the _paradiso_ as the embodied beauty of holiness was, to begin
with, a fair florentine girl.

the instance of beatrice is the strongest, although others might be
adduced, to illustrate dante's economy of actual experience; the skilful
use, that is, of real emotions and incidents to serve for suggestion and
material of poetical thought. as has been told, towards the close of the
_vita nuova_ he describes how he found a temporary consolation for the
loss of beatric
 
 ___________________________
 
ir and noble lady. in his next work,
the _convito_, or _banquet_, she appears as the personification of
philosophy. the plan of the _convito_ is that of a commentary on odes
which are interpreted as having various meanings--among others the
literal as distinguished from the allegorical or essentially true. as
far as this lady is concerned, dante shows some eagerness to pass from
the literal meaning; desirous, it may be, to correct the belief that he
had ever wavered in his exclusive devotion to beatrice. that for a time
he did transfer his thoughts from beatrice in heaven to the fair lady of
the window is almost certain, and by the time he wrote the _purgatorio_
he was able to make confession of such a fault. but at the earlier
period at which the _convito_[49] was written, he may have come to
regard the avowal in the _vita nuova_ as an oversight dishonouring to
himself as well as to his first love, and so have slurred it over,
leaving the fact to stand enveloped in an allegory. at any rate, t
 
 ___________________________
 
t or tearful
lover. friends he had, and society of various kinds. he tells how in a
severe illness he was nursed by a young and noble lady, nearly related
to him by blood--his sister most probably; and other ladies are
mentioned as watching in his sick-chamber.[63] with forese and piccarda
donati, brother and sister of the great corso donati, he was on terms of
the warmest friendship.[64] from the _vita nuova_ we can gather that,
even when his whole heart fainted and failed at the mere sight of
beatrice, he was a favourite with other ladies and conversed familiarly
with them. the brother of beatrice was his dear friend; while among
those of the elder generation he could reckon on the friendship of such
men as guido cavalcanti and brunetto latini. through latini he would,
even as a young man, get the entry of the most lettered and
intellectually active society of florence. the tradition of his intimacy
with giotto is supported by the mention he makes of the painter,[65] and
by the fact, referre
 
 ___________________________
 
h that of his writings. he
who was so severe a judge of others was not, as we can infer from more
than one passage of the _comedy_, a lenient judge when his own failings
were concerned.[115] that his conduct never fell short of his standard
no one will venture to maintain. but what should have hindered him, in
his hours of weariness and when even his hold on the future seemed to
slacken, in lonely castle or strange town, to seek sympathy from some
fair woman who might remind him in something of beatrice?[116]

when, in 1316, uguccione was driven out of lucca and pisa, that great
partisan took military service with can grande. it has been disputed
whether dante had earlier enjoyed the hospitality of the scaligers, or
was indebted for his first reception in verona to the good offices of
uguccione. it is barely credible that by this time in his life he stood
in need of any one to answer for him in the court of can grande. his
fame as a political writer must have preceded him; and it was of a
char
 
 ___________________________
 
xpressly says was the
case.

[41] in this adopting a device frequently used by the love-poets of the
period.--witte, _dante-forschungen_, vol. ii. p. 312.

[42] the _vita nuova_ contains some thirty poems.

[43] see sir theodore martin's introduction to his translation of _vita
nuova_, page xxi.

[44] in this matter we must not judge the conduct of dante by english
customs.

[45] _donne, ch' avete intelletto d' amore_: ladies that are acquainted
well with love. quoted in _purg._ xxiv. 51.

[46] beatrice died in june 1290, having been born in april 1266.

[47] _purg._ xi. 98.

[48] _purg._ xxiv. 52.

[49] the date of the _convito_ is still the subject of controversy, as
is that of most of dante's works. but it certainly was composed between
the _vita nuova_ and the _comedy_.

there is a remarkable sonnet by guido cavalcanti addressed to dante,
reproaching him for the deterioration in his thoughts and habits, and
urging him to rid himself of the woman who has bred the trouble. this
may refer to 
 
 ___________________________
 
the time after the death of beatrice. see also _purg._ xxx.
124.

[50] _convito_ ii. 13.

[51] some recent writers set his marriage five years later, and reduce
the number of his children to three.

[52] his sister is probably meant by the 'young and gentle lady, most
nearly related to him by blood' mentioned in the _vita nuova_.

[53] the difference between the teutonic and southern conception of
marriage must be kept in mind.

[54] he describes the weather on the day of the battle with the
exactness of one who had been there (_p
 
 ___________________________
 
bo, vobis offero, vobis denique recommendo_.' but it may be
questioned if this involves that the cantica was already finished.

[123] as, for instance, herr scheffer-boichorst in his _aus dantes
verbannung_, 1882.

[124] the traversari (_purg._ xiv. 107). guido's wife was of the
bagnacavalli (_purg._ xiv. 115). the only mention of the polenta family,
apart from that of francesca, is at _inf._ xxvii. 41.

[125] in 1350 a sum of ten gold florins was sent from florence by the
hands of boccaccio to beatrice, daughter of dante; she being then a nun
at ravenna.

[126] the embassy to venice is mentioned by villani, and there was a
treaty concluded in 1321 between the republic and guido. but dante's
name does not appear in it among those of the envoys from ravenna. a
letter, probably apocryphal, to guido from dante in venice is dated
1314. if dante, as is maintained by some writers, was engaged in tuition
while in ravenna, it is to be feared that his pupils would find in him
an impatient master.

[127
 
 ___________________________
 
ef of dante; but how that is to be
wrought out is left to his own judgment. he might secure a partial
deliverance for his ward by conducting him up the delectable mount--the
peaceful heights familiar to himself, and which are to be won by the
practice of natural piety. he chooses the other course, of guiding dante
through the regions of the future state, where the pilgrim's trust in
the divine government will be strengthened by what he sees, and his soul
acquire a larger peace.

[179] _a soul_: beatrice.

[180] _the emperor_: the attribution of this title to god is significant
of dante's lofty conception of the empire.

[181] _'gainst his laws, etc._: virgil was a rebel only in the sense of
being ignorant of the christian revelation (_inf._ iv. 37).

[182] _saint peter's gate_: virgil has not mentioned saint peter. dante
names him as if to proclaim that it is as a christian, though under
heathen guidance, that he makes the pilgrimage. here the gate seems to
be spoken of as if it formed the ent
 
 ___________________________
 
    through all the ages, while the world hath seat;                60
  a friend of mine, with fortune for his foe,
    has met with hindrance on his desert way,
    and, terror-smitten, can no further go,
  but turns; and that he is too far astray,
    and that i rose too late for help, i dread,
    from what in heaven concerning him they say.
  go, with thy speech persuasive him bestead,
    and with all needful help his guardian prove,
    that touching him i may be comforted.
  know, it is beatrice seeks thee thus to move.                     70
    thence come i where i to return am fain:
    my coming and my plea are ruled by love.
  when i shall stand before my lord again,
    often to him i will renew thy praise."
    and here she ceased, nor did i dumb remain:
  "o virtuous lady, thou alone the race
    of man exaltest 'bove all else that dwell
    beneath the heaven which wheels in narrowest space.[193]
  to do thy bidding pleases me so well,
    though 'twere already done 'twere al
 
 ___________________________
 
hrough this burning[195] unmolested glide.
  a noble lady[196] is in heaven, who sighs
    o'er the obstruction where i'd have thee go,
    and breaks the rigid edict of the skies.
  calling on lucia,[197] thus she made her know
    what she desired: 'thy vassal[198] now hath need
    of help from thee; do thou then helpful show.'
  lucia, who hates all cruelty, in speed                           100
    rose, and approaching where i sat at rest,
    to venerable rachel[199] giving heed,
  me: 'beatrice, true praise of god,' addressed;
    'why not help him who had such love for thee,
    and from the vulgar throng to win thee pressed?
  dost thou not hear him weeping pitiably,
    nor mark the death now threatening him upon
    a flood[200] than which less awful is the sea?'
  never on earth did any ever run,
    allured by profit or impelled by fear,                         110
    swifter than i, when speaking she had done,
  from sitting 'mong the blest descended here,
    my trust upon th
 
 ___________________________
 
when it was written.

[188] _papal gown_: 'the great mantle' dante elsewhere terms it; the
emblem of the papal dignity. it was only in dante's own time that
coronation began to take the place of investiture with the mantle.

[189] _chosen vessel_: paul, who like æneas visited the other world,
though not the same region of it. throughout the poem instances drawn
from profane history, and even poetry and mythology, are given as of
authority equal to those from christian sources.

[190] _a dame_: beatrice, the heroine of the _vita nuova_, at the close
of which dante promises some day to say of her what was never yet said
of any woman. she died in 1290, aged twenty-four. in the _comedy_ she
fills different parts: she is the glorified beatrice portinari whom
dante first knew as a fair florentine girl; but she also represents
heavenly truth, or the knowledge of it--the handmaid of eternal life.
theology is too hard and technical a term to bestow on her. virgil, for
his part, represents the knowledg
 
 ___________________________
 
eason, helped by such illumination as was enjoyed by
the virtuous heathen. in other words, he is the exponent of the divine
revelation involved in the imperial system--for the empire was never far
from dante's thoughts. to him it meant the perfection of just rule, in
which due cognisance is taken of every right and of every duty. the
relation dante bears to these two is that of erring humanity struggling
to the light. virgil leads him as far as he can, and then commits him to
the holier rule of beatrice. but the poem would lose its charm if the
allegorical meaning of every passage were too closely insisted on. and,
worse than that, it cannot always be found.

[191] _dubious state_: the limbo of the virtuous heathen (canto iv.).

[192] _the star_: in the _vita nuova_ dante speaks of the star in the
singular when he means the stars.

[193] _in narrowest space_: the heaven of the moon, on the ptolemaic
system the lowest of the seven planets. below it there is only the
heaven of fire, to which all
 
 ___________________________
 
l_: saint lucy being held in special veneration by
dante; or only that he was one that sought light. the word _fedele_ may
of course, as it usually is, be read in its primary sense of 'faithful
one;' but it is old italian for vassal; and to take the reference to be
to the duty of the overlord to help his dependant in need seems to give
force to the appeal.

[199] _rachel_: symbol of the contemplative life.

[200] _a flood, etc._: 'the sea of troubles' in which dante is involved.

[201] _tears_: beatrice weeps for human misery--especially that of
dante--though unaffected by the view of the sufferings of inferno.

[202] _my guide, etc._: after hearing how virgil was moved to come,
dante accepts him not only for his guide, as he did at the close of the
first canto, but for his lord and master as well.




canto iii.


  through me to the city dolorous lies the way,
    who pass through me shall pains eternal prove,
    through me are reached the people lost for aye.
  'twas justice did my gloriou
 
 ___________________________
 
e planned.                130
    the sepulchres have more or less of heat.'[350]
    then passed we, turning to the dexter hand,[351]
  'tween torments and the lofty parapet.


footnotes:

[331] _new colour_: both have changed colour, virgil in anger and dante
in fear.

[332] _unless_: to conceal his misgiving from dante, virgil refrains
from expressing all his thought. the 'unless' may refer to what the
lying demons had told him or threatened him with; the 'proffered aid,'
to that involved in beatrice's request.

[333] _this bottom_: the lower depths of inferno. how much still lies
below him is unknown to dante.

[334] _first degree_: the limbo where virgil resides. dante by an
indirect question, seeks to learn how much experience of inferno is
possessed by his guide.

[335] _erichtho_: a thessalian sorceress, of whom lucan (_pharsalia_
vi.) tells that she evoked a shade to predict to sextus pompey the
result of the war between his father and cæsar. this happened thirty
years before the dea
 
 ___________________________
 
e made this angel mean all kind of outlandish things.

[344] _a rod_: a piece of the angelic outfit, derived from the
_caduceus_ of mercury.

[345] _cerberus_: hercules, when cerberus opposed his entrance to the
infernal regions, fastened a chain round his neck and dragged him to the
gate. the angel's speech answers dante's doubts as to the limits of
diabolical power.

[346] _by other cares, etc._: it is not in inferno that dante is to hold
converse with celestial intelligences. the angel, like beatrice when she
sought virgil in limbo, is all on fire to return to his own place.

[347] _arles_: the alyscampo (elysian fields) at arles was an enormous
cemetery, of which ruins still exist. it had a circumference of about
six miles, and contained numerous sarcophagi dating from roman times.

[348] _pola_: in istria, near the gulf of quarnaro, said to have
contained many ancient tombs.

[349] _lords of heresies_: 'heresiarchs.' dante now learns for the first
time that dis is the city of unbelief. ea
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him money he had asked for, he burst out with 'and
yet i have lost my soul for the ghibelines--if i have a soul.' he died
not earlier than 1273. after these illustrious names farinata scorns to
mention meaner ones.

[372] _ominous words_: those in which farinata foretold dante's exile.

[373] _the stages, etc._: it is cacciaguida, his ancestor, who in
paradise instructs dante in what his future life is to be--one of
poverty and exile (_parad._ xvii.). this is, however, done at the
request of beatrice.

[374] _to the middle_: turning to the left they cut across the circle
till they reach the inner boundary of the city of tombs. here there is
no wall.




canto xi.


  we at the margin of a lofty steep
    made of great shattered stones in circle bent,
    arrived where worser torments crowd the deep.
  so horrible a stench and violent
    was upward wafted from the vast abyss,[375]
    behind the cover we for shelter went
  of a great tomb where i saw written this:
    'pope anastasius[376] 
 
 ___________________________
 
, xxix. 130.

  asdente, xx. 118.

  athamas, xxx. 4.

  athens, xii. 17.

  atropos, xxxiii. 126.

  attila, xii. 134, xiii. 149.

  augustus, i. 71.

  aulis, xx. iii.

  austrian, xxxii. 25.

  avarice, i. 49.

  ---- those guilty of, vii. 25, etc.

  aventine, xxv. 26.

  averroës, iv. 144.

  avicenna, iv. 143.


  bacchiglione, xv. 113.

  bacchus, xx. 59.

  baptism, iv. 36.

  baptist, st john, xiii. 143, xxx. 74.

  barbariccia, xxi. 120, xxii. 29, 59, 145.

  barrators, xxi. xxii.

  beatrice, ii. 70, 103, x. 131, xii. 88, xv. 90.

  beccheria, abbot, xxxii. 119.

  bello, geri del, xxix. 27.

  belzebub, xxxiv. 127.

  benacus, xx. 63, etc.

  benedict, abbey of st., xvi. 100.

  bergamese, xx. 71.

  bertrand de born, xxviii. 134.

  bianchi, the party of the, vi. 65, xxiv. 150.

  bisensio, xxxii. 56.

  blacks, the party of the, vi. 65, xxiv. 143.

  blasphemy, xiv. 46, etc.

  bocca degli abati, xxxii. 106.

  bologna, xxiii. 142.

  bolognese, xviii. 58, xxiii. 104.

  bonatti