hunted on the earth again.
  observing us descend they all stood close,
    save three of them who parted from the band
    with bow, and arrows they in coming chose.                      60
  'what torment,' from afar one made demand,
    'come ye to share, who now descend the hill?
    i shoot unless ye answer whence ye stand.'
  my master said: 'we yield no answer till
    we come to chiron[404] standing at thy side;
    but thy quick temper always served thee ill.'
  then touching me: ''tis nessus;[405] he who died
    with love for beauteous dejanire possessed,
    and who himself his own vendetta plied.
  he in the middle, staring on his breast,                          70
    is mighty chiron, who achilles bred;
    and next the wrathful pholus. they invest
  the fosse and in their thousands round it tread,
    shooting whoever from the blood shall lift,
    more than his crime allows, his guilty head.'
  as we moved nearer to those creatures swift
    chiron drew forth a shaft and dr
 
 ___________________________
 
n.
  one came from where the alleluiahs roll,
    who charged me with this office strange and new:
    no robber he, nor mine a felon soul.                            90
  but, by that power which makes me to pursue
    the rugged journey whereupon i fare,
    accord us one of thine to keep in view,
  that he may show where lies the ford, and bear
    this other on his back to yonder strand;
    no spirit he, that he should cleave the air.'
  wheeled to the right then chiron gave command
    to nessus: 'turn, and lead them, and take tent
    they be not touched by any other band.'[407]
  we with our trusty escort forward went,                          100
    threading the margin of the boiling blood
    where they who seethed were raising loud lament.
  people i saw up to the chin imbrued,
    'these all are tyrants,' the great centaur said,
    'who blood and plunder for their trade pursued.
  here for their pitiless deeds tears now are shed
    by alexander,[408] and dionysius fell,
    t
 
 ___________________________
 
nferno to its base.

[402] _the river of blood_: phlegethon, the 'boiling river.' styx and
acheron have been already passed. lethe, the fourth infernal river, is
placed by dante in purgatory. the first round or circlet of the seventh
circle is filled by phlegethon.

[403] _centaurs_: as this round is the abode of such as are guilty of
violence against their neighbours, it is guarded by these brutal
monsters, half-man and half-horse.

[404] _chiron_: called the most just of the centaurs.

[405] _nessus_: slain by hercules with a poisoned arrow. when dying he
gave dejanira his blood-stained shirt, telling her it would insure the
faithfulness to her of any whom she loved. hercules wore it and died of
the venom; and thus nessus avenged himself.

[406] the natures: the part of the centaur where the equine body is
joined on to the human neck and head.

[407] _other band_: of centaurs.

[408] _alexander_: it is not known whether alexander the great or a
petty thessalian tyrant is here meant. _diony
 
 ___________________________
 
anjou. in 1271 he stabbed, in the cathedral of viterbo, henry, son of
richard of cornwall and cousin of edward i. of england. the motive of
the murder was to revenge the death of his father, simon, at evesham.
the body of the young prince was conveyed to england, and the heart was
placed in a vase upon the tomb of the confessor. the shade of guy stands
up to the chin in blood among the worst of the tyrants, and alone,
because of the enormity of his crime.

[413] _here took we passage_: dante on nessus' back. virgil has fallen
behind to allow the centaur to act as guide; and how he crosses the
stream dante does not see.

[414] _attila_: king of the huns, who invaded part of italy in the fifth
century; and who, according to the mistaken belief of dante's age, was
the devastator of florence.

[415] _pyrrhus_: king of epirus. _sextus_: son of pompey; a great
sea-captain who fought against the triumvirs. the crime of the first, in
dante's eyes, is that he fought with rome; of the second, that he

 
 ___________________________
 
opposed augustus.

[416] _rinier of corneto_: who in dante's time disturbed the coast of
the states of the church by his robberies and violence.

[417] _rinier pazzo_: of the great family of the pazzi of val d'arno,
was excommunicated in 1269 for robbing ecclesiastics.




canto xiii.


  ere nessus landed on the other shore
    we for our part within a forest[418] drew,
    which of no pathway any traces bore.
  not green the foliage, but of dusky hue;
    not smooth the boughs, but gnarled and twisted round;
    for apples, poisonous thorns upon them grew.
  no rougher brakes or matted worse are found
    where savage beasts betwixt corneto[419] roam
    and cecina,[419] abhorring cultured ground.
  the loathsome harpies[420] nestle here at home,                   10
    who from the str
 
 ___________________________
 
. 47.

  montaperti, x. 85, xxxii. 81.

  montereggione, xxxi. 40.

  montfort, guy of, xii. 119.

  montone, xvi. 94.

  moon, the, x. 80, xx. 127.

  mordred, xxxii. 61.

  morocco, xxvi. 104.

  mosca, vi. 80, xxviii. 106.

  moses, iv. 57.

  mozzi, andrea de', xv. 112.

  murderers, xii.

  myrrha, xxx. 38.


  napoleone degli alberti, xxxii. 55.

  narcissus, xxx. 128.

  nasidius, xxv. 95.

  navarre, xxii. 48.

  navarese, xxii. 121.

  neptune, xxviii 83.

  neri, vi. 65, xxiv. 143.

  nessus, xii. 67, etc., xiii. 1.

  nicholas of siena, xxix. 127.

  ---- iii., pope, xix. 31.

  nile, xxxiv. 45.

  nimrod, xxxi. 77.

  ninus, v. 59.

  nisus, i. 108.

  novarese, xxviii. 59.


  obizzo d'este, xii. 111.

  ordelaffi, xxvii. 45.

  orpheus, iv. 140.

  orsini, xix. 70.

  ovid, iv. 90, xxv. 97.


  paduans, xv. 7, xvii. 70.

  pagani, mainardo, xxvii. 50.

  palestrina, xxvii. 102.

  palladium, xxvi. 63.

  panders, xviii.

  paris, v. 67.

  pasiphaÃ«, xii. 13.

  patriarchs, iv.