-capaneus--the crimson brook--the statue of time--
  the infernal rivers,                                                98

  canto xv.

  the seventh circle continued--the violent against nature--
  brunetto latini--francesco d'accorso--andrea de' mozzi, bishop
  of florence,                                                       106

  canto xvi.

  the seventh circle continued--the violent against nature--
  guidoguerra, tegghiaio aldobrandi, and jacopo rusticucci--
  the cataract--the cord--geryon,                                    115

  canto xvii.

  the seventh circle continued--the violent against art--usurers--
  the descent on geryon's back into the eighth circle,               123

  canto xviii.

  the eighth circle, otherwise named malebolge, which consists of
  ten concentric pits or moats connected by bridges of rock--in
  these are punished those guilty of fraud of different kinds--
  first bolgia or moat, where are panders and seducers, scourged
  by demons--venedico cacci
 
 ___________________________
 
rth of the montone, now follows an
independent course to the sea, having cut a new bed for itself since
dante's time.

[492] _where for a thousand, etc._: in the monastery there was room for
many more monks, say most of the commentators; or something to the like
effect. mr. longfellow's interpretation seems better: where the height
of the fall is so great that it would divide into a thousand falls.

[493] _toward the right_: the attitude of one about to throw.

[494] _the cord_: the services of geryon are wanted to convey them down
the next reach of the pit; and as no voice could be heard for the noise
of the waterfall, and no signal be made to catch the eye amid the gloom,
virgil is obliged to call the attention of the monster by casting some
object into the depth where he lies concealed. but, since they are
surrounded by solid masonry and slack sand, one or other of them must
supply something fit to throw down; and the cord worn by dante is fixed
on as what can best be done without. there 
 
 ___________________________
 
row blue,
    and seeing shade he trembles every whit,
  i at the hearing of that order grew;
    but his threats shamed me, as before the face
    of a brave lord his man grows valorous too.                     90
  on the great shoulders then i took my place,
    and wished to say, but could not move my tongue
    as i expected: 'do thou me embrace!'
  but he, who other times had helped me 'mong
    my other perils, when ascent i made
    sustained me, and strong arms around me flung,
  and, 'geryon, set thee now in motion!' said;
    'wheel widely; let thy downward flight be slow;
    think of the novel burden on thee laid.'
  as from the shore a boat begins to go                            100
    backward at first, so now he backward pressed,
    and when he found that all was clear below,
  he turned his tail where earlier was his breast;
    and, stretching it, he moved it like an eel,
    while with his paws he drew air toward his chest.
  more terror phaëthon could hardly feel
    
 
 ___________________________
 
s i tightened, trembling more and more.
  earlier i had not by the eye discerned
    that we swept downward; scenes of torment now
    seemed drawing nearer wheresoe'er we turned.
  and as a falcon (which long time doth go
    upon the wing, not finding lure[514] or prey),
    while 'ha!' the falconer cries, 'descending so!'
  comes wearied back whence swift it soared away;                  130
    wheeling a hundred times upon the road,
    then, from its master far, sulks angrily:
  so we, by geryon in the deep bestowed,
    were 'neath the sheer-hewn precipice set down:
    he, suddenly delivered from our load,
  like arrow from the string was swiftly gone.


footnotes:

[496] _the monster_: geryon, a mythical king of spain, converted here
into the symbol of fraud, and set as the guardian demon of the eighth
circle, where the fraudulent are punished. there is nothing in the
mythology to justify this account of geryon; and it seems that dante has
created a monster to serve his purpose. boc
 
 ___________________________
 
caccio, in his _genealogy of
the gods_ (lib. i.), repeats the description of geryon given by 'dante
the florentine, in his poem written in the florentine tongue, one
certainly of no little importance among poems;' and adds that geryon
reigned in the balearic isles, and was used to decoy travellers with his
benignant countenance, caressing words, and every kind of friendly lure,
and then to murder them when asleep.

[497] _who passes mountains, etc._: neither art nor nature affords any
defence against fraud.

[498] _the bank_: not that which confines the brook but the inner limit
of the seventh circle, from which the precipice sinks sheer into the
eighth, and to which the embankment by which the travellers have crossed
the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
nd joins itself on. virgil has beckoned geryon to come to that
part of the bank which adjoins the end of the causeway.

[499] _knot and rounded shield_: emblems of subtle devices and
subterfuges.

[500]_ varied dye_: denoting the various colours of deceit.

[501] _arachne_: the lydian weaver changed into a spider by minerva. see
_purg._ xii. 43.

[502] _gluttonous germany_: the habits of the german men-at-arms in
italy, odious to the temperate italians, explains this gibe.

[503] _the right_: this is the second and last time that, in their

 
 ___________________________
 
ocky wall
it is clear that they might have kept to the embankment until they were
clear beyond the edge of the sand. we are therefore to figure to
ourselves the water as plunging down at a point some yards, perhaps the
width of the border, short of the true limit of the circle; and this is
a touch of local truth, since waterfalls in time always wear out a
funnel for themselves by eating back the precipice down which they
tumble. it was into this funnel that virgil flung the cord, and up it
that geryon was seen to ascend, as if by following up the course of the
water he would find out who had made the signal. to keep to the narrow
causeway where it ran on by the edge of this gulf would seem too full of
risk.

[505] _woful folk_: usurers; those guilty of the unnatural sin of
contemning the legitimate modes of human industry. they sit huddled up
on the sand, close to its bound of solid masonry, from which dante looks
down on them. but that the usurers are not found only at the edge of the
plain
 
 ___________________________
 
he fifth circle, the pathway down which is
described as terrible (_inf._ vii. 105). the descent into the seventh
circle is made practicable, and nothing more (_inf._ xii. i).

[512] _heaven was fired_: as still appears in the milky way. in the
_convito_, ii. 15, dante discusses the various explanations of what
causes the brightness of that part of the heavens.

[513] _a terrific roar_: of the water falling to the ground. on
beginning the descent they had left the waterfall on the left hand, but
geryon, after fetching one or more great circles, passes in front of it,
and then they have it on the right. there is no further mention of the
waters of phlegethon till they are found frozen in cocytus (_inf._
xxxii. 23). philalethes suggests that they flow under the eighth circle.

[514] _lure_: an imitation bird used in training falcons. dante
describes the sulky, slow descent of a falcon which has either lost
sight of its prey, or has failed to discover where the falconer has
thrown the lure. gery
 
 ___________________________
 
hard and high;
    into ten vales divided is the ground.
  as is the figure offered to the eye,                              10
    where numerous moats a castle's towers enclose
    that they the walls may better fortify;
  a like appearance was made here by those.
    and as, again, from threshold of such place
    many a drawbridge to the outworks goes;
  so ridges from the precipice's base
    cutting athwart the moats and barriers run,
    till at the well join the extremities.[518]
  from geryon's back when we were shaken down
    'twas here we stood, until the poet's feet                      20
    moved to the left, and i, behind, came on.
  new torments on the right mine eyes did meet
    with new tormentors, novel woe on woe;
    with which the nearer bolgia was replete.
  sinners, all naked, in the gulf below,
    this side the middle met us; while they strode
    on that side with us, but more swift did go.[519]
  even so the romans, that the mighty crowd
    across the bridge, 
 
 ___________________________
 
. 'it is
no wonder,' says villani (i. 32) 'that, being the descendants as they
are of catiline and his followers, the pistoiese have always been
ruthless and cruel to strangers and to one another.'

[651] _who down thebes' wall_: capaneus (_inf._ xiv. 63).

[652] _maremma_: see note, _inf._ xiii. 8.

[653] _cacus_: dante makes him a centaur, but virgil (_æn._ viii.) only
describes him as half human. the pool was fed with the blood of his
human victims. the herd was the spoil hercules took from geryon. in the
_æneid_ cacus defends himself from hercules by vomiting a fiery smoke;
and this doubtless suggested the dragon of the text.

[654] _his brethren_: the centaurs who guard the river of blood (_inf._
xii. 56). in fucci, as a sinner guilty of blood and violence above most
of the thieves, the centaur cacus takes a special malign interest.

[655] _our tale_: of cacus. it is interrupted by the arrival of three
sinners whom dante does not at first recognise as he gazes down on them,
but only w
 
 ___________________________
 
, merry--frati godenti, xxiii. 103.

  ---- minor, xxiii. 3.

  frisians, xxxi. 64.

  fucci, vanni, xxiv. 125.

  furies, ix. 38.


  gaddo, xxxiii. 67.

  gaeta, xxvi. 92.

  galen, iv. 143.

  galahad, v. 137.

  gallura, gomita of, xxii. 81.

  ganellone, xxxii. 122.

  garda, xx. 65.

  gardingo, xxiii. 108.

  gate of inferno, iii. 1.

  ---- st. peter, i. 134.

  gaville, xxv. 151.

  genesis, xi. 107.

  genoese, xxxiii. 151.

  geri del bello, xxix. 27.

  germany, xvii. 21, xx. 61.

  geryon, xvii. 97, etc.

  ghisola, xviii. 55.

  gianni schicchi, xxx. 32, 42.

  ---- del soldanieri, xxxii. 121.

  giants, xxxi.

  gibraltar, xxvi. 107.

  gloomy, the, vii. 118.

  gluttons, vi.

  godenti, frati, xxiii. 103.

  gomita, fra, xxii. 81.

  gorgon, ix. 56.

  gorgona, xxxiii. 82.

  governo, xx. 78.

  greece, xx. 108.

  greeks, xxvi. 75, xxx. 98, 122.

  greyhound, i. 101.

  griffolino, xxix. 109, xxx. 31.

  gualandi, xxxiii. 32.

  gualdrada, xvi. 37.

  guidi, counts, xxx. 76.