ecomes, at last, "the most modern of the moderns." "this, i am
convinced," says the danish critic, "is his imperishable glory, and will
give lasting life to his works."




ghosts

a family-drama in three acts.

(1881)


characters.

  mrs. helen alving, widow of captain alving, late chamberlain to
  the king. [note: chamberlain (kammerherre) is the only title of
  honour now existing in norway. it is a distinction conferred by the
  king on men of wealth and position, and is not hereditary.]
  oswald alving, her son, a painter.
  pastor manders.
  jacob engstrand, a carpenter.
  regina engstrand, mrs. alving's maid.

the action takes place at mrs. alving's country house, beside one of the
large fjords in western norway.




act first.

[a spacious garden-room, with one door to the left, and two doors to the
right. in the middle of the room a round table, with chairs about it. on
the table lie books, periodicals, and newspapers. in the foreground to
the left a window, and by it a small sofa, with a
 
 ___________________________
 
ather he has been to
her. no! she shall never go to him with my goodwill.

manders. [rising.] my dear lady, don't take the matter so warmly. you
sadly misjudge poor engstrand. you seem to be quite terrified--

mrs. alving. [more quietly.] it makes no difference. i have taken regina
into my house, and there she shall stay. [listens.] hush, my dear mr.
manders; say no more about it. [her face lights up with gladness.]
listen! there is oswald coming downstairs. now we'll think of no one but
him.

[oswald alving, in a light overcoat, hat in hand, and smoking a large
meerschaum, enters by the door on the left; he stops in the doorway.]

oswald. oh, i beg your pardon; i thought you were in the study. [comes
forward.] good-morning, pastor manders.

manders. [staring.] ah--! how strange--!

mrs. alving. well now, what do you think of him, mr. manders?

manders. i--i--can it really be--?

oswald. yes, it's really the prodigal son, sir.

manders. [protesting.] my dear young friend--

oswald. well, then, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 has dreamt.

oswald. no, mother, i assure you i didn't dream it. for--don't you
remember this?--you came and carried me out into the nursery. then i
was sick, and i saw that you were crying.--did father often play such
practical jokes?

manders. in his youth he overflowed with the joy of life--

oswald. and yet he managed to do so much in the world; so much that was
good and useful; although he died so early.

manders. yes, you have inherited the name of an energetic and admirable
man, my dear oswald alving. no doubt it will be an incentive to you--

oswald. it ought to, indeed.

manders. it was good of you to come home for the ceremony in his honour.

oswald. i could do no less for my father.

mrs. alving. and i am to keep him so long! that is the best of all.

manders. you are going to pass the winter at home, i hear.

oswald. my stay is indefinite, sir.-but, ah! it is good to be at home!

mrs. alving. [beaming.] yes, isn't it, dear?

manders. [looking sympathetically at him.] you went out into 
 
 ___________________________
 
t
oswald, my own boy, should inherit nothing whatever from his father.

manders. then it is alving's fortune that--?

mrs. alving. yes. the sums i have spent upon the orphanage, year by
year, make up the amount--i have reckoned it up precisely--the amount
which made lieutenant alving "a good match" in his day.

manders. i don't understand--

mrs. alving. it was my purchase-money. i do not choose that that money
should pass into oswald's hands. my son shall have everything from
me--everything.

[oswald alving enters through the second door to the right; he has taken
of his hat and overcoat in the hall.]

mrs. alving. [going towards him.] are you back again already? my dear,
dear boy!

oswald. yes. what can a fellow do out of doors in this eternal rain? but
i hear dinner is ready. that's capital!

regina. [with a parcel, from the dining-room.] a parcel has come for
you, mrs. alving. [hands it to her.]

mrs. alving. [with a glance at mr. manders.] no doubt copies of the ode
for to-morrow's ceremony.

