 into the
dialogue. do they imagine at home that i am so inexpert in the theory of
drama as not to know this? of course i know it, and act accordingly.
in no other play that i have written is the author so external to the
action, so entirely absent from it, as in this last one."

"they say," he continued, "that the book preaches nihilism. not at all.
it is not concerned to preach anything whatsoever. it merely points
to the ferment of nihilism going on under the surface, at home as
elsewhere. a pastor manders will always goad one or other mrs. alving
to revolt. and just because she is a woman, she will, when once she has
begun, go to the utmost extremes."

towards the end of january ibsen wrote from rome to olaf skavlan:
"these last weeks have brought me a wealth of experiences, lessons, and
discoveries. i, of course, foresaw that my new play would call forth a
howl from the camp of the stagnationists; and for; this i care no more
than for the barking of a pack of chained dogs. but the pusillanimity
 
 ___________________________
 
the moderns." "this, i am
convinced," says the danish critic, "is his imperishable glory, and will
give lasting life to his works."




ghosts

a family-drama in three acts.

(1881)


characters.

  mrs. helen alving, widow of captain alving, late chamberlain to
  the king. [note: chamberlain (kammerherre) is the only title of
  honour now existing in norway. it is a distinction conferred by the
  king on men of wealth and position, and is not hereditary.]
  oswald alving, her son, a painter.
  pastor manders.
  jacob engstrand, a carpenter.
  regina engstrand, mrs. alving's maid.

the action takes place at mrs. alving's country house, beside one of the
large fjords in western norway.




act first.

[a spacious garden-room, with one door to the left, and two doors to the
right. in the middle of the room a round table, with chairs about it. on
the table lie books, periodicals, and newspapers. in the foreground to
the left a window, and by it a small sofa, with a worktable in front of
it. in the back
 
 ___________________________
 
i shall have finished my work at the
school house, and then i shall take to-night's boat and be off home to
the town.

regina. [mutters.] pleasant journey to you!

engstrand. thank you, my child. to-morrow the orphanage is to be opened,
and then there'll be fine doings, no doubt, and plenty of intoxicating
drink going, you know. and nobody shall say of jacob engstrand that he
can't keep out of temptation's way.

regina. oh!

engstrand. you see, there's to be heaps of grand folks here to-morrow.
pastor manders is expected from town, too.

regina. he's coming to-day.

engstrand. there, you see! and i should be cursedly sorry if he found
out anything against me, don't you understand?

regina. oho! is that your game?

engstrand. is what my game?

regina. [looking hard at him.] what are you going to fool pastor manders
into doing, this time?

engstrand. sh! sh! are you crazy? do _i_ want to fool pastor manders? oh
no! pastor manders has been far too good a friend to me for that. but i
just wanted to say,
 
 ___________________________
 
or him.] out you go!

engstrand. [falling back.] come, come! you're not going to hit me, i
hope.

regina. yes, if you begin talking about mother i shall hit you. get away
with you, i say! [drives him back towards the garden door.] and don't
slam the doors. young mr. alving--

engstrand. he's asleep; i know. you're mightily taken up about young mr.
alving--[more softly.] oho! you don't mean to say it's him as--?

regina. be off this minute! you're crazy, i tell you! no, not that way.
there comes pastor manders. down the kitchen stairs with you.

engstrand. [towards the right.] yes, yes, i'm going. but just you talk
to him as is coming there. he's the man to tell you what a child owes
its father. for i am your father all the same, you know. i can prove it
from the church register.

[he goes out through the second door to the right, which regina has
opened, and closes again after him. regina glances hastily at herself in
the mirror, dusts herself with her pocket handkerchief; and settles her
necktie; t
 
 ___________________________
 
hen she busies herself with the flowers.]

[pastor manders, wearing an overcoat, carrying an umbrella, and with
a small travelling-bag on a strap over his shoulder, comes through the
garden door into the conservatory.]

manders. good-morning, miss engstrand.

regina. [turning round, surprised and pleased.] no, really! good
morning, pastor manders. is the steamer in already?

manders. it is just in. [enters the sitting-room.] terrible weather we
have been having lately.

regina. [follows him.] it's such blessed weather for the country, sir.

manders. no doubt; you are quite right. we townspeople give too little
thought to that. [he begins to take of his overcoat.]

regina. oh, mayn't i help you?--there! why, how wet it is? i'll just
hang it up in the hall. and your umbrella, too--i'll open it and let it
dry.

[she goes out with the thing
 
 ___________________________
 
s through the second door on the right.
pastor manders takes off his travelling bag and lays it and his hat on a
chair. meanwhile regina comes in again.]

manders. ah, it's a comfort to get safe under cover. i hope everything
is going on well here?

regina. yes, thank you, sir.

manders. you have your hands full, i suppose, in preparation for
to-morrow?

regina. yes, there's plenty to do, of course.

manders. and mrs. alving is at home, i trust?

regina. oh dear, yes. she's just upstairs, looking after the young
master's chocolate.

manders. yes, b
 
 ___________________________
 
hat oswald had
arrived.

regina. yes, he came the day before yesterday. we didn't expect him
before to-day.

manders. quite strong and well, i hope?

regina. yes, thank you, quite; but dreadfully tired with the journey. he
has made one rush right through from paris--the whole way in one train,
i believe. he's sleeping a little now, i think; so perhaps we'd better
talk a little quietly.

manders. sh!--as quietly as you please.

regina. [arranging an arm-chair beside the table.] now, do sit down,
pastor manders, and make yourself comfortable. [he sits down; she places
a footstool under his feet.] there! are you comfortable now, sir?

manders. thanks, thanks, extremely so. [looks at her.] do you know, miss
engstrand, i positively believe you have grown since i last saw you.

regina. do you think so, sir? mrs. alving says i've filled out too.

manders. filled out? well, perhaps a little; just enough.

[short pause.]

regina. shall i tell mrs. alving you are here?

manders. thanks, thanks, there is no hu
 
 ___________________________
 
ff.] tell me, mrs.
alving, how do these books come to be here?

mrs. alving. these books? they are books i am reading.

manders. do you read this sort of literature?

mrs. alving. certainly i do.

manders. do you feel better or happier for such reading?

mrs. alving. i feel, so to speak, more secure.

manders. that is strange. how do you mean?

mrs. alving. well, i seem to find explanation and confirmation of all
sorts of things i myself have been thinking. for that is the wonderful
part of it, pastor manders--there is really nothing new in these books,
nothing but what most people think and believe. only most people either
don't formulate it to themselves, or else keep quiet about it.

manders. great heavens! do you really believe that most people--?

mrs. alving. i do, indeed.

manders. but surely not in this country? not here among us?

mrs. alving. yes, certainly; here as elsewhere.

manders. well, i really must say--!

mrs. alving. for the rest, what do you object to in these books?

manders. o
 
 ___________________________
 
interest to cover the current expenses of the orphanage.

mrs. alving. thank you; but please keep it--it will be more convenient.

manders. with pleasure. i think we will leave the money in the bank for
the present. the interest is certainly not what we could wish--four per
cent. and six months' notice of withdrawal. if a good mortgage could
be found later on--of course it must be a first mortgage and an
unimpeachable security--then we could consider the matter.

mrs. alving. certainly, my dear pastor manders. you are the best judge
in these things.

manders. i will keep my eyes open at any rate.--but now there is one
thing more which i have several times been intending to ask you.

mrs. alving. and what is that?

manders. shall the orphanage buildings be insured or not?

mrs. alving. of course they must be insured.

manders. well, wait a moment, mrs. alving. let us look into the matter a
little more closely.

mrs. alving. i have everything insured; buildings and movables and stock
and crops.

mande
 
 ___________________________
 
nded partly for the benefit of the town, as well;
and it is to be hoped it will, to a considerable extent, result in
lightening our poor rates. now, as i have been your adviser, and have
had the business arrangements in my hands, i cannot but fear that i may
have to bear the brunt of fanaticism--

mrs. alving. oh, you mustn't run the risk of that.

manders. to say nothing of the attacks that would assuredly be made upon
me in certain papers and periodicals, which--

mrs. alving. enough, my dear pastor manders. that consideration is quite
decisive.

manders. then you do not wish the orphanage to be insured?

mrs. alving. no. we will let it alone.

manders. [leaning hack in his chair.] but if, now, a disaster were to
happen? one can never tell--should you be able to make good the damage?

mrs. alving. no; i tell you plainly i should do nothing of the kind.

manders. then i must tell you, mrs. alving--we are taking no small
responsibility upon ourselves.

mrs. alving. do you think we can do otherwise?

 
 ___________________________
 

manders. no, that is just the point; we really cannot do otherwise. we
ought not to expose ourselves to misinterpretation; and we have no right
whatever to give offence to the weaker brethren.

mrs. alving. you, as a clergyman, certainly should not.

manders. i really think, too, we may trust that such an institution has
fortune on its side; in fact, that it stands under a special providence.

mrs. alving. let us hope so, pastor manders.

manders. then we will let it take its chance?

mrs. alving. yes, certainly.

manders. very well. so be it. [makes a note.] then--no insurance.

mrs. alving. it's odd that you should just happen to mention the matter
to-day--

manders. i have often thought of asking you about it--

mrs. alving.--for we very nearly had a fire down there yesterday.

manders. you don't say so!

mrs. alving. oh, it was a trifling matter. a heap of shavings had caught
fire in the carpenter's workshop.

manders. whe
 
 ___________________________
 
y.] it makes no difference. i have taken regina
into my house, and there she shall stay. [listens.] hush, my dear mr.
manders; say no more about it. [her face lights up with gladness.]
listen! there is oswald coming downstairs. now we'll think of no one but
him.

[oswald alving, in a light overcoat, hat in hand, and smoking a large
meerschaum, enters by the door on the left; he stops in the doorway.]

oswald. oh, i beg your pardon; i thought you were in the study. [comes
forward.] good-morning, pastor manders.

manders. [staring.] ah--! how strange--!

mrs. alving. well now, what do you think of him, mr. manders?

manders. i--i--can it really be--?

oswald. yes, it's really the prodigal son, sir.

manders. [protesting.] my dear young friend--

oswald. well, then, the lost sheep found.

mrs. alving. oswald is thinking of the time when you were so much
opposed to his becoming a painter.

manders. to our human eyes many a step seems dubious, which afterwards
proves--[wrings his hand.] but first of all,
 
 ___________________________
 

manders. [looking sympathetically at him.] you went out into the world
early, my dear oswald.

oswald. i did. i sometimes wonder whether it wasn't too early.

mrs. alving. oh, not at all. a healthy lad is all the better for it;
especially when he's an only child. he oughtn't to hang on at home with
his mother and father, and get spoilt.

manders. that is a very disputable point, mrs. alving. a child's proper
place is, and must be, the home of his fathers.

oswald. there i quite agree with you, pastor manders.

manders. only look at your own son--there is no reason why we should not
say it in his presence--what has the consequence been for him? he is six
or seven and twenty, and has never had the opportunity of learning what
a well-ordered home really is.

oswald. i beg your pardon, pastor; there you're quite mistaken.

manders. indeed? i thought you had lived almost exclusively in artistic
circles.

oswald. so i have.

manders. and chiefly among the younger artists?

oswald. yes, certainly.

mander
 
 ___________________________
 

right.]

mrs. alving. my poor boy!

manders. you may well say so. then this is what he has come to!

[mrs. alving looks at him silently.]

manders. [walking up and down.] he called himself the prodigal son.
alas! alas!

[mrs. alving continues looking at him.]

manders. and what do you say to all this?

mrs. alving. i say that oswald was right in every word.

manders. [stands still.] right? right! in such principles?

mrs. alving. here, in my loneliness, i have come to the same way of
thinking, pastor manders. but i have never dared to say anything. well!
now my boy shall speak for me.

manders. you are greatly to be pitied, mrs. alving. but now i must speak
seriously to you. and now it is no longer your business manager and
adviser, your own and your husband's early friend, who stands before
you. it is the priest--the priest who stood before you in the moment of
your life when you had gone farthest astray.

mrs. alving. and what has the priest to say to me?

manders. i will first stir up your memor
 
 ___________________________
 
y a little. the moment is well
chosen. to-morrow will be the tenth anniversary of your husband's death.
to-morrow the memorial in his honour will be unveiled. to-morrow i shall
have to speak to the whole assembled multitude. but to-day i will speak
to you alone.

mrs. alving. very well, pastor manders. speak.

manders. do you remember that after less than a year of married life you
stood on the verge of an abyss? that you forsook your house and home?
that you fled from your husband? yes, mrs. alving--fled, fled, and
refused to return to him, however much he begged and prayed you?

mrs. alving. have you forgotten how infinitely miserable i was in that
first year?

manders. it is the very mark of the spirit of rebellion to crave for
happiness in this life. what right have we human beings to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
eople's reputation into the bargain.

mrs. alving. other people's? one other person's, you mean.

manders. it was incredibly reckless of you to seek refuge with me.

mrs. alving. with our clergyman? with our intimate friend?

manders. just on that account. yes, you may thank god that i possessed
the necessary firmness; that i succeeded in dissuading you from your
wild designs; and that it was vouchsafed me to lead you back to the path
of duty, and home to your lawful husband.

mrs. alving. yes, pastor manders, that was certainly your work.

manders. i was but a poor instrument in a higher hand. and what a
blessing has it not proved to you, all the days of your life, that i
induced you to resume the yoke of duty and obedience! did not everything
happen as i foretold? did not alving turn his back on his errors, as
a man should? did he not live with you from that time, lovingly and
blamelessly, all his days? did he not become a benefactor to the whole
district? and did he not help you to rise to his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
s. alving. you sinned greatly
against your husband;--that you recognise by raising yonder memorial to
him. recognise now, also, how you have sinned against your son--there
may yet be time to lead him back from the paths of error. turn back
yourself, and save what may yet be saved in him. for [with uplifted
forefinger] verily, mrs. alving, you are a guilt-laden mother! this i
have thought it my duty to say to you.

[silence.]

mrs. alving. [slowly and with self-control.] you have now spoken out,
pastor manders; and to-morrow you are to speak publicly in memory of my
husband. i shall not speak to-morrow. but now i will speak frankly to
you, as you have spoken to me.

manders. to be sure; you will plead excuses for your conduct--

mrs. alving. no. i will only tell you a story.

manders. well--?

mrs. alving. all that you have just said about my husband and me, and
our life after you had brought me back to the path of duty--as you
called it--about all that you know nothing from personal observation.
fro
 
 ___________________________
 
hat is meant as a
reproach, i would beg you to bear in mind--

mrs. alving.--the regard you owed to your position, yes; and that i was
a runaway wife. one can never be too cautious with such unprincipled
creatures.

manders. my dear--mrs. alving, you know that is an absurd exaggeration--

mrs. alving. well well, suppose it is. my point is that your judgment
as to my married life is founded upon nothing but common knowledge and
report.

manders. i admit that. what then?

mrs. alving. well, then, pastor manders--i will tell you the truth. i
have sworn to myself that one day you should know it--you alone!

manders. what is the truth, then?

mrs. alving. the truth is that my husband died just as dissolute as he
had lived all his days.

manders. [feeling after a chair.] what do you say?

mrs. alving. after nineteen years of marriage, as dissolute--in his
desires at any rate--as he was before you married us.

manders. and those-those wild oats--those irregularities--those
excesses, if you like--you call "
 
 ___________________________
 
'm--

regina. and dinner is ready.

mrs. alving. very well. we will come directly. i will just--[begins to
open the parcel.]

regina. [to oswald.] would mr. alving like red or white wine?

oswald. both, if you please.

regina. _bien_. very well, sir. [she goes into the dining-room.]

oswald. i may as well help to uncork it. [he also goes into the dining
room, the door of which swings half open behind him.]

mrs. alving. [who has opened the parcel.] yes, i thought so. here is the
ceremonial ode, pastor manders.

manders. [with folded hands.] with what countenance i am to deliver my
discourse to-morrow--!

mrs. alving. oh, you will get through it somehow.

manders. [softly, so as not to be heard in the dining-room.] yes; it
would not do to provoke scandal.

mrs. alving. [under her breath, but firmly.] no. but then this long,
hateful comedy will be ended. from the day after to-morrow, i shall act
in every way as though he who is dead had never lived in this house.
there shall be no one here but my boy 
 
 ___________________________
 
e moment is heard:]

regina. [sharply, but in a whisper.] oswald! take care! are you mad? let
me go!

mrs. alving. [starts in terror.] ah--!

[she stares wildly towards the half-open door. oswald is heard laughing
and humming. a bottle is uncorked.]

manders. [agitated.] what can be the matter? what is it, mrs. alving?

mrs. alving. [hoarsely.] ghosts! the couple from the conservatory--risen
again!

manders. is it possible! regina--? is she--?

mrs. alving. yes. come. not a word--!

[she seizes pastor manders by the arm, and walks unsteadily towards the
dining-room.]




act second.

[the same room. the mist still lies heavy over the landscape.]

[manders and mrs. alving enter from the dining-room.]

mrs. alving. [still in the doorway.] _velbekomme_ [note: a phrase
equivalent to the german _prosit die mahlzeit_--may good digestion wait
on appetite.], mr. manders. [turns back towards the dining-room.] aren't
you coming too, oswald?

oswald. [from within.] no, thank you. i think i shall go out a littl
 
 ___________________________
 
 for his
happiness--

manders. what? what then?

mrs. alving. but it couldn't be; for unfortunately regina is not the
right sort of woman.

manders. well, what then? what do you mean?

mrs. alving. if i weren't such a pitiful coward, i should say to him,
"marry her, or make what arrangement you please, only let us have
nothing underhand about it."

manders. merciful heavens, would you let them marry! anything so
dreadful--! so unheard of--

mrs. alving. do you really mean "unheard of"? frankly, pastor manders,
do you suppose that throughout the country there are not plenty of
married couples as closely akin as they?

manders. i don't in the least understand you.

mrs. alving. oh yes, indeed you do.

manders. ah, you are thinking of the possibility that--alas! yes, family
life is certainly not always so pure as it ought to be. but in such a
case as you point to, one can never know--at least with any certainty.
here, on the other hand--that you, a mother, can think of letting your
son--

mrs. alving. 
 
 ___________________________
 
but i cannot--i wouldn't for anything in the world; that is
precisely what i am saying.

manders. no, because you are a "coward," as you put it. but if you were
not a "coward," then--? good god! a connection so shocking!

mrs. alving. so far as that goes, they say we are all sprung from
connections of that sort. and who is it that arranged the world so,
pastor manders?

manders. questions of that kind i must decline to discuss with you, mrs.
alving; you are far from being in the right frame of mind for them. but
that you dare to call your scruples "cowardly"--!

mrs. alving. let me tell you what i mean. i am timid and faint-hearted
because of the ghosts that hang about me, and that i can never quite
shake off.

manders. what do you say hangs about you?

mrs. alving. ghosts! when i heard regina and oswald in there, it was
as though ghosts rose up before me. b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut i almost think we are all of us
ghosts, pastor manders. it is not only what we have inherited from our
father and mother that "walks" in us. it is all sorts of dead ideas,
and lifeless old beliefs, and so forth. they have no vitality, but they
cling to us all the same, and we cannot shake them off. whenever i take
up a newspaper, i seem to see ghosts gliding between the lines. there
must be ghosts all the country over, as thick as the sands of the sea.
and then we are, one and all, so pitifully afraid of the light.

manders. aha--here we have the f
 
 ___________________________
 

mrs. alving. [sighs, looks for a moment out of the window, sets the room
in order a little, and is about to go into the dining-room, but stops at
the door with a half-suppressed cry.] oswald, are you still at table?

oswald. [in the dining room.] i'm only finishing my cigar.

mrs. alving. i thought you had gone for a little walk.

oswald. in such weather as this?

[a glass clinks. mrs. alving leaves the door open, and sits down with
her knitting on the sofa by the window.]

oswald. wasn't that pastor manders that went out just now?

mrs. alving. yes; he went down to the orphanage.

oswald. h'm. [the glass and decanter clink again.]

mrs. alving. [with a troubled glance.] dear oswald, you should take care
of that liqueur. it is strong.

oswald. it keeps out the damp.

mrs. alving. wouldn't you rather come in here, to me?

oswald. i mayn't smoke in there.

mrs. alving. you know quite well you may smoke cigars.

oswald. oh, all right then; i'll come in. just a tiny drop more first.
there! [he comes in
 
 ___________________________
 
a blessing both to town and country,
as the saying goes! the newspapers won't be for handling your reverence
very gently, i expect.

manders. no; that is just what i am thinking of. that is almost the
worst of the whole matter. all the malignant attacks and imputations--!
oh, it makes me shudder to think of it!

mrs. alving. [comes in from the garden.] he is not to be persuaded to
leave the fire.

manders. ah, there you are, mrs. alving.

mrs. alving. so you have escaped your inaugural address, pastor manders.

manders. oh, i should so gladly--

mrs. alving. [in an undertone.] it is all for the best. that orphanage
would have done no one any good.

manders. do you think not?

mrs. alving. do you think it would?

manders. it is a terrible misfortune, all the same.

mrs. alving. let us speak of it plainly, as a matter of business.--are
you waiting for mr. manders, engstrand?

engstrand. [at the hall door.] that's just what i'm a-doing of, ma'am.

mrs. alving. then sit down meanwhile.

engstrand. thank
 
 ___________________________
 
him, but cannot for emotion.]

manders. [hangs his travelling-bag over his shoulder.] and now let us
set out. we two will go together.

engstrand. [at the dining-room door, softly to regina.] you come along
too, my lass. you shall live as snug as the yolk in an egg.

regina. [tosses her head.] _merci_! [she goes out into the hall and
fetches manders' overcoat.]

manders. good-bye, mrs. alving! and may the spirit of law and order
descend upon this house, and that quickly.

mrs. alving. good-bye, pastor manders. [she goes up towards the
conservatory, as she sees oswald coming in through the garden door.]

engstrand. [while he and regina help manders to get his coat on.]
good-bye, my child. and if any trouble should come to you, you know
where jacob engstrand is to be found. [softly.] little harbour street,
h'm--! [to mrs. alving and oswald.] and the refuge for wandering
mariners shall be called "chamberlain alving's home," that it shall! and
if so be as i'm spared to carry on that house in my own way,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i make so
bold as to promise that it shall be worthy of the chamberlain's memory.

manders. [in the doorway.] h'm--h'm!--come along, my dear enstrand.
good-bye! good-bye! [he and engstrand go out through the hall.]

oswald. [goes towards the table.] what house was he talking about?

mrs. alving. oh, a kind of home that he and pastor manders want to set
up.

oswald. it will burn down like the other.

mrs. alving. what makes you think so?

oswald. everything will burn. all that recalls father's memory is
doomed. here am i, too, burning down. [regina starts and looks at him.]

mrs. alving. oswald! you oughtn't to have remained so long down there,
my poor boy.

oswald. [sits down by the table.] i almost think you are right.

mrs. alving. let me dry your face, oswald; you are quite wet. [she dries
his face with her pocket-handkerchief.
 
 ___________________________
 
 the country and wear myself
out nursing sick people.

oswald. not even one who is so near to you?

regina. no, that i can't. a poor girl must make the best of her young
days, or she'll be left out in the cold before she knows where she is.
and i, too, have the joy of life in me, mrs. alving!

mrs. alving. unfortunately, you leave. but don't throw yourself away,
regina.

regina. oh, what must be, must be. if oswald takes after his father, i
take after my mother, i daresay.--may i ask, ma'am, if pastor manders
knows all this about me?

mrs. alving. pastor manders knows all about it.

regina. [busied in putting on her shawl.] well then, i'd better make
haste and get away by this steamer. the pastor is such a nice man to
deal with; and i certainly think i've as much right to a little of that
money as he has--that brute of a carpenter.

mrs. alving. you are heartily welcome to it, regina.

regina. [looks hard at her.] i think you might have brought me up as a
gentleman's daughter, ma'am; it would have s
 
 ___________________________
 
uited me better. [tosses her
head.] but pooh--what does it matter! [with a bitter side glance at the
corked bottle.] i may come to drink champagne with gentlefolks yet.

mrs. alving. and if you ever need a home, regina, come to me.

regina. no, thank you, ma'am. pastor manders will look after me, i know.
and if the worst comes to the worst, i know of one house where i've
every right to a place.

mrs. alving. where is that?

regina. "chamberlain alving's home."

mrs. alving. regina--now i see it--you are going to your ruin.

regina. oh, stuff! good-bye. [she nods and goes out through the hall.]

oswald. [stands at the window and looks out.] is she gone?

mrs. alving. yes.

oswald. [murmuring aside to himself.] i think it was a mistake, this.

mrs. alving. [goes up beh