you understand
     that my affections have been long engaged elsewhere,
     and it will not be many weeks, i believe, before
     this engagement is fulfilled.  it is with great
     regret that i obey your commands in returning the
     letters with which i have been honoured from you,
     and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly bestowed
     on me.

     "i am, dear madam,
               "your most obedient
                    "humble servant,
                                        "john willoughby."


with what indignation such a letter as this must be read by miss
dashwood, may be imagined.  though aware, before she began it, that it
must bring a confession of his inconstancy, and confirm their
separation for ever, she was not aware that such language could be
suffered to announce it; nor could she have supposed willoughby capable
of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable and
delicate feeling--so far from the common decorum of a gentleman, as to
send a letter so impude
 
 ___________________________
 
riage with miss grey.  yes, we do know it all.  this seems to have
been a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first unfolded
it to us.  mr. willoughby is unfathomable!  where did you hear it?"

"in a stationer's shop in pall mall, where i had business.  two ladies
were waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the other
an account of the intended match, in a voice so little attempting
concealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all.  the name
of willoughby, john willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing
was now finally settled respecting his marriage with miss grey--it was
no longer to be a secret--it would take place even within a few weeks,
with many particulars of preparations and other matters.  one thing,
especially, i remember, because it served to identify the man still
more:--as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to combe
magna, his seat in somersetshire.  my astonis