 dare say you are, and i am sure i do not at all wonder at it.  but
if i dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised.  mrs.
ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present--but the time may
come--how soon it will come must depend upon herself--when we may be
very intimately connected."

she looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at her companion to observe its effect on her.

"good heavens!" cried elinor, "what do you mean?  are you acquainted
with mr. robert ferrars?  can you be?" and she did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

"no," replied lucy, "not to mr. robert ferrars--i never saw him in my
life; but," fixing her eyes upon elinor, "to his eldest brother."

what felt elinor at that moment? astonishment, that would have been as
painful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attended it.  she turned towards lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and th
 
 ___________________________
 
ispleasure for a
while by owning the truth?"

"if we could be certain that it would be only for a while!  but mrs.
ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of anger
upon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to robert, and
the idea of that, for edward's sake, frightens away all my inclination
for hasty measures."

"and for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestedness
beyond reason."

lucy looked at elinor again, and was silent.

"do you know mr. robert ferrars?" asked elinor.

"not at all--i never saw him; but i fancy he is very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"a great coxcomb!" repeated miss steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in marianne's music.-- "oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, i dare say."

"no sister," cried lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are not great coxcombs."

"i can answer for it that miss dashwood's is not," said mrs. jennings,
laughing heartily; "for he is one of
 
 ___________________________
 
ained even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the
room.  in one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of
young men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases
at gray's.  she perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, and
speaking familiarly to her brother; and had just determined to find out
his name from the latter, when they both came towards her, and mr.
dashwood introduced him to her as mr. robert ferrars.

he addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head into a bow
which assured her as plainly as words could have done, that he was
exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by lucy.  happy
had it been for her, if her regard for edward had depended less on his
own merit, than on the merit of his nearest relations!  for then his
brother's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun.  but while she
wondered at the dif
 
 ___________________________
 
 any reason to
regret, my dear elinor.  there is no doubt of your doing exceedingly
well--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  has
colonel brandon been with you lately?"

elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of mr. robert ferrars.  after a few moments'
chat, john dashwood, recollecting that fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course of
life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her most
u
 
 ___________________________
 
self, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said,

"is mrs. ferrars at longstaple?"

"at longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise.-- "no, my mother
is in town."

"i meant," said elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to inquire
for mrs. edward ferrars."

she dared not look up;--but her mother and marianne both turned their
eyes on him.  he coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,--

"perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean mrs.--mrs. robert ferrars."

"mrs. robert ferrars!"--was repeated by marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though elinor could not speak,
even her eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder.  he
rose from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not
knowing what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to
pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,

"perhaps you do not know--you may not have 