, that, though his entreaties were carried to a
point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence.
his kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after he
left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from
the park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present of
game.  he insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to and
from the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction of
sending them his newspaper every day.

lady middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting her
intention of waiting on mrs. dashwood as soon as she could be assured
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced
to them the next day.

they were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearance
was favourable to their wishes.  lady middleton was not more than six
or seve
 
 ___________________________
 
her figure tall and
striking, and her address graceful.  her manners had all the elegance
which her husband's wanted.  but they would have been improved by some
share of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long enough to
detract something from their first admiration, by shewing that, though
perfectly well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say for
herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.

conversation however was not wanted, for sir john was very chatty, and
lady middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her their
eldest child, a fine little boy about six years old, by which means
there was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of
extremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, admire his beauty,
and ask him questions which his mother answered for him, while he hung
about her and held down his head, to the great surprise of her
ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as he could
make noise enough at home
 
 ___________________________
 
latter
for that of his lady.  they were scarcely ever without some friends
staying with them in the house, and they kept more company of every
kind than any other family in the neighbourhood.  it was necessary to
the happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outward
behaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want of
talent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected with
such as society produced, within a very narrow compass.  sir john was a
sportsman, lady middleton a mother.  he hunted and shot, and she
humoured her children; and these were their only resources.  lady
middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all the
year round, while sir john's independent employments were in existence
only half the time.  continual engagements at home and abroad, however,
supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education; supported the
good spirits of sir john, and gave exercise to the good breeding of his
wife.

lady middleton piqued herself u
 
 ___________________________
 
being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.  they
would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither very
young nor very gay.  he hoped they would all excuse the smallness of
the party, and could assure them it should never happen so again.  he
had been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some
addition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was full
of engagements.  luckily lady middleton's mother had arrived at barton
within the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman,
he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine.  the young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectly
satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished for
no more.

mrs. jennings, lady middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,
fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, and
rather vulgar.  she was full of jokes and
 
 ___________________________
 
bject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.  marianne was
vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards elinor
to see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gave
elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as mrs. jennings's.

colonel brandon, the friend of sir john, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than lady middleton was to be
his wife, or mrs. jennings to be lady middleton's mother.  he was
silent and grave.  his appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of marianne and margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his
address was particularly gentlemanlike.

there was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the dashwoods; but the co
 
 ___________________________
 
ld insipidity of lady middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
colonel brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of sir john and his
mother-in-law was interesting.  lady middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,
who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what related to themselves.

in the evening, as marianne was discovered to be musical, she was
invited to play.  the instrument was unlocked, every body prepared to
be charmed, and marianne, who sang very well, at their request went
through the chief of the songs which lady middleton had brought into
the family on
 
 ___________________________
 
 her marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in
the same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship had celebrated
that event by giving up music, although by her mother's account, she
had played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.

marianne's performance was highly applauded.  sir john was loud in his
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversation
with the others while every song lasted.  lady middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one's attention could be diverted
from music for a moment, and asked marianne to sing a particular song
which marianne had just finished.  colonel brandon alone, of all the
party, heard her without being in raptures.  he paid her only the
compliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him on the
occasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless
want of taste.  his pleasure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstati
 
 ___________________________
 
bers
to talk to."

"that is exactly what i think of him," cried marianne.

"do not boast of it, however," said elinor, "for it is injustice in
both of you.  he is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and
i never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him."

"that he is patronised by you," replied willoughby, "is certainly in
his favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach in
itself.  who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a
woman as lady middleton and mrs. jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?"

"but perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and marianne will
make amends for the regard of lady middleton and her mother.  if their
praise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not more
undiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"in defence of your protege you can even be saucy."

"my protege, as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense will always
have attractions for me.  yes, marianne,
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the fond attachment to norland, which she brought with
her from sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought it
possible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on her
present home.

elinor's happiness was not so great.  her heart was not so much at
ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure.  they afforded
her no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind,
nor that could teach her to think of norland with less regret than
ever.  neither lady middleton nor mrs. jennings could supply to her the
conversation she missed; although the latter was an everlasting talker,
and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her a
large share of her discourse.  she had already repeated her own history
to elinor three or four times; and had elinor's memory been equal to
her means of improvement, she might have known very early in their
acquaintance all the particulars of mr. jennings's last illness, and
what he said to his wife a few minut
 
 ___________________________
 
es before he died.  lady middleton
was more agreeable than her mother only in being more silent.  elinor
needed little observation to perceive that her reserve was a mere
calmness of manner with which sense had nothing to do.  towards her
husband and mother she was the same as to them; and intimacy was
therefore neither to be looked for nor desired.  she had nothing to say
one day that she had not said the day before.  her insipidity was
invariable, for even her spirits were always the same; and though she
did not oppose the par
 
 ___________________________
 
i know
where he is too."

"yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own house at norland to be
sure.  he is the curate of the parish i dare say."

"no, that he is not.  he is of no profession at all."

"margaret," said marianne with great warmth, "you know that all this is
an invention of your own, and that there is no such person in
existence."

"well, then, he is lately dead, marianne, for i am sure there was such
a man once, and his name begins with an f."

most grateful did elinor feel to lady middleton for observing, at this
moment, "that it rained very hard," though she believed the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to her, than from her
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as
delighted her husband and mother.  the idea however started by her, was
immediately pursued by colonel brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject of
rain by both of them.  willoughby opened the piano-forte, and aske
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the sun frequently appeared.  they were all in high spirits and
good humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to the
greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.

while they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.  among the
rest there was one for colonel brandon;--he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room.

"what is the matter with brandon?" said sir john.

nobody could tell.

"i hope he has had no bad news," said lady middleton.  "it must be
something extraordinary that could make colonel brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."

in about five minutes he returned.

"no bad news, colonel, i hope;" said mrs. jennings, as soon as he
entered the room.

"none at all, ma'am, i thank you."

"was it from avignon?  i hope it is not to say that your sister is
worse."

"no, ma'am. it came from town, and is merely a letter of business."

"but how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only a
letter of business? 
 
 ___________________________
 
 come, come, this won't do, colonel; so let us hear
the truth of it."

"my dear madam," said lady middleton, "recollect what you are saying."

"perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin fanny is married?" said
mrs. jennings, without attending to her daughter's reproof.

"no, indeed, it is not."

"well, then, i know who it is from, colonel.  and i hope she is well."

"whom do you mean, ma'am?" said he, colouring a little.

"oh! you know who i mean."

"i am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, addressing lady middleton,
"that i should receive this letter today, for it is on business which
requires my 
 
 ___________________________
 
 same, but that i shall ever
find you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will
always consider me with the kindness which has made everything
belonging to you so dear to me."

the promise was readily given, and willoughby's behaviour during the
whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness.

"shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said mrs. dashwood, when he was
leaving them.  "i do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on lady middleton."

he engaged to be with them by four o'clock.



chapter 15


mrs. dashwood's visit to lady middleton took place the next day, and
two of her daughters went with her; but marianne excused herself from
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
mother, who concluded that a promise had been made by willoughby the
night before of calling on her while they were absent, was perfectly
satisfied with her remaining at home.

on their return from the park they found willough
 
 ___________________________
 
nteresting, must be before her, must force her attention, and engross
her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.

from a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table, she was
roused one morning, soon after edward's leaving them, by the arrival of
company.  she happened to be quite alone.  the closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drew
her eyes to the window, and she saw a large party walking up to the
door.  amongst them were sir john and lady middleton and mrs. jennings,
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were quite unknown
to her.  she was sitting near the window, and as soon as sir john
perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open
the casement to speak to him, though the space was so short between the
door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at one
without being heard at the other.

"well," said he, "we have brough
 
 ___________________________
 
e brought my other son
and daughter to see you.  only think of their coming so suddenly!  i
thought i heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them.  i thought of
nothing but whether it might not be colonel brandon come back again; so
i said to sir john, i do think i hear a carriage; perhaps it is colonel
brandon come back again"--

elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; lady middleton introduced the two
strangers; mrs. dashwood and margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while mrs. jennings
continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by sir john.

mrs. palmer was several years younger than lady middleton, and totally
unlike her in every respect.  she was short and plump, had a very
pretty face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be.  her manners were by no m
 
 ___________________________
 
n't help wishing they
had not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,
for they came all round by london upon account of some business, for
you know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it was
wrong in her situation.  i wanted her to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you all!"

mrs. palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any harm.

"she expects to be confined in february," continued mrs. jennings.

lady middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, and
therefore exerted herself to ask mr. palmer if there was any news in
the paper.

"no, none at all," he replied, and read on.

"here comes marianne," cried sir john.  "now, palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty girl."

he immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and
ushered her in himself.  mrs. jennings asked her, as soon as she
appeared, if she had not been to allenham; and mrs. palmer laughed so
heartily at the question, as t
 
 ___________________________
 
how she understood it.  mr. palmer
looked up on her entering the room, stared at her some minutes, and
then returned to his newspaper.  mrs. palmer's eye was now caught by
the drawings which hung round the room.  she got up to examine them.

"oh! dear, how beautiful these are!  well! how delightful!  do but
look, mama, how sweet! i declare they are quite charming; i could look
at them for ever." and then sitting down again, she very soon forgot
that there were any such things in the room.

when lady middleton rose to go away, mr. palmer rose also, laid down
the newspaper, stretched himself and looked at them all around.

"my love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.

he made her no answer; and only observed, after again examining the
room, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked.
he then made his bow, and departed with the rest.

sir john had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at
the park.  mrs. dashwood, who did not chuse to dine with them oftene
 
 ___________________________
 
r
than they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased.  but they had no curiosity to
see how mr. and mrs. palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way.  they attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good.  but sir john would not be satisfied--the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come.  lady middleton too, though
she did not press their mother, pressed them.  mrs. jennings and mrs.
palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young ladies were obliged to yield.

"why should they ask us?" said marianne, as soon as they were gone.
"the rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us."

"they mean no less to be civil and kind to us now,
 
 ___________________________
 
l that you
should live at the cottage!  nothing can be like it, to be sure!  and i
am so glad your sister is going to be well married!  i hope you will be
a great deal at combe magna.  it is a sweet place, by all accounts."

"you have been long acquainted with colonel brandon, have not you?"

"yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.-- he was a
particular friend of sir john's. i believe," she added in a low voice,
"he would have been very glad to have had me, if he could.  sir john
and lady middleton wished it very much.  but mama did not think the
match good enough for me, otherwise sir john would have mentioned it to
the colonel, and we should have been married immediately."

"did not colonel brandon know of sir john's proposal to your mother
before it was made?  had he never owned his affection to yourself?"

"oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it, i dare say he would have
liked it of all things.  he had not seen me then above twice, for it
was before i left school.  however, i am m
 
 ___________________________
 
nd wife, before sir
john's and mrs. jennings's active zeal in the cause of society,
procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe.

in a morning's excursion to exeter, they had met with two young ladies,
whom mrs. jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be her
relations, and this was enough for sir john to invite them directly to
the park, as soon as their present engagements at exeter were over.
their engagements at exeter instantly gave way before such an
invitation, and lady middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the
return of sir john, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life, and of whose
elegance,--whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof; for
the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all.  their being her relations too made it so much the
worse; and mrs. jennings's attempts at consolation were therefore
unfortunately founded, when she advised her daughte
 
 ___________________________
 
r not to care about
their being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must put
up with one another.  as it was impossible, however, now to prevent
their coming, lady middleton resigned herself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with merely
giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times
every day.

the young ladies arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel or
unfashionable.  their dress was very smart, their manners very civil,
they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that lady
middleton's good opinion 
 
 ___________________________
 
ible
face, nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more than two or
three and twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; her features
were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, and a smartness of air,
which though it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinction
to her person.-- their manners were particularly civil, and elinor soon
allowed them credit for some kind of sense, when she saw with what
constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable
to lady middleton.  with her children they were in continual raptures,
extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring their
whims; and such of their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which this politeness made on it, was spent in admiration of
whatever her ladyship was doing, if she happened to be doing any thing,
or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in which her
appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight.
fortunately for those who pay their cour
 
 ___________________________
 
t through such foibles, a fond
mother, though, in pursuit of praise for her children, the most
rapacious of human beings, is likewise the most credulous; her demands
are exorbitant; but she will swallow any thing; and the excessive
affection and endurance of the miss steeles towards her offspring were
viewed therefore by lady middleton without the smallest surprise or
distrust.  she saw with maternal complacency all the impertinent
encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted.
she saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled about their ears, their
work-bags searched, and their knives and scissors stolen away, and felt
no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment.  it suggested no other
surprise than that elinor and marianne should sit so composedly by,
without claiming a share in what was passing.

"john
 
 ___________________________
 
ld suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little
sufferer.  she was seated in her mother's lap, covered with kisses, her
wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the miss steeles, who was
on her knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by
the other.  with such a reward for her tears, the child was too wise to
cease crying.  she still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two
brothers for offering to touch her, and all their united soothings were
ineffectual till lady middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of
similar distress last week, some apricot marmalade had been
successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerly
proposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission of
screams in the young lady on hearing it, gave them reason to hope that
it would not be rejected.-- she was carried out of the room therefore
in her mother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boys
chose to follow, though earnestly entreated by thei
 
 ___________________________
 
r mother to stay
behind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room
had not known for many hours.

"poor little creatures!" said miss steele, as soon as they were gone.
"it might have been a very sad accident."

"yet i hardly know how," cried marianne, "unless it had been under
totally different circumstances.  but this is the usual way of
heightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality."

"what a sweet woman lady middleton is!" said lucy steele.

marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon elinor therefore the whole
task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.  she did
her best when thus called on, by speaking of lady middleton with more
warmth than she felt, though with far less than miss lucy.

"and sir john too," cried the elder sister, "what a charming man he is!"

here too, miss dashwood's commendation, being only simpl
 
 ___________________________
 
ly observed that he was perfectly
good humoured and friendly.

"and what a charming little family they have!  i never saw such fine
children in my life.--i declare i quite doat upon them already, and
indeed i am always distractedly fond of children."

"i should guess so," said elinor, with a smile, "from what i have
witnessed this morning."

"i have a notion," said lucy, "you think the little middletons rather
too much indulged; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it is
so natural in lady middleton; and for my part, i love to see children
full of life and spirits; i cannot bear them if they are tame and
quiet."

"i confess," replied elinor, "that while i am at barton park, i never
think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence."

a short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by miss
steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who now
said rather abruptly, "and how do you like devonshire, miss dashwood?
i suppose you were very sorry to leave sussex."

in
 
 ___________________________
 
eton's head; and therefore very little leisure was ever given for
a general chat, and none at all for particular discourse.  they met for
the sake of eating, drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards,
or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.

one or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without affording
elinor any chance of engaging lucy in private, when sir john called at
the cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that they
would all dine with lady middleton that day, as he was obliged to
attend the club at exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone,
except her mother and the two miss steeles.  elinor, who foresaw a
fairer opening for the point she had in view, in such a party as this
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil
and well-bred direction of lady middleton than when her husband united
them together in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted the
invitation; margaret, with her mother's permission, was equall
 
 ___________________________
 
y
compliant, and marianne, though always unwilling to join any of their
parties, was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to have her
seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.

the young ladies went, and lady middleton was happily preserved from
the frightful solitude which had threatened her.  the insipidity of the
meeting was exactly such as elinor had expected; it produced not one
novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less interesting
than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room: to the latter, the children accompanied them, and while
they remained there, she was too well convinced of the impossibility of
engaging lucy's attention to attempt it.  they quitt
 
 ___________________________
 
ed it only with the
removal of the tea-things.  the card-table was then placed, and elinor
began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a hope of
finding time for conversation at the park.  they all rose up in
preparation for a round game.

"i am glad," said lady middleton to lucy, "you are not going to finish
poor little annamaria's basket this evening; for i am sure it must hurt
your eyes to work filigree by candlelight.  and we will make the dear
little love some amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and then i
hope she will not much mind it."

this hint was enough, lucy recollected herself instantly and replied,
"indeed you are very much mistaken, lady middleton; i am only waiting
to know whether you can make your party without me, or i should have
been at
 
 ___________________________
 
are very good, i hope it won't hurt your eyes--will you ring the
bell for some working candles?  my poor little girl would be sadly
disappointed, i know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for
though i told her it certainly would not, i am sure she depends upon
having it done."

lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with an
alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could taste no
greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child.

lady middleton proposed a rubber of casino to the others.  no one made
any objection but marianne, who with her usual inattention to the forms
of general civility, exclaimed, "your ladyship will have the goodness
to excuse me--you know i detest cards.  i shall go to the piano-forte;
i have not touched it since it was tuned."  and without farther
ceremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument.

lady middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that she had never made
so rude a speech.

"marianne can never
 
 ___________________________
 
that it must be
impossible i think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening.  i
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share in it."

"indeed i shall be very much obliged to you for your help," cried lucy,
"for i find there is more to be done to it than i thought there was;
and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear annamaria after
all."

"oh! that would be terrible, indeed," said miss steele-- "dear little
soul, how i do love her!"

"you are very kind," said lady middleton to elinor; "and as you really
like the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till
another rubber, or will you take your chance now?"

elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and thus by a
little of that address which marianne could never condescend to
practise, gained her own end, and pleased lady middleton at the same
time.  lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the two fair
rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with the
utm
 
 ___________________________
 
r conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

after very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted.  mrs. jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.  sir john was
delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants in
london, was something.  even lady middleton took the trouble of being
delighted, which was putting herself rather out of her way; and as for
the miss steeles, especially lucy, they had never been so happy in
their lives as this intelligence made them.

elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with
less reluctance than she had expected to feel.  with regard to herself,
it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not, and
when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and her
sister e
 
 ___________________________
 
eturn of anxiety) "it cannot be
expected to last long.  at this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it.  frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity.  in another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer--nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"

"at any rate," said elinor, wishing to prevent mrs. jennings from
seeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she did, "i dare say we
shall have sir john and lady middleton in town by the end of next week."

"ay, my dear, i'll warrant you we do.  mary always has her own way."

"and now," silently conjectured elinor, "she will write to combe by
this day's post."

but if she did, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy
which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact.  whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as elinor was from feeling thorough
contentment about it, yet while she saw marianne in spirits, she could
not be very uncomfortable herse
 
 ___________________________
 
ined; but marianne persevered,
and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in
the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
frost.

the miss dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with mrs.
jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with her
behaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind.  every thing in her
household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to lady middleton's regret, she
had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feelings of her young companions.  pleased to find
herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she had
expected, elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real
enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or
abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.

colonel brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with
th
 
 ___________________________
 
eed, marianne, i have
nothing to tell."

"nor i," answered marianne with energy, "our situations then are alike.
we have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do not
communicate, and i, because i conceal nothing."

elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she was
not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to
press for greater openness in marianne.

mrs. jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read it
aloud.  it was from lady middleton, announcing their arrival in conduit
street the night before, and requesting the company of her mother and
cousins the following evening.  business on sir john's part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in berkeley street.
the invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it was in common civility to mrs. jennings, that
they should both attend her on such a visit, elinor had some difficulty
in persuading her sister to go, for still she had
 
 ___________________________
 
 seen nothing of
willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad,
than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.

elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is not
materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled
in town, sir john had contrived to collect around him, nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse them with a ball.  this was an affair,
however, of which lady middleton did not approve.  in the country, an
unpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in london, where the
reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained, it
was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls, to have it
known that lady middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.

mr. and mrs. palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they had
not seen before since their arrival in town, as he was car
 
 ___________________________
 
s conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of colonel brandon's
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.



chapter 28


nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make elinor
regret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for willoughby
neither came nor wrote.  they were engaged about the end of that time
to attend lady middleton to a party, from which mrs. jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this party,
marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and seeming
equally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared, without one
look of hope or one expression of pleasure.  she sat by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of lady middleton's
arrival, without once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude,
lost in her own thoughts, and insensible of he
 
 ___________________________
 
r sister's presence; and
when at last they were told that lady middleton waited for them at the
door, she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected.

they arrived in due time at the place of destination, and as soon as
the string of carriages before them would allow, alighted, ascended the
stairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to another
in an audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up, quite full
of company, and insufferably hot.  when they had paid their tribute of
politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house, they
 
 ___________________________
 
 were permitted
to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat and
inconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add.  after some
time spent in saying little or doing less, lady middleton sat down to
cassino, and as marianne was not in spirits for moving about, she and
elinor luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no great
distance from the table.

they had not remained in this manner long, before elinor perceived
willoughby, standing within a few yards of them, in earnest
conversation with a very fashionable looking young woman.  she soon
caught his eye, and he immediately bowed, but without attempting to
speak to her, or to approach marianne, though he could not bu
 
 ___________________________
 
nce of composure, till she might speak to him with more
privacy and more effect, was impossible; for marianne continued
incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings,
by exclamations of wretchedness.  in a short time elinor saw willoughby
quit the room by the door towards the staircase, and telling marianne
that he was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that
evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm.  she instantly begged
her sister would entreat lady middleton to take them home, as she was
too miserable to stay a minute longer.

lady middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informed
that marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to her
wish of going away, and making over her cards to a friend, they
departed as soon the carriage could be found.  scarcely a word was
spoken during their return to berkeley street.  marianne was in a
silent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as mrs. jennings
was luckily not come ho
 
 ___________________________
 
my disappointment in having
     missed you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment
     at not having received any answer to a note which
     i sent you above a week ago.  i have been expecting
     to hear from you, and still more to see you, every
     hour of the day.  pray call again as soon as possible,
     and explain the reason of my having expected this
     in vain.  you had better come earlier another time,
     because we are generally out by one.  we were last
     night at lady middleton's, where there was a dance.
     i have been told that you were asked to be of the
     party.  but could it be so?  you must be very much
     altered indeed since we parted, if that could be
     the case, and you not there.  but i will not suppose
     this possible, and i hope very soon to receive your
     personal assurance of its being otherwise.

                                            "m.d."

the contents of her last note to him were these:--

     "what am i to imagine, willoughby
 
 ___________________________
 
s, why should i stay here? i came only for willoughby's sake--and
now who cares for me? who regards me?"

"it would be impossible to go to-morrow. we owe mrs. jennings much more
than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a
hasty removal as that."

"well then, another day or two, perhaps; but i cannot stay here long, i
cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people.
the middletons and palmers--how am i to bear their pity?  the pity of
such a woman as lady middleton!  oh, what would he say to that!"

elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she did so; but
no attitude could give her ease; and in restless pain of mind and body
she moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at
all, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance.  some lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time ti
 
 ___________________________
 
uch
that she was resolved never to mention his name again, and she should
tell everybody she saw, how good-for-nothing he was."

the rest of mrs. palmer's sympathy was shewn in procuring all the
particulars in her power of the approaching marriage, and communicating
them to elinor.  she could soon tell at what coachmaker's the new
carriage was building, by what painter mr. willoughby's portrait was
drawn, and at what warehouse miss grey's clothes might be seen.

the calm and polite unconcern of lady middleton on the occasion was a
happy relief to elinor's spirits, oppressed as they often were by the
clamorous kindness of the others.  it was a great comfort to her to be
sure of exciting no interest in one person at least among their circle
of friends: a great comfort to know that there was one who would meet
her without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety for
her sister's health.

every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of the
moment, to more than its real val
 
 ___________________________
 
ue; and she was sometimes worried down
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature.

lady middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, "it is very
shocking, indeed!" and by the means of this continual though gentle
vent, was able not only to see the miss dashwoods from the first
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at li
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and she
should certainly wait on mrs. john dashwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her.  his manners to them, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to mrs. jennings, most attentively civil; and on colonel
brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to him.

after staying with them half an hour, he asked elinor to walk with him
to conduit street, and introduce him to sir john and lady middleton.
the weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented.  as soon as
they were out of the house, his enquiries began.

"who is colonel brandon?  is he a man of fortune?"

"yes; he has very good property in dorsetshire."

"i am glad of it.  he seems a most gentlemanlike man; and i think,
elinor, i may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life."

"me, brother! what do you mean?"

"he likes you.  i observed him narrowly, and am convinced of it.  what
is the a
 
 ___________________________
 
s an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention.  he had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
colonel brandon, or a legacy from mrs. jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.

they were lucky enough to find lady middleton at home, and sir john
came in before their visit ended.  abundance of civilities passed on
all sides.  sir john was ready to like anybody, and though mr. dashwood
did not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a very
good-natured fellow: while lady middleton saw enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and mr. dashwood
went away delighted with both.

"i shall have a charming account to carry to fanny," said he, as he
walked back with his siste
 
 ___________________________
 
r.  "lady middleton is really a most elegant
woman!  such a woman as i am sure fanny will be glad to know.  and mrs.
jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter.  your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only knew that mrs. jennings was the widow of a
man who had got all his money in a low way; and fanny and mrs. ferrars
were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor 
 
 ___________________________
 
her daughters
were such kind of women as fanny would like to associate with.  but now
i can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."



chapter 34


mrs. john dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on mrs. jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy
her notice; and as for lady middleton, she found her one of the most
charming women in the world!

lady middleton was equally pleased with mrs. dashwood.  there was a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually
attracted them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

the same manners, however, which recommended mrs. john dashwood to the
good opinion of lady middleton did not suit the fancy of mrs. jennings,
and to her she appeared nothing more
 
 ___________________________
 
that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect
indifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being in
company with mrs. ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, was
as lively as ever.

the interest with which she thus anticipated the party, was soon
afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearing
that the miss steeles were also to be at it.

so well had they recommended themselves to lady middleton, so agreeable
had their assiduities made them to her, that though lucy was certainly
not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as ready as
sir john to ask them to spend a week or two in conduit street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the miss steeles, as soon as
the dashwoods' invitation was known, that their visit should begin a
few days before the party took place.

their claims to the notice of mrs. john dashwood, as the nieces of the
gentleman who for many ye
 
 ___________________________
 
ars had had the care of her brother, might not
have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her table; but
as lady middleton's guests they must be welcome; and lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view of
their characters and her own difficulties, and to have an opportunity
of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in her life,
than she was on receiving mrs. john dashwood's card.

on elinor its effect was very different.  she began immediately to
determine, that edward who lived with his mother, must be asked as his
mother was, to a party given by his sister; 
 
 ___________________________
 
alifications for being
agreeable--want of sense, either natural or improved--want of
elegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.

when the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was particularly evident, for the gentlemen had supplied the discourse
with some variety--the variety of politics, inclosing land, and
breaking horses--but then it was all over; and one subject only engaged
the ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative heights of
harry dashwood, and lady middleton's second son william, who were
nearly of the same age.

had both the children been there, the affair might have been determined
too easily by measuring them at once; but as harry only was present, it
was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over
again as often as they liked.

the parties stood thus:

the two mothers, though each really convinced that her own son was the
tallest, politely decided in
 
 ___________________________
 
uch elevated by the
civility of mrs. ferrars;--that her interest and her vanity should so
very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid her
because she was not elinor, appear a compliment to herself--or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her, because
her real situation was unknown.  but that it was so, had not only been
declared by lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over again the
next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, lady middleton
set her down in berkeley street on the chance of seeing elinor alone,
to tell her how happy she was.

the chance proved a lucky one, for a message from mrs. palmer soon
after she arrived, carried mrs. jennings away.

"my dear friend," cried lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "i
come to talk to you of my happiness.  could anything be so flattering
as mrs. ferrars's way of treating me yesterday?  so exceeding affable
as she was!--you know how i dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--but
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
e sorry to have you ill; you, that have been the greatest
comfort to me in the world!--heaven knows what i should have done
without your friendship."--

elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her own success.
but it seemed to satisfy lucy, for she directly replied,

"indeed i am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to
edward's love, it is the greatest comfort i have.--poor edward!--but
now there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for lady middleton's delighted with mrs. dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in harley street, i dare say, and edward spends half his
time with his sister--besides, lady middleton and mrs. ferrars will
visit now;--and mrs. ferrars and your sister were both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me.-- they are such
charming women!--i am sure if ever you tell your sister what i think of
her, you cannot speak too high."

but elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she shou
 
 ___________________________
 
or as she wished to
be as much as possible with charlotte, she went thither every morning as
soon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in the evening;
and the miss dashwoods, at the particular request of the middletons,
spent the whole of every day in conduit street. for their own comfort
they would much rather have remained, at least all the morning, in mrs.
jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged against the wishes
of everybody. their hours were therefore made over to lady middleton and
the two miss steeles, by whom their company, in fact was as little
valued, as it was professedly sought.

they had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former; and
by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye, as intruding on
their ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to monopolize.
though nothing could be more polite than lady middleton's behaviour to
elinor and marianne, she did not really like them at all.  because they
neither flattered herself nor her
 
 ___________________________
 
 children, she could not believe them
good-natured; and because they were fond of reading, she fancied them
satirical: perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical;
but that did not signify.  it was censure in common use, and easily
given.

their presence was a restraint both on her and on lucy.  it checked the
idleness of one, and the business of the other.  lady middleton was
ashamed of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which lucy was
proud to think of and administer at other times, she feared they would
despise her for offering.  miss steele was the least discomposed of the
three, by their presence; and it was in their power to reconcile her to
it entirely.  would either of them only have given her a full and
minute account of the whole affair between marianne and mr. willoughby,
she would have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the
b
 
 ___________________________
 
not more; and it was altogether an
attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his
father.  fanny was startled at the proposal.

"i do not see how it can be done," said she, "without affronting lady
middleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise i should be
exceedingly glad to do it.  you know i am always ready to pay them any
attention in my power, as my taking them out this evening shews.  but
they are lady middleton's visitors.  how can i ask them away from her?"

her husband, but with great humility, did not see the force of her
objection.  "they had already spent a week in this manner in conduit
street, and lady middleton could not be displeased at their giving the
same number of days to such near relations."

fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said,

"my love i would ask them with all my heart, if it was in my power.
but i had just settled within myself to ask the miss steeles to spend a
 
 ___________________________
 
on as lady
middleton could spare them.  this was enough to make lucy really and
reasonably happy.  mrs. dashwood seemed actually working for her,
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!  such
an opportunity of being with edward and his family was, above all
things, the most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feelings!  it was an advantage that could not be
too gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the
visit to lady middleton, which had not before had any precise limits,
was instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days'
time.

when the note was shown to elinor, as it was within ten minutes after
its arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some share in the
expectations of lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafed
on so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-will
towards her arose from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be brought, by time 
 
 ___________________________
 
ou see i cannot leave mrs. clarke."

it was lucky, however, for mrs. jennings's curiosity and elinor's too,
that she would tell any thing without being asked; for nothing would
otherwise have been learnt.

"i am so glad to meet you;" said miss steele, taking her familiarly by
the arm--"for i wanted to see you of all things in the world."  and
then lowering her voice, "i suppose mrs. jennings has heard all about
it.  is she angry?"

"not at all, i believe, with you."

"that is a good thing.  and lady middleton, is she angry?"

"i cannot suppose it possible that she should be."

"i am monstrous glad of it.  good gracious!  i have had such a time of
it!  i never saw lucy in such a rage in my life.  she vowed at first
she would never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me
again, so long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we are
as good friends as ever.  look, she made me this bow to my hat, and put
in the feather last night.  there now, you are going to laugh at me
too.  but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ady."

miss steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach of
her own party made another more necessary.

"oh, la! here come the richardsons.  i had a vast deal more to say to
you, but i must not stay away from them not any longer.  i assure you
they are very genteel people.  he makes a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach.  i have not time to speak to mrs. jennings
about it myself, but pray tell her i am quite happy to hear she is not
in anger against us, and lady middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sister away, and mrs. jennings
should want company, i am sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with her for as long a time as she likes.  i suppose lady middleton
won't ask us any more this bout.  good-by; i am sorry miss marianne was
not here.  remember me kindly to her.  la! if you have not got your
spotted muslin on!--i wonder you was not afraid of its being torn."

such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time 
 
 ___________________________
 
r. palmer, or any friend that may be able to
     assist us.--poor anne was much to blame for what
     she did, but she did it for the best, so i say
     nothing; hope mrs. jennings won't think it too much
     trouble to give us a call, should she come this way
     any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my
     cousins would be proud to know her.--my paper reminds
     me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully
     and respectfully remembered to her, and to sir john,
     and lady middleton, and the dear children, when you
     chance to see them, and love to miss marianne,

                                      "i am, &c."

as soon as elinor had finished it, she performed what she concluded to
be its writer's real design, by placing it in the hands of mrs.
jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and
praise.

"very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye, that was quite
proper to let him be off if he would.  that was just like lucy.--poor
soul! i wish i 
 
 ___________________________
 
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner.  she had
depended on a twilight walk to the grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred
her from it; but a heavy and settled rain even she could not fancy dry
or pleasant weather for walking.

their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.  mrs. palmer
had her child, and mrs. jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged lady middleton's engagements,
and wondered whether mr. palmer and colonel brandon would get farther
than reading that night.  elinor, however little concerned in it,
joined in their discourse; and marianne, who had the knack of finding
her way in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by
the family in general, soon procured herself a book.

nothing was wanting on mrs. palmer's side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome.  the
openness and heartin