to give still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of mrs. dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at norland.

this circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of mrs. john dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there.

some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother.  but mrs. dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration.  it was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that elinor returned the partiality.
it was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were
 
 ___________________________
 
 attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

edward ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any
peculiar graces of person or address.  he was not handsome, and his
manners required intimacy to make them pleasing.  he was too diffident
to do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,
his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.
his understanding was good, and his education had given it solid
improvement.  but he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to
answer the wishes of his mother and s
 
 ___________________________
 
t is invariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."

"had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised him
half so much.  confess, marianne, is not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

soon after this, upon elinor's leaving the room, "mama," said
marianne, "i have an alarm on the subject of illness which i cannot
conceal from you.  i am sure edward ferrars is not well.  we have now
been here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  nothing but
real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.  what else
can detain him at norland?"

"had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said mrs. dashwood.  "i had
none.  on the contrary, if i have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when i talked of his
coming to barton.  does e
 
 ___________________________
 
elinor, to screen marianne from
particularity, as she felt almost certain of its not being willoughby,
quickened her pace and kept up with her.  they were soon within thirty
yards of the gentleman.  marianne looked again; her heart sunk within
her; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back, when the voices
of both her sisters were raised to detain her; a third, almost as well
known as willoughby's, joined them in begging her to stop, and she
turned round with surprise to see and welcome edward ferrars.

he was the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgiven for not being willoughby; the only one who could have gained a
smile from her; but she dispersed her tears to smile on him, and in her
sister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.

he dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant, walked back with
them to barton, whither he was purposely coming to visit them.

he was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially by
marianne, who showed more
 
 ___________________________
 
ing a woman sincerely attached to him."

"certainly," answered elinor, without knowing what she said; but after
a moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"engaged to mr. edward
ferrars!--i confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really--i beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name.  we cannot mean the same mr. ferrars."

"we can mean no other," cried lucy, smiling.  "mr. edward ferrars, the
eldest son of mrs. ferrars, of park street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, mrs. john dashwood, is the person i mean; you must allow
that i am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depends."

"it is strange," replied elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that i
should never have heard him even mention your name."

"no; considering our situation, it was not strange.  our first care has
been to keep the matter secret.-- you knew nothing of me, or my 
 
 ___________________________
 
ice, miss dashwood?"

"no," answered elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, "on such a subject i certainly will not.  you know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

"indeed you wrong me," replied lucy, with great solemnity; "i know
nobody of whose judgment i think so highly as i do of yours; and i do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, 'i advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with edward ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,' i should resolve upon doing it
immediately."

elinor blushed for the insincerity of edward's future wife, and
replied, "this compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any
opinion on the subject had i formed one.  it raises my influence much
too high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too
much for an indifferent person."

"'tis because you are an indifferent person," said lucy, with some
pique, and laying a par
 
 ___________________________
 
anners of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty in
persuading marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would go
likewise, as she did not think it proper that marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that mrs. jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours.  to this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that edward ferrars, by lucy's account, was
not to be in town before february; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"i will have you both go," said mrs. dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical.  you will have much pleasure in being in london, and
especially in being together; and if elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with 
 
 ___________________________
 
her sister-in-law's family."

elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her
mother's dependence on the attachment of edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to begin
her design by saying, as calmly as she could, "i like edward ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether i am
ever known to them or not."

mrs. dashwood smiled, and said nothing.  marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

after very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted.  mrs. jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, an
 
 ___________________________
 
ds are all truly anxious to see you well settled; fanny
particularly, for she has your interest very much at heart, i assure
you.  and her mother too, mrs. ferrars, a very good-natured woman, i am
sure it would give her great pleasure; she said as much the other day."

elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"it would be something remarkable, now," he continued, "something
droll, if fanny should have a brother and i a sister settling at the
same time.  and yet it is not very unlikely."

"is mr. edward ferrars," said elinor, with resolution, "going to be
married?"

"it is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation.
he has a most excellent mother.  mrs. ferrars, with the utmost
liberality, will come forward, and settle on him a thousand a year, if
the match takes place.  the lady is the hon. miss morton, only daughter
of the late lord morton, with thirty thousand pounds.  a very desirable
connection on both sides, and i have not a doubt of its taking place in
time.  a thousand a-year
 
 ___________________________
 
thing or other, and at last he said in a whisper, 'for fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, i think it advisable to say, that i
believe there is no great reason for alarm; i hope mrs. dashwood will
do very well.'"

"what! is fanny ill?"

"that is exactly what i said, my dear.  'lord!' says i, 'is mrs.
dashwood ill?' so then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all i can learn, seems to be this.  mr. edward ferrars,
the very young man i used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, i am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), mr.
edward ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
cousin lucy!--there's for you, my dear!--and not a creature knowing a
syllable of the matter, except nancy!--could you have believed such a
thing possible?-- there is no great wonder in their liking one another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobody
suspe
 
 ___________________________
 
on, a very
awful pause took place.  it was put an end to by mrs. dashwood, who
felt obliged to hope that he had left mrs. ferrars very well.  in a
hurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.

another pause.

elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said,

"is mrs. ferrars at longstaple?"

"at longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise.-- "no, my mother
is in town."

"i meant," said elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to inquire
for mrs. edward ferrars."

she dared not look up;--but her mother and marianne both turned their
eyes on him.  he coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,--

"perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean mrs.--mrs. robert ferrars."

"mrs. robert ferrars!"--was repeated by marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though elinor could not speak,
even her eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder.  he
rose from his seat, and walked to the window, appa