
sense and sensibility

by jane austen

(1811)




chapter 1


the family of dashwood had long been settled in sussex.  their estate
was large, and their residence was at norland park, in the centre of
their property, where, for many generations, they had lived in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surrounding acquaintance.  the late owner of this estate was a single
man, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.  but her
death, which happened ten years before 
 
 ___________________________
 
his own, produced a great
alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and received
into his house the family of his nephew mr. henry dashwood, the legal
inheritor of the norland estate, and the person to whom he intended to
bequeath it.  in the society of his nephew and niece, and their
children, the old gentleman's days were comfortably spent.  his
attachment to them all increased.  the constant attention of mr. and
mrs. henry dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a relish to his existence.

by a former marriage, mr. henry dashwood had one son: by his present
lady, three daughters.  the son, a steady respectable young man, was
amply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.  by his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
r mother had nothing, and their
father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for the
remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to her
child, and he had only a life-interest in it.

the old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every other
will, gave as much disappointment as pleasure.  he was neither so
unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;--but
he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest.  mr. dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wife
and daughters than for himself or his son;--but to his son, and his
son's son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, as
to leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dear
to him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, or
by any sale of its valuable woods.  the whole was tied up for the
benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his father and
mother at norland, had so far gai
 
 ___________________________
 
ned on the affections of his uncle, by
such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three
years old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having his
own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh
all the value of all the attention which, for years, he had received
from his niece and her daughters.  he meant not to be unkind, however,
and, as a mark of his affection for the three girls, he left them a
thousand pounds a-piece.

mr. dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper was
cheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many years,
and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produce
of an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement.  but the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was
his only one twelvemonth.  he survived his uncle no longer; and ten
thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained for
his widow and daughters.

h
 
 ___________________________
 
is son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him mr.
dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.

mr. john dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the
family; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to make
them comfortable.  his father was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and mr. john dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in his power to do for them.

he was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, well
respected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties.  had he married a more amiable woman, he might
have been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even have
been made amiable himself; for he was very young when 
 
 ___________________________
 
he married, and
very fond of his wife.  but mrs. john dashwood was a strong caricature
of himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.

when he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself to
increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand
pounds a-piece.  he then really thought himself equal to it.  the
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed his
heart, and made him feel capable of generosity.-- "yes, he would give
them three thousand 
 
 ___________________________
 
pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! it would
be enough to make them completely easy.  three thousand pounds! he
could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- he
thought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he did
not repent.

no sooner was his father's funeral over, than mrs. john dashwood,
without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,
arrived with her child and their attendants.  no one could dispute her
right to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of his
father's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater, and to a woman in mrs. dashwood's situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in her mind there was
a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of
the kind, by 
 
 ___________________________
 
whomsoever given or received, was to her a source of
immovable disgust.  mrs. john dashwood had never been a favourite with
any of her husband's family; but she had had no opportunity, till the
present, of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of
other people she could act when occasion required it.

so acutely did mrs. dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, had
not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the
propriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three children
determined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach
with their brother.

elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possessed
a strength of unde
 
 ___________________________
 
rstanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualified
her, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and
enabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,
that eagerness of mind in mrs. dashwood which must generally have led
to imprudence.  she had an excellent heart;--her disposition was
affectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and which
one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.

marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to elinor's.
she was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, her
joys, could have no moderation.  she was generous, amiable,
interesti
 
 ___________________________
 
ng: she was everything but prudent.  the resemblance between
her and her mother was strikingly great.

elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; but
by mrs. dashwood it was valued and cherished.  they encouraged each
other now in the violence of their affliction.  the agony of grief
which overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was sought
for, was created again and again.  they gave themselves up wholly to
their sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that
could afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation in
future.  elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she could
struggle, she could exert herself.  she
 
 ___________________________
 
ould consult with her brother,
could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her with
proper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar
exertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.

margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; but
as she had already imbibed a good deal of marianne's romance, without
having much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sisters at a more advanced period of life.



chapter 2


mrs. john dashwood now installed herself mistress of norland; and her
mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.
as such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and by
her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody
beyond himself, his wife, and their child.  he really pressed them,
with some earnestness, to consider norland as their home; and, as no
plan appeared so eligible to mrs. dashwood as remaining there till she
could accommodate herself with a
 
 ___________________________
 
 house in the neighbourhood, his
invitation was accepted.

a continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former
delight, was exactly what suited her mind.  in seasons of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness
itself.  but in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.

mrs. john dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended
to do for his sisters.  to take three thousand pounds from the fortune
of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree.  she begged him to think again on the subject.  how
could he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,
of so large a sum?  and what possible claim could the miss dashwoods,
who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as no
relationship at all, have on h
 
 ___________________________
 
herefore, i do not know whether, upon the
whole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother
while she lives, rather than for them--something of the annuity kind i
mean.--my sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself.
a hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."

his wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to this
plan.

"to be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with fifteen hundred
pounds at once.  but, then, if mrs. dashwood should live fifteen years
we shall be completely taken in."

"fifteen years! my dear fanny; her life cannot be worth half that
purchase."

"certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever when
there is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and healthy,
and hardly forty.  an annuity is a very serious business; it comes over
and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.  you are not
aware of what you are doing.  i have known a great deal of the trouble
of annu
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and afterwards it turned out to be
no such thing.  my mother was quite sick of it.  her income was not her
own, she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the more
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have been
entirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever.  it
has given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that i am sure i would
not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world."

"it is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied mr. dashwood, "to have
those kind of yearly drains on one's income.  one's fortune, as your
mother justly says, is not one's own.  to be tied down to the regular
payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: it
takes away one's independence."

"undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.  they think
themselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raises
no gratitude at all.  if i were you, whatever i did should be done at
my own discretion entirely.  i would n
 
 ___________________________
 
 that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at
all.  the assistance he thought of, i dare say, was only such as might
be reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for a
comfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,
and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever they
are in season.  i'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,
it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.  do but consider,
my dear mr. dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law
and her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,
besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, which
brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they will
pay their mother for their board out of it.  altogether, they will have
five hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four women want
for more than that?--they will live so cheap! their housekeeping will
be nothing at all.  they will ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve no carriage, no horses, and hardly
any servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses of
any kind!  only conceive how comfortable they will be!  five hundred a
year! i am sure i cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as
to your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it.  they will
be much more able to give you something."

"upon my word," said mr. dashwood, "i believe you are perfectly right.
my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than
what you say.  i clearly understand it now, and i will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you
have described.  when my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as i can.  some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then."

"certainly," returned mrs. john dashwood.  "but, however, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t you owe no
particular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we very
well know that if he could, he would have left almost everything in the
world to them."

this argument was irresistible.  it gave to his intentions whatever of
decision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would be
absolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for the
widow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts as
his own wife pointed out.



chapter 3


mrs. dashwood remained at norland several months; not from any
disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased
to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for when
her spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy
remembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of norland; for
to remove far from that beloved spot 
 
 ___________________________
 
was impossible.  but she could
hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and
ease, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadier
judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income, which
her mother would have approved.

mrs. dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise on
the part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his last
earthly reflections.  she doubted the sincerity of this assurance no
more than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for her
daughters' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she was
persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000l would support her in
affluence.  for their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his own
heart, she rejoiced; and she repr
 
 ___________________________
 
mpt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt for
her daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledge
of her character, which half a year's residence in her family afforded;
and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found it
impossible to have lived together so long, had not a particular
circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of mrs. dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at norland.

this circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of mrs. john dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there.

some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some m
 
 ___________________________
 
ight have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother.  but mrs. dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration.  it was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that elinor returned the partiality.
it was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

edward ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by a
 
 ___________________________
 
ted with some of the great men of the day.  mrs. john
dashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of these
superior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted her
ambition to see him driving a barouche.  but edward had no turn for
great men or barouches.  all his wishes centered in domestic comfort
and the quiet of private life.  fortunately he had a younger brother
who was more promising.

edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged
much of mrs. dashwood's attention; for she was, at that time, in such
affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects.  she saw
only that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.  he
did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation.
she was first called to observe and approve him farther, by a
reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference
between him and his sister.  it was a contrast which recommended him
most forcibly to her mother.

"it is enough
 
 ___________________________
 
," said she; "to say that he is unlike fanny is enough.
it implies everything amiable.  i love him already."

"i think you will like him," said elinor, "when you know more of him."

"like him!" replied her mother with a smile.  "i feel no sentiment of
approbation inferior to love."

"you may esteem him."

"i have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."

mrs. dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.  her manners
were attaching, and soon banished his reserve.  she speedily
comprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for elinor
perhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of his
worth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against all
her established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was no
longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper
affectionate.

no sooner did sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e
than friendship.

but, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceived
by his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time, (which was
still more common,) to make her uncivil.  she took the first
opportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to
her so expressively of her brother's great expectations, of mrs.
ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of the
danger attending any young woman who attempted to draw him in; that
mrs. dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to
be calm.  she gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and
instantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be the
inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved elinor
should not be exposed another week to such insinuations.

in this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from the
post, which contained a proposal particularly well timed.  it was the
offer of a small house, on very easy terms, belong
 
 ___________________________
 
her's intention of removing into devonshire.  the house, too, as
described by sir john, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so
uncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on either
point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charm
to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of norland
beyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from
sending a letter of acquiescence.



chapter 5


no sooner was her answer dispatched, than mrs. dashwood indulged herself
in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that she
was provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer than till
every thing were ready for her inhabiting it. they heard her with
surprise. mrs. john dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly hoped
that she would not be settled far from norland. she had great
satisfaction in replying that she was going into devonshire.--edward
turned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surpr
 
 ___________________________
 
d no explanation to her, repeated,
"devonshire! are you, indeed, going there? so far from hence! and to
what part of it?" she explained the situation. it was within four miles
northward of exeter.

"it is but a cottage," she continued, "but i hope to see many of my
friends in it.  a room or two can easily be added; and if my friends
find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, i am sure i will
find none in accommodating them."

she concluded with a very kind invitation to mr. and mrs. john dashwood
to visit her at barton; and to edward she gave one with still greater
affection.  though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had
made her resolve on remaining at norland no longer than was
unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that
point to which it principally tended.  to separate edward and elinor
was as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show mrs.
john dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totally
she disregarded her di
 
 ___________________________
 
sapprobation of the match.

mr. john dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry
he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from norland as to
prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture.  he
really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very
exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his
father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.-- the furniture
was all sent around by water.  it chiefly consisted of household linen,
plate, china, and books,
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a handsome pianoforte of marianne's.
mrs. john dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could not
help feeling it hard that as mrs. dashwood's income would be so
trifling in comparison with their own, she should have any handsome
article of furniture.

mrs. dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,
and she might have immediate possession.  no difficulty arose on either
side in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of her
effects at norland, and to determine her future household, before she
set off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in the
performance of everything that interested her, was soon done.--the
horses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after his
death, and an opportunity 
 
 ___________________________
 
  for the comfort of her children, had she consulted only her
own wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of elinor
prevailed.  her wisdom too limited the number of their servants to
three; two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily provided from
amongst those who had formed their establishment at norland.

the man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into devonshire,
to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as lady
middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood, she preferred going
directly to the cottage to being a visitor at barton park; and she
relied so undoubtingly on sir john's description of the house, as to
feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own.
her eagerness to be gone from norland was preserved from diminution by
the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her
removal; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealed
under a cold invitation to her to defer her departure.  n
 
 ___________________________
 
ow was the
time when her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particular
propriety be fulfilled.  since he had neglected to do it on first
coming to the estate, their quitting his house might be looked on as
the most suitable period for its accomplishment.  but mrs. dashwood
began shortly to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced,
from the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extended
no farther than their maintenance for six months at norland.  he so
frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of
the perpetual demands upon his purse, which a man of any consequence in
the world was beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather to
stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of giving
money aw
 
 ___________________________
 
ay.

in a very few weeks from the day which brought sir john middleton's
first letter to norland, every thing was so far settled in their future
abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters to begin their
journey.

many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved.  "dear, dear norland!" said marianne, as she wandered
alone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; "when
shall i cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--oh!
happy house, could you know what i suffer in now viewing you from this
spot, from whence perhaps i may view you no more!--and you, ye
well-known trees!--but you will continue t
 
 ___________________________
 
en
downs, the others cultivated and woody.  the village of barton was
chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the
cottage windows.  the prospect in front was more extensive; it
commanded the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond.
the hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in that
direction; under another name, and in another course, it branched out
again between two of the steepest of them.

with the size and furniture of the house mrs. dashwood was upon the
whole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered many
additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was a
delight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to supply
all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments.  "as for the
house itself, to be sure," said she, "it is too small for our family,
but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as it
is too late in the year for improvements.  perhaps in the spri
 
 ___________________________
 
uld not give offence.
his kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after he
left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from
the park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present of
game.  he insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to and
from the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction of
sending them his newspaper every day.

lady middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting her
intention of waiting on mrs. dashwood as soon as she could be assured
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced
to them the next day.

they were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearance
was favourable to their wishes.  lady middleton was not more than six
or seven and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall and
striking, and her address gracef
 
 ___________________________
 
t surprise of her
ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as he could
make noise enough at home.  on every formal visit a child ought to be
of the party, by way of provision for discourse.  in the present case
it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like his
father or mother, and in what particular he resembled either, for of
course every body differed, and every body was astonished at the
opinion of the others.

an opportunity was soon to be given to the dashwoods of debating on the
rest of the children, as sir john would not leave the house without
securing their promise of dining at the park the next day.



chapter 7


barton park was about half a mile from the cottage.  the ladies had
passed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened from
their view at home by the projection of a hill.  the house was large
and handsome; and the middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality
and elegance.  the former was for sir john's gratification
 
 ___________________________
 
he pleased.  he was a blessing to all the
juvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for ever
forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in winter
his private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who was not
suffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.

the arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy
to him, and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitants
he had now procured for his cottage at barton.  the miss dashwoods were
young, pretty, and unaffected.  it was enough to secure his good
opinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to
make her mind as captivating as her person.  the friendliness of his
disposition made him happy in accommodating those, whose situation
might be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.  in
showing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfaction
of a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in his
cottage, he had
 
 ___________________________
 
 all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,
though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise, is
not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a
residence within his own manor.

mrs. dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house by
sir john, who welcomed them to barton park with unaffected sincerity;
and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young
ladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the day
before, at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.  they
would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither very
young nor very gay.  he hoped th
 
 ___________________________
 
d, than lady middleton was to be
his wife, or mrs. jennings to be lady middleton's mother.  he was
silent and grave.  his appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of marianne and margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his
address was particularly gentlemanlike.

there was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of lady middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
colonel brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of sir john and his
mother-in-law was interesting.  lady middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,
who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what related to themselves.

in the evening, as marianne was discovered to be musical,
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst them both.  at the park she
laughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at marianne.  to the former
her raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at first
incomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knew
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.

mrs. dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of
her daughter, ventured to clear mrs. jennings from the probability of
wishing to throw ridicule on his age.

"but at least, mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured.  colonel brandon
is certainly younger than mrs. jennings, but he is old enough to be my
father; and if he were ever animated enough to be in l
 
 ___________________________
 
eresting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

soon after this, upon elinor's leaving the room, "mama," said
marianne, "i have an alarm on the subject of illness which i cannot
conceal from you.  i am sure edward ferrars is not well.  we have now
been here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  nothing but
real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.  what else
can detain him at norland?"

"had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said mrs. dashwood.  "i had
none.  on the contrary, if i have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when i talked of his
coming to barton.  does elinor expect him already?"

"i have never mentioned it to her, but of course she must."

"i rather think you are mistaken, for when i was talking to her
yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber, she observed
that there was no immediate hur
 
 ___________________________
 
ewell there was no
distinction between elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an
affectionate brother to both.  twice did i leave them purposely
together in the course of the last morning, and each time did he most
unaccountably follow me out of the room.  and elinor, in quitting
norland and edward, cried not as i did.  even now her self-command is
invariable.  when is she dejected or melancholy? when does she try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"



chapter 9


the dashwoods were now settled at barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves.  the house and the garden, with all the objects surrounding
them, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which had
given to norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than norland had been able to afford, since the loss of their
father.  sir john middleton, who called on them every day for the first
fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at
home, could not conc
 
 ___________________________
 
eal his amazement on finding them always employed.

their visitors, except those from barton park, were not many; for, in
spite of sir john's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at
their service, the independence of mrs. dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining to
visit any family beyond the distance of a walk.  there were but few who
could be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable.
about a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of allenham, which issued from that of barton, as formerly
described, the girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an
ancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding the
 
 ___________________________
 
er in a chair in the parlour.

elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and while
the eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secret
admiration which equally sprung from his appearance, he apologized for
his intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank and so
graceful that his person, which was uncommonly handsome, received
additional charms from his voice and expression.  had he been even old,
ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of mrs. dashwood would
have been secured by any act of attention to her child; but the
influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to the
action which came home to her feelings.

she thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetness of address which
always attended her, invited him to be seated.  but this he declined,
as he was dirty and wet.  mrs. dashwood then begged to know to whom she
was obliged.  his name, he replied, was willoughby, and his present
home was at allenham, from whence he hop
 
 ___________________________
 
ed she would allow him the
honour of calling tomorrow to enquire after miss dashwood.  the honour
was readily granted, and he then departed, to make himself still more
interesting, in the midst of a heavy rain.

his manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the
theme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raised
against marianne received particular spirit from his exterior
attractions.-- marianne herself had seen less of his mama the
rest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting
her up, had robbed her of the power of
 
 ___________________________
 
s were pleasant, and the pain of a
sprained ankle was disregarded.

sir john called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weather
that morning allowed him to get out of doors; and marianne's accident
being related to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew any
gentleman of the name of willoughby at allenham.

"willoughby!" cried sir john; "what, is he in the country? that is good
news however; i will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on
thursday."

"you know him then," said mrs. dashwood.

"know him! to be sure i do.  why, he is down here every year."

"and what sort of a young man is he?"

"as good a kind of fellow as ever lived, i assure you.  a very decent
shot, and there is not a bolder rider in england."

"and is that all you can say for him?" cried marianne, indignantly.
"but what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance? what his
pursuits, his talents, and genius?"

sir john was rather puzzled.

"upon my soul," said he, "i do not know much about him as to all that.

 
 ___________________________
 
than he could describe to her the shades of his
mind.

"but who is he?" said elinor.  "where does he come from?  has he a
house at allenham?"

on this point sir john could give more certain intelligence; and he
told them that mr. willoughby had no property of his own in the
country; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old lady
at allenham court, to whom he was related, and whose possessions he was
to inherit; adding, "yes, yes, he is very well worth catching i can
tell you, miss dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own in
somersetshire besides; and if i were you, i would not give him up to my
younger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills.  miss
marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself.  brandon will
be jealous, if she does not take care."

"i do not believe," said mrs. dashwood, with a good humoured smile,
"that mr. willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of my
daughters towards what you call catching him.  it is not an employ
 
 ___________________________
 
ut he laughed as
heartily as if he did, and then replied,

"ay, you will make conquests enough, i dare say, one way or other.
poor brandon! he is quite smitten already, and he is very well worth
setting your cap at, i can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling
about and spraining of ankles."



chapter 10


marianne's preserver, as margaret, with more elegance than precision,
styled willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to make
his personal enquiries.  he was received by mrs. dashwood with more
than politeness; with a kindness which sir john's account of him and
her own gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during the
visit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,
and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced
him.  of their personal charms he had not required a second interview
to be convinced.

miss dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and a
remarkably pretty figure.  marianne was still handsomer.  he
 
 ___________________________
 
xactly formed to engage marianne's heart, for with all this, he joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind which was
now roused and increased by the example of her own, and which
recommended him to her affection beyond every thing else.

his society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.  they read,
they talked, they sang together; his musical talents were considerable;
and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which edward had
unfortunately wanted.

in mrs. dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in marianne's; and
elinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity, in which he
strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying too
much what he thought on every occasion, without attention to persons or
circumstances.  in hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
people, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided
attention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily the
forms of worldly propriet
 
 ___________________________
 
, "that he has neither genius, taste, nor
spirit.  that his understanding has no brilliancy, his feelings no
ardour, and his voice no expression."

"you decide on his imperfections so much in the mass," replied elinor,
"and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that the
commendation i am able to give of him is comparatively cold and
insipid.  i can only pronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred,
well-informed, of gentle address, and, i believe, possessing an amiable
heart."

"miss dashwood," cried willoughby, "you are now using me unkindly.  you
are endeavouring to disarm me by reason, and to convince me against my
will.  but it will not do.  you shall find me as stubborn as you can be
artful.  i have three unanswerable reasons for disliking colonel
brandon; he threatened me with rain when i wanted it to be fine; he has
found fault with the hanging of my curricle, and i cannot persuade him
to buy my brown mare.  if it will be any satisfaction to you, however,
to be told, that i b
 
 ___________________________
 
elieve his character to be in other respects
irreproachable, i am ready to confess it.  and in return for an
acknowledgment, which must give me some pain, you cannot deny me the
privilege of disliking him as much as ever."



chapter 11


little had mrs. dashwood or her daughters imagined when they first came
into devonshire, that so many engagements would arise to occupy their
time as shortly presented themselves, or that they should have such
frequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them little
leisure for serious employment.  yet such was the case.  when marianne
was recovered, the schemes of amusement at home and abroad, which sir
john had been previously forming, were put into execution.  the private
balls at the park then began;
 
 ___________________________
 
g he said, was clever.  if their evenings at
the park were concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the rest
of the party to get her a good hand.  if dancing formed the amusement
of the night, they were partners for half the time; and when obliged to
separate for a couple of dances, were careful to stand together and
scarcely spoke a word to any body else.  such conduct made them of
course most exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame, and
seemed hardly to provoke them.

mrs. dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left
her no inclination for checking this excessive display of them.  to her
it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and
ardent mind.

this was the season of happiness to marianne.  her heart was devoted to
willoughby, and the fond attachment to norland, which she brought with
her from sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought it
possible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on her
pres
 
 ___________________________
 
but too common, and too dangerous!  i
speak from experience.  i once knew a lady who in temper and mind
greatly resembled your sister, who thought and judged like her, but who
from an inforced change--from a series of unfortunate circumstances"--
here he stopt suddenly; appeared to think that he had said too much,
and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures, which might not
otherwise have entered elinor's head.  the lady would probably have
passed without suspicion, had he not convinced miss dashwood that what
concerned her ought not to escape his lips.  as it was, it required but
a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender
recollection of past regard.  elinor attempted no more.  but marianne,
in her place, would not have done so little.  the whole story would
have been speedily formed under her active imagination; and every thing
established in the most melancholy order of disastrous love.



chapter 12


as elinor and marianne were walking together the next morning the
 
 ___________________________
 
asons for this alteration were at the same time
related, and they were such as to make further entreaty on his side
impossible.  his concern however was very apparent; and after
expressing it with earnestness, he added, in the same low voice,--"but,
marianne, the horse is still yours, though you cannot use it now.  i
shall keep it only till you can claim it.  when you leave barton to
form your own establishment in a more lasting home, queen mab shall
receive you."

this was all overheard by miss dashwood; and in the whole of the
sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it, and in his addressing her
sister by her christian name alone, she instantly saw an intimacy so
decided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement between
them.  from that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each
other; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she, or
any of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank, to discover
it by accident.

margaret related something to her the 
 
 ___________________________
 
d parties to visit them, at
least, twice every summer for the last ten years.  they contained a
noble piece of water; a sail on which was to a form a great part of the
morning's amusement; cold provisions were to be taken, open carriages
only to be employed, and every thing conducted in the usual style of a
complete party of pleasure.

to some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking,
considering the time of year, and that it had rained every day for the
last fortnight;--and mrs. dashwood, who had already a cold, was
persuaded by elinor to stay at home.



chapter 13


their intended excursion to whitwell turned out very different from
what elinor had expected.  she was prepared to be wet through,
fatigued, and frightened; but the event was still more unfortunate, for
they did not go at all.

by ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where they
were to breakfast.  the morning was rather favourable, though it had
rained all night, as the clouds were then dispersin
 
 ___________________________
 
ty of pleasure.  brandon is one of
them.  he was afraid of catching cold i dare say, and invented this
trick for getting out of it.  i would lay fifty guineas the letter was
of his own writing."

"i have no doubt of it," replied marianne.

"there is no persuading you to change your mind, brandon, i know of
old," said sir john, "when once you are determined on anything.  but,
however, i hope you will think better of it.  consider, here are the
two miss careys come over from newton, the three miss dashwoods walked
up from the cottage, and mr. willoughby got up two hours before his
usual time, on purpose to go to whitwell."

colonel brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of
disappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to be
unavoidable.

"well, then, when will you come back again?"

"i hope we shall see you at barton," added her ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
whitwell till you return."

"you are very obliging.  but
 
 ___________________________
 
ot want to pry into other men's concerns.  i suppose it is
something he is ashamed of."

colonel brandon's horses were announced.

"you do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added sir john.

"no. only to honiton.  i shall then go post."

"well, as you are resolved to go, i wish you a good journey.  but you
had better change your mind."

"i assure you it is not in my power."

he then took leave of the whole party.

"is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this
winter, miss dashwood?"

"i am afraid, none at all."

"then i must bid you farewell for a longer time than i should wish to
do."

to marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing.

"come colonel," said mrs. jennings, "before you go, do let us know what
you are going about."

he wished her a good morning, and, attended by sir john, left the room.

the complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto
restrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again and
again how provoking it was to be so disapp
 
 ___________________________
 
rn
of all the rest.  they both seemed delighted with their drive; but said
only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the others
went on the downs.

it was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long.  some more of the
careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly
twenty to table, which sir john observed with great contentment.
willoughby took his usual place between the two elder miss dashwoods.
mrs. jennings sat on elinor's right hand; and they had not been long
seated, before she leant behind her and willoughby, and said to
marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "i have found you out in
spite of all your tricks.  i know where you spent the morning."

marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, "where, pray?"--

"did not you know," said willoughby, "that we had been out in my
curricle?"

"yes, yes, mr. impudence, i know that very well, and i was determined
to find out where y
 
 ___________________________
 
 more
of his hours were spent there than at allenham; and if no general
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the rest
of the day was spent by himself at the side of marianne, and by his
favourite pointer at her feet.

one evening in particular, about a week after colonel brandon left the
country, his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the objects around him; and on mrs. dashwood's happening
to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he warmly
opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as
perfect with him.

"what!" he exclaimed--"improve this dear cottage!  no. that i will
never consent to.  not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inch
to its size, if my feelings are regarded."

"do not be alarmed," said miss dashwood, "nothing of the kind will be
done; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it."

"i am h
 
 ___________________________
 
 be perceptible.  then, and then only, under
such a roof, i might perhaps be as happy at combe as i have been at
barton."

"i flatter myself," replied elinor, "that even under the disadvantage
of better rooms and a broader staircase, you will hereafter find your
own house as faultless as you now do this."

"there certainly are circumstances," said willoughby, "which might
greatly endear it to me; but this place will always have one claim of
my affection, which no other can possibly share."

mrs. dashwood looked with pleasure at marianne, whose fine eyes were
fixed so expressively on willoughby, as plainly denoted how well she
understood him.

"how often did i wish," added he, "when i was at allenham this time
twelvemonth, that barton cottage were inhabited!  i never passed within
view of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no one
should live in it.  how little did i then think that the very first
news i should hear from mrs. smith, when i next came into the country,
would be th
 
 ___________________________
 
at barton cottage was taken: and i felt an immediate
satisfaction and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of
prescience of what happiness i should experience from it, can account
for.  must it not have been so, marianne?" speaking to her in a lowered
voice.  then continuing his former tone, he said, "and yet this house
you would spoil, mrs. dashwood?  you would rob it of its simplicity by
imaginary improvement! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance
first began, and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by
us together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,
and every body would be eager to pass through the room which has
hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort
than any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world
could possibly afford."

mrs. dashwood again a
 
 ___________________________
 
 makes me
easy.  extend it a little farther, and it will make me happy.  tell me
that not only your house will remain the same, but that i shall ever
find you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will
always consider me with the kindness which has made everything
belonging to you so dear to me."

the promise was readily given, and willoughby's behaviour during the
whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness.

"shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said mrs. dashwood, when he was
leaving them.  "i do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on lady middleton."

he engaged to be with them by four o'clock.



chapter 15


mrs. dashwood's visit to lady middleton took place the next day, and
two of her daughters went with her; but marianne excused herself from
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
mother, who concluded that a promise had been made by willoughby the
night before of calling on her 
 
 ___________________________
 
while they were absent, was perfectly
satisfied with her remaining at home.

on their return from the park they found willoughby's curricle and
servant in waiting at the cottage, and mrs. dashwood was convinced that
her conjecture had been just.  so far it was all as she had foreseen;
but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had taught her
to expect.  they were no sooner in the passage than marianne came
hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with her
handkerchief at her eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs.
surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room she had
just quitted, where they found only willoughby, who was leaning again
 
 ___________________________
 
st
the mantel-piece with his back towards them.  he turned round on their
coming in, and his countenance shewed that he strongly partook of the
emotion which over-powered marianne.

"is anything the matter with her?" cried mrs. dashwood as she
entered--"is she ill?"

"i hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful; and with a forced
smile presently added, "it is i who may rather expect to be ill--for i
am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment!"

"disappointment?"

"yes, for i am unable to keep my engagement with you.  mrs. smith has
this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent
cousin, by sending me on business to london.  i have just received my
dispatches, and taken my farewell of allenham;
 
 ___________________________
 
ll not detain you from us long i hope."

he coloured as he replied, "you are very kind, but i have no idea of
returning into devonshire immediately.  my visits to mrs. smith are
never repeated within the twelvemonth."

"and is mrs. smith your only friend?  is allenham the only house in the
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome?  for shame, willoughby, can
you wait for an invitation here?"

his colour increased; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he only
replied, "you are too good."

mrs. dashwood looked at elinor with surprise.  elinor felt equal
amazement.  for a few moments every one was silent.  mrs. dashwood
first spoke.

"i have only to add, my dear willoughby, that at barton cottage you
will always be welcome; for i will not press you to return here
immediately, because you only can judge how far that might be pleasing
to mrs. smith; and on this head i shall be no more disposed to question
your judgment than to doubt your inclination."

"my engagements at present," replied willoug
 
 ___________________________
 
hby, confusedly, "are of
such a nature--that--i dare not flatter myself"--

he stopt.  mrs. dashwood was too much astonished to speak, and another
pause succeeded.  this was broken by willoughby, who said with a faint
smile, "it is folly to linger in this manner.  i will not torment
myself any longer by remaining among friends whose society it is
impossible for me now to enjoy."

he then hastily took leave of them all and left the room.  they saw him
step into his carriage, and in a minute it was out of sight.

mrs. dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly quitted the
parlour to give w
 
 ___________________________
 
 know that she dearly loves me, and that i shall not
be the last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances make
the revealment of it eligible.  i would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct."

elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering her sister's
youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, were all sunk in mrs. dashwood's romantic
delicacy.

it was several days before willoughby's name was mentioned before
marianne by any of her family; sir john and mrs. jennings, indeed, were
not so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;--but
one evening, mrs. dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of
shakespeare, exclaimed,

"we have never finished hamlet, marianne; our dear willoughby went away
before we could get through it.  we will put it by, that when he comes
again...but it may be months, perhaps,
 
 ___________________________
 
 before that happens."

"months!" cried marianne, with strong surprise.  "no--nor many weeks."

mrs. dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but it gave elinor
pleasure, as it produced a reply from marianne so expressive of
confidence in willoughby and knowledge of his intentions.

one morning, about a week after his leaving the country, marianne was
prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual walk, instead of
wandering away by herself.  hitherto she had carefully avoided every
companion in her rambles.  if her sisters intended to walk on the
downs, she directly stole away towards the lanes; if t
 
 ___________________________
 
r, endeavoured to support something like discourse with him, by
talking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. extorting
from him occasional questions and remarks.  his coldness and reserve
mortified her severely; she was vexed and half angry; but resolving to
regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present, she
avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated him
as she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection.



chapter 17


mrs. dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him; for his
coming to barton was, in her opinion, of all things the most natural.
her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder.  he received
the kindest welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not
stand against such a reception.  they had begun to fail him before he
entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivating
manners of mrs. dashwood.  indeed a man could not very well be in love
with either of her daug
 
 ___________________________
 
hters, without extending the passion to her; and
elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like
himself.  his affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and his
interest in their welfare again became perceptible.  he was not in
spirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, was
attentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits.  the whole family
perceived it, and mrs. dashwood, attributing it to some want of
liberality in his mother, sat down to table indignant against all
selfish parents.

"what are mrs. ferrars's views for you at present, edward?" said she,
when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; "are you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?"

"no. i hope my mother is now convinced that i have no more talents than
inclination for a public life!"

"but how is your fame to be established? for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; 
 
 ___________________________
 
at i
should do with it!"

marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.

"i should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself," said mrs.
dashwood, "if my children were all to be rich without my help."

"you must begin your improvements on this house," observed elinor, "and
your difficulties will soon vanish."

"what magnificent orders would travel from this family to london," said
edward, "in such an event!  what a happy day for booksellers,
music-sellers, and print-shops!  you, miss dashwood, would give a
general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you--and as
for marianne, i know her greatness of soul, there would not be music
enough in london to content her.  and books!--thomson, cowper,
scott--she would buy them all over and over again: she would buy up
every copy, i believe, to prevent their falling into unworthy hands;
and she would have every book that tells her how to admire an old
twisted tree.  should not you, marianne?  forgive me, if i am very
saucy.  but 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i am not fond
of nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms.  i have more pleasure in a
snug farm-house than a watch-tower--and a troop of tidy, happy villages
please me better than the finest banditti in the world."

marianne looked with amazement at edward, with compassion at her
sister.  elinor only laughed.

the subject was continued no farther; and marianne remained
thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engaged her attention.
she was sitting by edward, and in taking his tea from mrs. dashwood,
his hand passed so directly before her, as to make a ring, with a plait
of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers.

"i never saw you wear a ring before, edward," she cried.  "is that
fanny's hair? i remember her promising to give you some.  but i should
have thought her hair had been darker."

marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt--but when she saw
how much she had pained edward, her own vexation at her want of thought
could not be surpassed by his.  he colour
 
 ___________________________
 
survey of the guest.  with the assistance of
his mother-in-law, sir john was not long in discovering that the name
of ferrars began with an f. and this prepared a future mine of raillery
against the devoted elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with edward could have prevented from being immediately
sprung.  but, as it was, she only learned, from some very significant
looks, how far their penetration, founded on margaret's instructions,
extended.

sir john never came to the dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.
on the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their visitor,
towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them for both.

"you must drink tea with us to night," said he, "for we shall be quite
alone--and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we shall be a
large party."

mrs. jennings enforced the necessity.  "and who knows but you may ra
 
 ___________________________
 
ise
a dance," said she.  "and that will tempt you, miss marianne."

"a dance!" cried marianne.  "impossible! who is to dance?"

"who! why yourselves, and the careys, and whitakers to be sure.--what!
you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless is gone!"

"i wish with all my soul," cried sir john, "that willoughby were among
us again."

this, and marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to edward.  "and who
is willoughby?" said he, in a low voice, to miss dashwood, by whom he
was sitting.

she gave him a brief reply.  marianne's countenance was more
communicative.  edward saw enough to comprehend, not only the meaning
of others, but such of marianne's expressions as had puzzled him
before; and when their visitors left them, he went immediately round
her, and said, in a whisper, "i have been guessing.  shall i tell you
my guess?"

"what do you mean?"

"shall i tell you."

"certainly."

"well then; i guess that mr. willoughby hunts."

marianne was surprise
 
 ___________________________
 
have been glad to know when these
difficulties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,--when mrs.
ferrars would be reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy.  but
from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal
of her confidence in edward's affection, to the remembrance of every
mark of regard in look or word which fell from him while at barton, and
above all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wore round
his finger.

"i think, edward," said mrs. dashwood, as they were at breakfast the
last morning, "you would be a happier man if you had any profession to
engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions.  some
inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might result from it--you would
not be able to give them so much of your time.  but (with a smile) you
would be materially benefited in one particular at least--you would
know where to go when you left them."

"i do assure you," he replied, "that i have long thought on this point,
as yo
 
 ___________________________
 
gth, as there was no necessity for my having any profession at all,
as i might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as
with one, idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous
and honourable, and a young man of eighteen is not in general so
earnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of his
friends to do nothing.  i was therefore entered at oxford and have been
properly idle ever since."

"the consequence of which, i suppose, will be," said mrs. dashwood,
"since leisure has not promoted your own happiness, that your sons will
be brought up to as many pursuits, employments, professions, and trades
as columella's."

"they will be brought up," said he, in a serious accent, "to be as
unlike myself as is possible.  in feeling, in action, in condition, in
every thing."

"come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits,
edward.  you are in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlike
yourself must be happy.  but remember that th
 
 ___________________________
 
 happiness.  you want nothing but
patience--or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope.  your
mother will secure to you, in time, that independence you are so
anxious for; it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long become her
happiness to prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.
how much may not a few months do?"

"i think," replied edward, "that i may defy many months to produce any
good to me."

this desponding turn of mind, though it could not be communicated to
mrs. dashwood, gave additional pain to them all in the parting, which
shortly took place, and left an uncomfortable impression on elinor's
feelings especially, which required some trouble and time to subdue.
but as it was her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herself
from appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on his
going away, she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by
marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow, by
seeking silence, solitude and 
 
 ___________________________
 
only think of their coming so suddenly!  i
thought i heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them.  i thought of
nothing but whether it might not be colonel brandon come back again; so
i said to sir john, i do think i hear a carriage; perhaps it is colonel
brandon come back again"--

elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; lady middleton introduced the two
strangers; mrs. dashwood and margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while mrs. jennings
continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by sir john.

mrs. palmer was several years younger than lady middleton, and totally
unlike her in every respect.  she was short and plump, had a very
pretty face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be.  her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister's,
but they we
 
 ___________________________
 
, mama, how it is improved since i was here last!
i always thought it such a sweet place, ma'am! (turning to mrs.
dashwood) but you have made it so charming!  only look, sister, how
delightful every thing is! how i should like such a house for myself!
should not you, mr. palmer?"

mr. palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise his eyes from the
newspaper.

"mr. palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing; "he never does
sometimes.  it is so ridiculous!"

this was quite a new idea to mrs. dashwood; she had never been used to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking with
surprise at them both.

mrs. jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, and
continued her account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeing
their friends, without ceasing till every thing was told.  mrs. palmer
laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite an
agreeable surprise.

"you may b
 
 ___________________________
 
ere any such things in the room.

when lady middleton rose to go away, mr. palmer rose also, laid down
the newspaper, stretched himself and looked at them all around.

"my love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.

he made her no answer; and only observed, after again examining the
room, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked.
he then made his bow, and departed with the rest.

sir john had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at
the park.  mrs. dashwood, who did not chuse to dine with them oftener
than they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased.  but they had no curiosity to
see how mr. and mrs. palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way.  they attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good.  but sir john would not be satisfied--the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come.
 
 ___________________________
 
, as soon as they were gone.
"the rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us."

"they mean no less to be civil and kind to us now," said elinor, "by
these frequent invitations, than by those which we received from them a
few weeks ago.  the alteration is not in them, if their parties are
grown tedious and dull.  we must look for the change elsewhere."



chapter 20


as the miss dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next
day, at one door, mrs. palmer came running in at the other, looking as
good humoured and merry as before.  she took them all most
affectionately by the hand, and expressed great delight in seeing them
again.

"i am so glad to see you!" said she, seating herself between elinor and
marianne, "for it is so bad a day i was afraid you might not come,
which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. we must
go, for the westons come to us ne
 
 ___________________________
 
on.  he is so droll! he never tells me any
thing! i am so sorry we cannot stay longer; however we shall meet again
in town very soon, i hope."

they were obliged to put an end to such an expectation.

"not go to town!" cried mrs. palmer, with a laugh, "i shall be quite
disappointed if you do not.  i could get the nicest house in the world for
you, next door to ours, in hanover-square.  you must come, indeed.  i
am sure i shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till i am
confined, if mrs. dashwood should not like to go into public."

they thanked her; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties.

"oh, my love," cried mrs. palmer to her husband, who just then entered
the room--"you must help me to persuade the miss dashwoods to go to
town this winter."

her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to the ladies, began
complaining of the weather.

"how horrid all this is!" said he.  "such weather makes every thing and
every body disgusting.  dullness is as much produced within door
 
 ___________________________
 
under was too common for any
sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it.-- it was rather a wish of
distinction, she believed, which produced his contemptuous treatment of
every body, and his general abuse of every thing before him.  it was
the desire of appearing superior to other people.  the motive was too
common to be wondered at; but the means, however they might succeed by
establishing his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to attach
any one to him except his wife.

"oh, my dear miss dashwood," said mrs. palmer soon afterwards, "i have
got such a favour to ask of you and your sister.  will you come and
spend some time at cleveland this christmas?  now, pray do,--and come
while the westons are with us.  you cannot think how happy i shall be!
it will be quite delightful!--my love," applying to her husband, "don't
you long to have the miss dashwoods come to cleveland?"

"certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"i came into devonshire with no
other view."

"there now,"--said his lady, "yo
 
 ___________________________
 
mart, their manners very civil,
they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that lady
middleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had
been an hour at the park.  she declared them to be very agreeable girls
indeed, which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration.  sir john's
confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise, and he
set off directly for the cottage to tell the miss dashwoods of the miss
steeles' arrival, and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls
in the world.  from such commendation as this, however, there was not
much to be learned; elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in the
world were to be met with in every part of england, under every
possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding.  sir john
wanted the whole family to walk to the park directly and look at his
guests.  benevolent, philanthropic man!  it was painful to him even to
kee
 
 ___________________________
 
lity."

"what a sweet woman lady middleton is!" said lucy steele.

marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon elinor therefore the whole
task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.  she did
her best when thus called on, by speaking of lady middleton with more
warmth than she felt, though with far less than miss lucy.

"and sir john too," cried the elder sister, "what a charming man he is!"

here too, miss dashwood's commendation, being only simple and just,
came in without any eclat.  she merely observed that he was perfectly
good humoured and friendly.

"and what a charming little family they have!  i never saw such fine
children in my life.--i declare i quite doat upon them already, and
indeed i am always distractedly fond of children."

"i should guess so," said elinor, with a smile, "from what i have
witnessed this morning."

"i have a notion," said lucy, "you think the little middletons rather
too m
 
 ___________________________
 
 the outside of enough; but it is
so natural in lady middleton; and for my part, i love to see children
full of life and spirits; i cannot bear them if they are tame and
quiet."

"i confess," replied elinor, "that while i am at barton park, i never
think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence."

a short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by miss
steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who now
said rather abruptly, "and how do you like devonshire, miss dashwood?
i suppose you were very sorry to leave sussex."

in some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least of
the manner in which it was spoken, elinor replied that she was.

"norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?" added miss steele.

"we have heard sir john admire it excessively," said lucy, who seemed
to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister.

"i think every one must admire it," replied elinor, "who ever saw the
place; though it is not to be suppose
 
 ___________________________
 
art beaux there?  i suppose you have not so
many in this part of the world; for my part, i think they are a vast
addition always."

"but why should you think," said lucy, looking ashamed of her sister,
"that there are not as many genteel young men in devonshire as sussex?"

"nay, my dear, i'm sure i don't pretend to say that there an't.  i'm
sure there's a vast many smart beaux in exeter; but you know, how could
i tell what smart beaux there might be about norland; and i was only
afraid the miss dashwoods might find it dull at barton, if they had not
so many as they used to have.  but perhaps you young ladies may not
care about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as with them.
for my part, i think they are vastly agreeable, provided they dress
smart and behave civil.  but i can't bear to see them dirty and nasty.
now there's mr. rose at exeter, a prodigious smart young man, quite a
beau, clerk to mr. simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet him of
a morning, he is not fit to be seen
 
 ___________________________
 
.-- i suppose your brother was quite
a beau, miss dashwood, before he married, as he was so rich?"

"upon my word," replied elinor, "i cannot tell you, for i do not
perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word.  but this i can say, that
if he ever was a beau before he married, he is one still for there is
not the smallest alteration in him."

"oh! dear! one never thinks of married men's being beaux--they have
something else to do."

"lord! anne," cried her sister, "you can talk of nothing but
beaux;--you will make miss dashwood believe you think of not
 
 ___________________________
 
xpressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family.  but sir john did not sport long
with the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least as
much pleasure in telling the name, as miss steele had in hearing it.

"his name is ferrars," said he, in a very audible whisper; "but pray do
not tell it, for it's a great secret."

"ferrars!" repeated miss steele; "mr. ferrars is the happy man, is he?
what! your sister-in-law's brother, miss dashwood? a very agreeable
young man to be sure; i know him very well."

"how can you say so, anne?" cried lucy, who generally made an amendment
to all her sister's assertions.  "though we have seen him once or twice
at my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well."

elinor heard all this with attention and surprise.  "and who was this
uncle?  where did he live?  how came they acquainted?"  she wished very
much to have the subject continued, though she did not chuse to join in
it h
 
 ___________________________
 
unity of engaging her in conversation, or of
striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank
communication of her sentiments.

lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just and amusing; and
as a companion for half an hour elinor frequently found her agreeable;
but her powers had received no aid from education: she was ignorant and
illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want of
information in the most common particulars, could not be concealed from
miss dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to
advantage.  elinor saw, and pitied her for, the neglect of abilities
which education might have rendered so respectable; but she saw, with
less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of
rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions, her
assiduities, her flatteries at the park betrayed; and she could have no
lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity
with ignorance; whose want of instruction prev
 
 ___________________________
 
 a soul of all my relations know of it but
anne, and i never should have mentioned it to you, if i had not felt
the greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and i really
thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about mrs. ferrars
must seem so odd, that it ought to be explained.  and i do not think
mr. ferrars can be displeased, when he knows i have trusted you,
because i know he has the highest opinion in the world of all your
family, and looks upon yourself and the other miss dashwoods quite as
his own sisters."--she paused.

elinor for a few moments remained silent.  her astonishment at what she
heard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing herself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, she said, with calmness of manner,
which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude-- "may i ask
if your engagement is of long standing?"

"we have been engaged these four years."

"four years!"

"yes."

elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it.


 
 ___________________________
 
near
plymouth.  it was there our acquaintance begun, for my sister and me
was often staying with my uncle, and it was there our engagement was
formed, though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he
was almost always with us afterwards.  i was very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation of
his mother; but i was too young, and loved him too well, to be so
prudent as i ought to have been.-- though you do not know him so well
as me, miss dashwood, you must have seen enough of him to be sensible
he is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him."

"certainly," answered elinor, without knowing what she said; but after
a moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"engaged to mr. edward
ferrars!--i confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really--i beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name.  we cannot mean 
 
 ___________________________
 
the same mr. ferrars."

"we can mean no other," cried lucy, smiling.  "mr. edward ferrars, the
eldest son of mrs. ferrars, of park street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, mrs. john dashwood, is the person i mean; you must allow
that i am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depends."

"it is strange," replied elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that i
should never have heard him even mention your name."

"no; considering our situation, it was not strange.  our first care has
been to keep the matter secret.-- you knew nothing of me, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no occasion for ever mentioning my name
to you; and, as he was a
 
 ___________________________
 
" continued lucy, after wiping her eyes, "i think whether it
would not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely."  as
she said this, she looked directly at her companion.  "but then at
other times i have not resolution enough for it.-- i cannot bear the
thoughts of making him so miserable, as i know the very mention of such
a thing would do.  and on my own account too--so dear as he is to me--i
don't think i could be equal to it.  what would you advise me to do in
such a case, miss dashwood?  what would you do yourself?"

"pardon me," replied elinor, startled by the question; "but i can give
you no advice under such circumstances.  your own judgment must direct
you."

"to be sure," continued lucy, after a few minutes silence on both
sides, "his mother must provide for him sometime or other; but poor
edward is so cast down by it!  did you not think him dreadful
low-spirited when he was at barton?  he was so miserable when he left
us at longstaple, to go to you, that i was afraid yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ress which marianne could never condescend to
practise, gained her own end, and pleased lady middleton at the same
time.  lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the two fair
rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with the
utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work.  the pianoforte at
which marianne, wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts, had
by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself,
was luckily so near them that miss dashwood now judged she might
safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table.



chapter 24


in a firm, though cautious tone, elinor thus began.

"i should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with,
if i felt no desire for its continuance, or no farther curiosity on its
subject.  i will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again."

"thank you," cried lucy warmly, "for breaking the ice; you have set
 
 ___________________________
 
lucy looked at elinor again, and was silent.

"do you know mr. robert ferrars?" asked elinor.

"not at all--i never saw him; but i fancy he is very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"a great coxcomb!" repeated miss steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in marianne's music.-- "oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, i dare say."

"no sister," cried lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are not great coxcombs."

"i can answer for it that miss dashwood's is not," said mrs. jennings,
laughing heartily; "for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
young men i ever saw; but as for lucy, she is such a sly little
creature, there is no finding out who she likes."

"oh," cried miss steele, looking significantly round at them, "i dare
say lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as miss
dashwood's."

elinor blushed in spite of herself.  lucy bit her lip, and looked
angrily at her sister.  a mutual silence took place for some time.
lucy
 
 ___________________________
 
e regard
to me, your brother might be persuaded to give him norland living;
which i understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while.  that would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."

"i should always be happy," replied elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for mr. ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary?  he is
brother to mrs. john dashwood--that must be recommendation enough to
her husband."

"but mrs. john dashwood would not much approve of edward's going into
orders."

"then i rather suspect that my interest would do very little."

they were again silent for many minutes.  at length lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh,

"i believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolving the engagement.  we seem so beset with difficulties
on every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, we
shou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld be happier perhaps in the end.  but you will not give me your
advice, miss dashwood?"

"no," answered elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, "on such a subject i certainly will not.  you know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

"indeed you wrong me," replied lucy, with great solemnity; "i know
nobody of whose judgment i think so highly as i do of yours; and i do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, 'i advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with edward ferrars, it
 
 ___________________________
 
ve such weight with me.  if you could be
supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings, your opinion
would not be worth having."

elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might
provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; and
was even partly determined never to mention the subject again.  another
pause therefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this speech, and
lucy was still the first to end it.

"shall you be in town this winter, miss dashwood?" said she with all
her accustomary complacency.

"certainly not."

"i am sorry for that," returned the other, while her eyes brightened at
the information, "it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you
there!  but i dare say you will go for all that.  to be sure, your
brother and sister will ask you to come to them."

"it will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do."

"how unlucky that is! i had quite depended upon meeting you there.
anne and me are to go the latter end of
 
 ___________________________
 
 was in the habit of spending a large portion of
the year at the houses of her children and friends, she was not without
a settled habitation of her own.  since the death of her husband, who
had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town, she had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near portman
square.  towards this home, she began on the approach of january to
turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and very
unexpectedly by them, asked the elder misses dashwood to accompany her.
elinor, without observing the varying complexion of her sister, and the
animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gave
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believed herself
to be speaking their united inclinations.  the reason alleged was their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the
year.  mrs. jennings received the refusal with some surprise, and
repeated her invitation immediately.

"oh, lord! i am sure
 
 ___________________________
 
, you may depend upon it."

"i have a notion," said sir john, "that miss marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if her elder sister would come into it.  it is very
hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because miss
dashwood does not wish it.  so i would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you are tired of barton, without saying a word to miss
dashwood about it."

"nay," cried mrs. jennings, "i am sure i shall be monstrous glad of
miss marianne's company, whether miss dashwood will go or not, only the
more the merrier say i, and i thought it would be more comfortable for
them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back.  but one or
the other, if not both of them, i must have.  lord bless me! how do you
think i can live poking by myself, i who have been always used till
this winter to have charlotte with me.  come, miss marianne, let us
strike hands upon the bargain, and if miss dashwood wil
 
 ___________________________
 
ank you," said marianne, with warmth:
"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness i am capable of,
to be able to accept it.  but my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--i
feel the justice of what elinor has urged, and if she were to be made
less happy, less comfortable by our absence--oh! no, nothing should
tempt me to leave her.  it should not, must not be a struggle."

mrs. jennings repeated her assurance that mrs. dashwood could spare
them perfectly well; and elinor, who now understood her sister, and saw
to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by her
eagerness to be with willoughby again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother's
decision, from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any
support in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could not
approve of for marianne, and which on her own account she had
particular reasons to avoid
 
 ___________________________
 
ation for going to london.  that
marianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly acquainted with mrs.
jennings' manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook
every inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must be
most wounding to her irritable feelings, in her pursuit of one object,
was such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that object
to her, as elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to
witness.

on being informed of the invitation, mrs. dashwood, persuaded that such
an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her
daughters, and perceiving through all her affectionate attention to
herself, how much the heart of marianne was in it, would not hear of
their declining the offer upon her account; insisted on their both
accepting it directly; and then began to foresee, with her usual
cheerfulness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all,
from this separation.

"i am delighted with the plan," she cried, "it is exac
 
 ___________________________
 
doubt.  and in all probability you will see your
brother, and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife,
when i consider whose son he is, i cannot bear to have you so wholly
estranged from each other."

"though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," said elinor, "you
have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which
occurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily removed."

marianne's countenance sunk.

"and what," said mrs. dashwood, "is my dear prudent elinor going to
suggest?  what formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward?  do let
me hear a word about the expense of it."

"my objection is this; though i think very well of mrs. jennings's
heart, she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure, or
whose protection will give us consequence."

"that is very true," replied her mother, "but of her society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always a
 
 ___________________________
 
ewise, as she did not think it proper that marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that mrs. jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours.  to this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that edward ferrars, by lucy's account, was
not to be in town before february; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"i will have you both go," said mrs. dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical.  you will have much pleasure in being in london, and
especially in being together; and if elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with her sister-in-law's family."

elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her
mother's dependence on the attachment of edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when 
 
 ___________________________
 
the whole truth were revealed, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to begin
her design by saying, as calmly as she could, "i like edward ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether i am
ever known to them or not."

mrs. dashwood smiled, and said nothing.  marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

after very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted.  mrs. jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.  sir john was
delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the
 
 ___________________________
 
ere
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.
the disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day.  they had not long finished
their breakfast before mrs. palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few minutes she came laughing into the room: so delighted to see
them all, that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure
from meeting her mother or the miss dashwoods again.  so surprised at
their coming to town, though it was what she had rather expected all
along; so angry at their accepting her mother's invitation after having
declined her own, though at the same time she would never have forgiven
them if they had not come!

"mr. palmer will be so happy to see you," said she; "what do you think
he said when he heard of your coming with mama?  i forget what it was
now, but it was something so droll!"

after an hour or two spent in what her mother called c
 
 ___________________________
 
lder than it was in the morning, elinor? there
seems to me a very decided difference.  i can hardly keep my hands warm
even in my muff.  it was not so yesterday, i think.  the clouds seem
parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear
afternoon."

elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but marianne persevered,
and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in
the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
frost.

the miss dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with mrs.
jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with her
behaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind.  every thing in her
household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to lady middleton's regret, she
had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feelings of her young companions.  pleased to find
herself more comfortably sit
 
 ___________________________
 
 his mother-in-law, and therefore
never came near her, they received no mark of recognition on their
entrance.  he looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who they
were, and merely nodded to mrs. jennings from the other side of the
room.  marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered: it
was enough--he was not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposed to
receive or communicate pleasure.  after they had been assembled about
an hour, mr. palmer sauntered towards the miss dashwoods to express his
surprise on seeing them in town, though colonel brandon had been first
informed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself said
something very droll on hearing that they were to come.

"i thought you were both in devonshire," said he.

"did you?" replied elinor.

"when do you go back again?"

"i do not know." and thus ended their discourse.

never had marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise.  she
 
 ___________________________
 
lating all
that had passed, her suspicions of willoughby's inconstancy, urging her
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from marianne an account
of her real situation with respect to him.

her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, and
colonel brandon was announced.  marianne, who had seen him from the
window, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before he
entered it.  he looked more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding miss dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
particular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word.
elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her
sister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening.  it was not the
first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction; for, more than
once before, beginning with the observation of "your sister looks
unwell to-day," or "your sister seems out of spirits," he had appeared
on the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll i might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhaps
rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something to
support its doubts, if i had not, when the servant let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to mr. willoughby in
your sister's writing.  i came to inquire, but i was convinced before i
could ask the question.  is every thing finally settled?  is it
impossible to-?  but i have no right, and i could have no chance of
succeeding.  excuse me, miss dashwood.  i believe i have been wrong in
saying so much, but i hardly know what to do, and on your prudence i
have the strongest dependence.  tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
concealment be possible, is all that remains."

these words, which conveyed to elinor a direct avowal of his love for
her sister, affected her very much.  she was not immediately able to
say anything, and even when her spirits were recovered, she debated for
a short tim
 
 ___________________________
 
nd to be
composed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of marianne, it
was beyond her wish.  she sat in an agony of impatience which affected
every feature.

at last he turned round again, and regarded them both; she started up,
and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection, held out her hand to
him.  he approached, and addressing himself rather to elinor than
marianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not to observe
her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after mrs. dashwood, and
asked how long they had been in town.  elinor was robbed of all
presence of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a word.  but
the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed.  her face was
crimsoned over, and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion,
"good god! willoughby, what is the meaning of this?  have you not
received my letters?  will you not shake hands with me?"

he could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painful to him, and he
held her hand only for a
 
 ___________________________
 
 moment,
obliged herself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,
trying to smile, replied, "and have you really, ma'am, talked yourself
into a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to mr. willoughby?  i
thought it had been only a joke, but so serious a question seems to
imply more; and i must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any longer.  i do assure you that nothing would surprise me
more than to hear of their being going to be married."

"for shame, for shame, miss dashwood! how can you talk so?  don't we
all know that it must be a match, that they were over head and ears in
love with each other from the first moment they met?  did not i see
them together in devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not i
know that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding
clothes?  come, come, this won't do.  because you are so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
thing, i can tell you, for it has been known all ove
 
 ___________________________
 
ch she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till mrs. jennings
returned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless.



chapter 30


mrs. jennings came immediately to their room on her return, and without
waiting to have her request of admittance answered, opened the door and
walked in with a look of real concern.

"how do you do my dear?"--said she in a voice of great compassion to
marianne, who turned away her face without attempting to answer.

"how is she, miss dashwood?--poor thing! she looks very bad.-- no
wonder.  ay, it is but too true.  he is to be married very soon--a
good-for-nothing fellow!  i have no patience with him.  mrs. taylor
told me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it by a particular
friend of miss grey herself, else i am sure i should not have believed
it; and i was almost ready to sink as it was.  well, said i, all i can
say is, that if this be true, he has used a young lady of my
acquaintance abominably ill, and i wish with all my so
 
 ___________________________
 
inor.  "you have something to tell me of mr.
willoughby, that will open his character farther.  your telling it will
be the greatest act of friendship that can be shewn marianne.  my
gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to
that end, and hers must be gained by it in time.  pray, pray let me
hear it."

"you shall; and, to be brief, when i quitted barton last october,--but
this will give you no idea--i must go farther back.  you will find me a
very awkward narrator, miss dashwood; i hardly know where to begin.  a
short account of myself, i believe, will be necessary, and it shall be
a short one.  on such a subject," sighing heavily, "can i have little
temptation to be diffuse."

he stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, went
on.

"you have probably entirely forgotten a conversation--(it is not to be
supposed that it could make any impression on you)--a conversation
between us one evening at barton park--it was the evening of a
dance--in which i al
 
 ___________________________
 
 of tender concern, at the fate of his unfortunate friend.

"your sister, i hope, cannot be offended," said he, "by the resemblance
i have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation.  their
fates, their fortunes, cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happier
marriage, she might have been all that you will live to see the other
be.  but to what does all this lead?  i seem to have been distressing
you for nothing.  ah! miss dashwood--a subject such as this--untouched
for fourteen years--it is dangerous to handle it at all!  i will be
more collected--more concise.  she left to my care her only child, a
little girl, the offspring of her first guilty connection, who was then
about three years old.  she loved the child, and had always kept it
with her.  it was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would i
have discharged it in the strictest sense, by watching over her
education myself, had the nature of our situations a
 
 ___________________________
 
e had felt the
loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of miss williams, the
misery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his designs might once
have been on herself, preyed altogether so much on her spirits, that
she could not bring herself to speak of what she felt even to elinor;
and, brooding over her sorrows in silence, gave more pain to her sister
than could have been communicated by the most open and most frequent
confession of them.

to give the feelings or the language of mrs. dashwood on receiving and
answering elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of what
her daughters had already felt and said; of a disappointment hardly
less painful than marianne's, and an indignation even greater than
elinor's.  long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought; to express her
anxious solicitude for marianne, and entreat she would bear up with
fortitude under this misfortune.  bad indeed must the nature of
marianne's affl
 
 ___________________________
 
iction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude!
mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which
she could wish her not to indulge!

against the interest of her own individual comfort, mrs. dashwood had
determined that it would be better for marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at barton, where every thing within her view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing willoughby before her, such as she had always seen
him there.  she recommended it to her daughters, therefore, by all
means not to shorten their visit to mrs. jennings; the length of which,
though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at
least fiv
 
 ___________________________
 
r of seeing willoughby again, her mother considered her
to be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since his
acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves her
friends.  design could never bring them in each other's way: negligence
could never leave them exposed to a surprise; and chance had less in
its favour in the crowd of london than even in the retirement of
barton, where it might force him before her while paying that visit at
allenham on his marriage, which mrs. dashwood, from foreseeing at first
as a probable event, had brought herself to expect as a certain one.

she had yet another reason for wishing her children to remain where
they were; a letter from her son-in-law had told her that he and his
wife were to be in town before the middle of february, and she judged
it right that they should sometimes see their brother.

marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's opinion, and she
submitted to it therefore without opposition, though it proved
perfectly
 
 ___________________________
 
ter's health.

every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of the
moment, to more than its real value; and she was sometimes worried down
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature.

lady middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, "it is very
shocking, indeed!" and by the means of this continual though gentle
vent, was able not only to see the miss dashwoods from the first
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
interest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined (though rather
against the opinion of sir john) that as mrs. willoughby would at once
be a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with her as soon
as sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e married.

colonel brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome
to miss dashwood.  he had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate
discussion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which he had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence.  his chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or
could oblige herself to speak to
 
 ___________________________
 
ave elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; but
mrs. jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that the
colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could neither prevail
on him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
midsummer, they would not be married till michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all.  the good understanding
between the colonel and miss dashwood seemed rather to declare that the
honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be made over to her; and mrs. jennings had, for some time ceased to
think at all of mrs. ferrars.

early in february, within a fortnight from the receipt of willoughby's
letter, elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he
was married.  she had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she was
desirous tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 it, if you ever hear it talked of."

mrs. jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she
certainly would not, and miss steele was made completely happy.

"i suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, miss
dashwood, when they come to town," said lucy, returning, after a
cessation of hostile hints, to the charge.

"no, i do not think we shall."

"oh, yes, i dare say you will."

elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.

"what a charming thing it is that mrs. dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time together!"

"long a time, indeed!" interposed mrs. jennings.  "why, their visit is
but just begun!"

lucy was silenced.

"i am sorry we cannot see your sister, miss dashwood," said miss
steele.  "i am sorry she is not well--" for marianne had left the room
on their arrival.

"you are very good.  my sister will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much plagued lately with
nervous head-aches, which make her unfit for comp
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
would do no more than accompany them to gray's in sackville street,
where elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewels of her mother.

when they stopped at the door, mrs. jennings recollected that there was
a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call; and as
she had no business at gray's, it was resolved, that while her young
friends transacted their's, she should pay her visit and return for
them.

on ascending the stairs, the miss dashwoods found so many people before
them in the room, that there was not a person at liberty to tend to
their orders; and they were obliged to wait.  all that could be done
was, to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the
quickest succession; one gentleman only was standing there, and it is
probable that elinor was not without hope of exciting his politeness to
a quicker despatch.  but the correctness of his eye, and the delicacy
of his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness.
 
 ___________________________
 
ng
unconscious of it all; for she was as well able to collect her thoughts
within herself, and be as ignorant of what was passing around her, in
mr. gray's shop, as in her own bedroom.

at last the affair was decided.  the ivory, the gold, and the pearls,
all received their appointment, and the gentleman having named the last
day on which his existence could be continued without the possession of
the toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care, and
bestowing another glance on the miss dashwoods, but such a one as
seemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with a
happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.

elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, was on the point
of concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her side.
she turned her eyes towards his face, and found him with some surprise
to be her brother.

their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in mr. gray's shop.  john dashw
 
 ___________________________
 
 your little cottage and want for
nothing!  edward brought us a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing.  it was a great satisfaction to us
to hear it, i assure you."

elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and was not sorry to
be spared the necessity of answering him, by the arrival of mrs.
jennings's servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited for
them at the door.

mr. dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to mrs. jennings
at the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being able to
call on them the next day, took leave.

his visit was duly paid.  he came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but she was so much engaged
with her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where."
mrs. jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or somet
 
 ___________________________
 
hing like it, and she
should certainly wait on mrs. john dashwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her.  his manners to them, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to mrs. jennings, most attentively civil; and on colonel
brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to him.

after staying with them half an hour, he asked elinor to walk with him
to conduit street, and introduce him to sir john and lady middleton.
the weather was remarkably fine, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
y every possible attention.  he had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
colonel brandon, or a legacy from mrs. jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.

they were lucky enough to find lady middleton at home, and sir john
came in before their visit ended.  abundance of civilities passed on
all sides.  sir john was ready to like anybody, and though mr. dashwood
did not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a very
good-natured fellow: while lady middleton saw enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and mr. dashwood
went away delighted with both.

"i shall have a charming account to carry to fanny," said he, as he
walked back with his sister.  "lady middleton is really a most elegant
woman!  such a woman as i am sure fanny will be glad to know.  and mrs.
jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woma
 
 ___________________________
 
ant
as her daughter.  your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only knew that mrs. jennings was the widow of a
man who had got all his money in a low way; and fanny and mrs. ferrars
were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughters
were such kind of women as fanny would like to associate with.  but now
i can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."



chapter 34


mrs. john dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on mrs. jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy
her notice; and as for lady middleton, she found her one of the most
charming women in the world!

lady middleton was equally pleased with mrs. dashwood.  there was a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually
attracted the
 
 ___________________________
 
m; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

the same manners, however, which recommended mrs. john dashwood to the
good opinion of lady middleton did not suit the fancy of mrs. jennings,
and to her she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking woman
of uncordial address, who met her husband's sisters without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on berkeley street, she sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence.

elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,
whether edward was then in town; but nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
 tell her that
his marriage with miss morton was resolved on, or till her husband's
expectations on colonel brandon were answered; because she believed
them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.  the
intelligence however, which she would not give, soon flowed from
another quarter.  lucy came very shortly to claim elinor's compassion
on being unable to see edward, though he had arrived in town with mr.
and mrs. dashwood.  he dared not come to bartlett's buildings for fear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to be
told, they could do nothing at present but write.

edward assured them himself of his being in town, within a very short
time, by twice calling in berkeley street.  twice was his card found on
the table, when they returned from their morning's engagements.  elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

the dashwoods were so prodig
 
 ___________________________
 
iously delighted with the middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in harley street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months.  their sisters and mrs. jennings were invited
likewise, and john dashwood was careful to secure colonel brandon, who,
always glad to be where the miss dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  they were to
meet mrs. ferrars; but elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party.  the expectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect
indifference as to her opinion of herself, her des
 
 ___________________________
 
cipated the party, was soon
afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearing
that the miss steeles were also to be at it.

so well had they recommended themselves to lady middleton, so agreeable
had their assiduities made them to her, that though lucy was certainly
not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as ready as
sir john to ask them to spend a week or two in conduit street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the miss steeles, as soon as
the dashwoods' invitation was known, that their visit should begin a
few days before the party took place.

their claims to the notice of mrs. john dashwood, as the nieces of the
gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother, might not
have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her table; but
as lady middleton's guests they must be welcome; and lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view of
their characters and her own difficulties, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
to have an opportunity
of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in her life,
than she was on receiving mrs. john dashwood's card.

on elinor its effect was very different.  she began immediately to
determine, that edward who lived with his mother, must be asked as his
mother was, to a party given by his sister; and to see him for the
first time, after all that passed, in the company of lucy!--she hardly
knew how she could bear it!

these apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, and
certainly not at all on truth.  they were relieved however, not by her
own recollection, but by the good will of l
 
 ___________________________
 
ucy, who believed herself to
be inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that edward
certainly would not be in harley street on tuesday, and even hoped to
be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept
away by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not conceal
when they were together.

the important tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies
to this formidable mother-in-law.

"pity me, dear miss dashwood!" said lucy, as they walked up the stairs
together--for the middletons arrived so directly after mrs. jennings,
that they all followed the servant at the same time--"there is nobody
here but you, that can feel for me.--i declare i can hardly stand.
good gracious!--in a moment i shall see the person that all my
happiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"--

elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being miss morton's mother, rather than her own,
whom 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd serious, even to sourness, in her aspect.  her
complexion was sallow; and her features small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the strong characters of pride and ill nature.  she was not a woman of
many words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them to the
number of her ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her, not
one fell to the share of miss dashwood, whom she eyed with the spirited
determination of disliking her at all events.

elinor could not now be made unhappy by this behaviour.-- a few months
ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in mrs. ferrars'
power to distress her by it now;--and the difference of her manners to
the miss steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble
her more, only amused her.  she could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person-- for
lu
 
 ___________________________
 
were numerous, and every thing
bespoke the mistress's inclination for show, and the master's ability
to support it.  in spite of the improvements and additions which were
making to the norland estate, and in spite of its owner having once
been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a
loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to
infer from it;--no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appeared--but there, the deficiency was considerable.  john dashwood
had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing, and his wife
had still less.  but there was no peculiar disgrace in this; for it was
very much the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost all
laboured under one or other of these disqualifications for being
agreeable--want of sense, either natural or improved--want of
elegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.

when the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was particularly evident, for the gentlemen 
 
 ___________________________
 
had supplied the discourse
with some variety--the variety of politics, inclosing land, and
breaking horses--but then it was all over; and one subject only engaged
the ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative heights of
harry dashwood, and lady middleton's second son william, who were
nearly of the same age.

had both the children been there, the affair might have been determined
too easily by measuring them at once; but as harry only was present, it
was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over
again as often as they liked.

the parties stood thus:

the two mothers, though each really convinced that her own son was the
tallest,
 
 ___________________________
 
, by which
she offended mrs. ferrars and fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

before her removing from norland, elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of john dashwood on his following the other gentlemen
into the room, were officiously handed by him to colonel brandon for
his admiration.

"these are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, i dare say, be pleased with them.  i do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

the colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done 
 
 ___________________________
 
any thing painted by
miss dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspection.  mrs. ferrars,
not aware of their being elinor's work, particularly requested to look
at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of lady
middletons's approbation, fanny presented them to her mother,
considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done by
miss dashwood.

"hum"--said mrs. ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without regarding them at
all, returned them to her daughter.

perhaps fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude
enough,--for, colouring a little, she immediately said,

"they are very pretty, ma'am--an't they?" but then again, the dread of
having been too civil, too encouraging herself, probably came over her,
for she presently added,

"do you not think they are something in miss morton's style of
painting, ma'am?--she does p
 
 ___________________________
 
 the world why mrs. ferrars should seem to like me, if she did
not, and her liking me is every thing.  you shan't talk me out of my
satisfaction.  i am sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulties at all, to what i used to think.  mrs. ferrars is a
charming woman, and so is your sister.  they are both delightful women,
indeed!--i wonder i should never hear you say how agreeable mrs.
dashwood was!"

to this elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any.

"are you ill, miss dashwood?--you seem low--you don't speak;--sure you
an't well."

"i never was in better health."

"i am glad of it with all my heart; but really you did not look it.  i
should be sorry to have you ill; you, that have been the greatest
comfort to me in the world!--heaven knows what i should have done
without your friendship."--

elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her own success.
but it seemed to satisfy lucy, for she directly replied,

"indeed i am perfectly convinced of your regard fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r me, and next to
edward's love, it is the greatest comfort i have.--poor edward!--but
now there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for lady middleton's delighted with mrs. dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in harley street, i dare say, and edward spends half his
time with his sister--besides, lady middleton and mrs. ferrars will
visit now;--and mrs. ferrars and your sister were both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me.-- they are such
charming women!--i am sure if ever you tell your sister what i think of
her, you cannot speak too high."

but elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she should
tell her sister.  lucy conti
 
 ___________________________
 
d of a
son and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connections who knew it before.

this event, highly important to mrs. jennings's happiness, produced a
temporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influenced, in a
like degree, the engagements of her young friends; for as she wished to
be as much as possible with charlotte, she went thither every morning as
soon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in the evening;
and the miss dashwoods, at the particular request of the middletons,
spent the whole of every day in conduit street. for their own comfort
they would much rather have remained, at least all the morning, in mrs.
jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged against the wishes
of everybody. their hours were therefore made over to lady middleton and
the two miss steeles, by whom their company, in fact was as little
valued, as it was professedly sought.

they had too much sense to be desirable companions to the f
 
 ___________________________
 
fants being alike; and though she could plainly perceive, at
different times, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing his
father of it; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world.

i come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell mrs. john dashwood.  it so happened that while her two sisters
with mrs. jennings were first calling on her in harley street, another
of her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to her.  but while the imaginations
of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.  in the present
instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her
 
 ___________________________
 
 fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the miss
dashwoods, and understanding them to be mr. dashwood's sisters, she
immediately concluded them to be staying in harley street; and this
misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards of
invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister, to a small
musical party at her house.  the consequence of which was, that mrs.
john dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great
inconvenience of sending her carriage for the miss dashwoods, but, what
was still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing
to treat them with attention: and who could tell that they might not
expect to go out with her a second time?  the power of disappointing
them, it was true, must always be hers.  but that was not enough; for
when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be
wrong, they feel inju
 
 ___________________________
 
efreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.'  lady elliott was delighted with the thought.  we measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair was arranged precisely after my plan.  so that, in fact, you
see, if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be as
well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."

elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved the
compliment of rational opposition.

as john dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,
his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
struck him during the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her approbation, when they got home.  the consideration of mrs.
dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while mrs. jennings's engagements kept her from home.  the expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not
 
 ___________________________
 
t was in my power.
but i had just settled within myself to ask the miss steeles to spend a
few days with us.  they are very well behaved, good kind of girls; and
i think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very well
by edward.  we can ask your sisters some other year, you know; but the
miss steeles may not be in town any more.  i am sure you will like
them; indeed, you do like them, you know, very much already, and so
does my mother; and they are such favourites with harry!"

mr. dashwood was convinced.  he saw the necessity of inviting the miss
steeles immediately, and his conscience was pacified by the resolution
of inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bringing elinor to town as colonel brandon's wife, and marianne as
their visitor.

fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that had
procured it, wrote the next morning to lucy, to request her company and
her sist
 
 ___________________________
 
er's, for some days, in harley street, as soon as lady
middleton could spare them.  this was enough to make lucy really and
reasonably happy.  mrs. dashwood seemed actually working for her,
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!  such
an opportunity of being with edward and his family was, above all
things, the most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feelings!  it was an advantage that could not be
too gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the
visit to lady middleton, which had not before had any precise limits,
was instantly discovered to have been always meant 
 
 ___________________________
 

by some emigrant; called lucy by her christian name; and did not know
whether she should ever be able to part with them.





[at this point in the first and second editions, volume ii ended.]




chapter 37


mrs. palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother felt
it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her; and,
contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day, returned from
that period to her own home, and her own habits, in which she found the
miss dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.

about the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in
berkeley street, mrs. jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit to
mrs. palmer, entered the drawing-room, where elinor was sitting by
herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to
hear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it, by saying,

"lord! my dear miss dashwood! have you heard the news?"

"no, ma'am
 
 ___________________________
 
s he was going away again, it
came into my head, i am sure i do not know how i happened to think of
it, but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news.  so upon
that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed to know
something or other, and at last he said in a whisper, 'for fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, i think it advisable to say, that i
believe there is no great reason for alarm; i hope mrs. dashwood will
do very well.'"

"what! is fanny ill?"

"that is exactly what i said, my dear.  'lord!' says i, 'is mrs.
dashwood ill?' so then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all i can learn, seems to be this.  mr. edward ferrars,
the very young man i used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, i am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), mr.
edward ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
cousin lucy!--there's for you, my dear
 
 ___________________________
 
wn stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the
country.  so up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place, for
lucy was come to them by that time, little dreaming what was going on.
poor soul!  i pity her.  and i must say, i think she was used very
hardly; for your sister scolded like any fury, and soon drove her into
a fainting fit.  nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bitterly;
and your brother, he walked about the room, and said he did not know
what to do.  mrs. dashwood declared they should not stay a minute
longer in the house, and your brother was forced to go down upon his
knees too, to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed up
their clothes.  then she fell into hysterics again, and he was so
frightened that he would send for mr. donavan, and mr. donavan found
the house in all this uproar.  the carriage was at the door ready to
take my poor cousins away, and they were just stepping in as he came
off; poor lucy in such a condition, he says, she c
 
 ___________________________
 
 him to give up his engagement.  he would
stand to it, cost him what it might."

"then," cried mrs. jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "he has acted like an honest man! i beg your pardon, mr.
dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, i should have thought him a
rascal.  i have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for lucy steele is my cousin, and i believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband."

john dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune.  he therefore replied, without any resentment,

"i would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam.  miss lucy steele is, i dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
and to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle's care, the son
 
 ___________________________
 
him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him."

"poor young man!" cried mrs. jennings, "i am sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so i would tell him if i
could see him.  it is not fit that he should be living about at his own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns."

elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards edward, though she
could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"if he would only have done as well by himself," said john dashwood,
"as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have been
in his proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing.  but as it
is, it must be out of anybody's power to assist him.  and there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than all--his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
that estate upon robert immediately, which might have been edward's, on
proper conditions.  i left her this morning with her lawyer, talking
over th
 
 ___________________________
 
  but why should not i wear pink ribbons?  i do not care if it is
the doctor's favourite colour.  i am sure, for my part, i should never
have known he did like it better than any other colour, if he had not
happened to say so.  my cousins have been so plaguing me!  i declare
sometimes i do not know which way to look before them."

she had wandered away to a subject on which elinor had nothing to say,
and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again to
the first.

"well, but miss dashwood," speaking triumphantly, "people may say what
they chuse about mr. ferrars's declaring he would not have lucy, for it
is no such thing i can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad.  whatever lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain."

"i never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, i assure you,"
said elinor.

"oh, did not you?  but it was said, i know, very well, and by more tha
 
 ___________________________
 
lled from
below to tell me mrs. richardson was come in her coach, and would take
one of us to kensington gardens; so i was forced to go into the room
and interrupt them, to ask lucy if she would like to go, but she did
not care to leave edward; so i just run up stairs and put on a pair of
silk stockings and came off with the richardsons."

"i do not understand what you mean by interrupting them," said elinor;
"you were all in the same room together, were not you?"

"no, indeed, not us.  la! miss dashwood, do you think people make love
when any body else is by?  oh, for shame!--to be sure you must know
better than that.  (laughing affectedly.)--no, no; they were shut up in
the drawing-room together, and all i heard was only by listening at the
door."

"how!" cried elinor; "have you been repeating to me what you only
learnt yourself by listening at the door?  i am sorry i did not know it
before; for i certainly would not have suffered you to give me
particulars of a conversation which you ought n
 
 ___________________________
 
 can give her.--then they will have a child every year! and lord
help 'em! how poor they will be!--i must see what i can give them
towards furnishing their house.  two maids and two men, indeed!--as i
talked of t'other day.--no, no, they must get a stout girl of all
works.-- betty's sister would never do for them now."

the next morning brought elinor a letter by the two-penny post from
lucy herself.  it was as follows:

                    "bartlett's building, march.

     "i hope my dear miss dashwood will excuse the
     liberty i take of writing to her; but i know your
     friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such
     a good account of myself and my dear edward, after
     all the troubles we have went through lately,
     therefore will make no more apologies, but proceed
     to say that, thank god! though we have suffered
     dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy
     as we must always be in one another's love.  we have
     had great trials, and great perse
 
 ___________________________
 
f if he would.  that was just like lucy.--poor
soul! i wish i could get him a living, with all my heart.--she calls me
dear mrs. jennings, you see.  she is a good-hearted girl as ever
lived.--very well upon my word.  that sentence is very prettily turned.
yes, yes, i will go and see her, sure enough.  how attentive she is, to
think of every body!--thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.  it is as
pretty a letter as ever i saw, and does lucy's head and heart great
credit."



chapter 39


the miss dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,
and marianne's impatience to be gone increased every day.  she sighed
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that if
any place could give her ease, barton must do it.  elinor was hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal, and only so much less bent
on its being effected immediately, as that she was conscious of the
difficulties of so long a journey, which marianne could not be brought
to acknowledge.  she began
 
 ___________________________
 
eir kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence of her
good-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining them from
home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. the palmers were to remove to cleveland about
the end of march, for the easter holidays; and mrs. jennings, with both
her friends, received a very warm invitation from charlotte to go with
them.  this would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy
of miss dashwood;--but it was inforced with so much real politeness by
mr. palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amendment of his
manners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy,
induced her to accept it with pleasure.

when she told marianne what she had done, however, her first reply was
not very auspicious.

"cleveland!"--she cried, with great agitation.  "no, i cannot go to
cleveland."--

"you forget," said elinor gently, "that its situation is not...that it
is not in the neighbour
 
 ___________________________
 
--at least, i am afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"

such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended the
delicate feelings of mrs. jennings; but after this narration of what
really passed between colonel brandon and elinor, while they stood at
the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage.



chapter 40


"well, miss dashwood," said mrs. jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soon
as the gentleman had withdrawn, "i do not ask you what the colonel has
been saying to you; for though, upon my honour, i tried to keep out of
hearing, i could not help catching enough to understand his business.
and i assure you i never was better pleased in my life, and i wish you
joy of it with all my heart."

"thank you, ma'am," said elinor.  "it is a matter of great joy to me;
and i feel the goodness of colonel brandon most sensibly.  there
 
 ___________________________
 
n happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain; and
she joined mrs. jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
being all comfortably together in delaford parsonage before michaelmas.
so far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give elinor
that credit which edward would give her, that she spoke of her
friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on miss dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing in
the world for those she really valued.  as for colonel brandon, she was
not only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover truly
anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and scarcely
resolved to avail herself, at delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s poultry.

it was now above a week since john dashwood had called in berkeley
street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visit.--this was an obligation, however,
which not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companions.  marianne, not
contented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to
prevent her sister's going at all; and mrs. jennings, though her

 
 ___________________________
 
carriage was always at elinor's service, so very much disliked mrs.
john dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after
the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by taking
edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again.  the consequence was, that elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to run
the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman, whom neither of the others had
so much reason to dislike.

mrs. dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from t
 
 ___________________________
 
es place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had
never discarded him; and, therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much as
possible.  mrs. ferrars can never forget that edward is her son."

"you surprise me; i should think it must nearly have escaped her memory
by this time."

"you wrong her exceedingly.  mrs. ferrars is one of the most
affectionate mothers in the world."

elinor was silent.

"we think now,"--said mr. dashwood, after a short pause, "of robert's
marrying miss morton."

elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother's
tone, calmly replied,

"the lady, i suppose, has no choice in the affair."

"choice!--how do you mean?"

"i only mean that i suppose, from your manner of speaking, it must be
the same to miss morton whether she marry edward or robert."

"certainly, there can be no difference; for robert will now to all
intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son;--and as to a
 
 ___________________________
 
 no doubt of your doing exceedingly
well--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  has
colonel brandon been with you lately?"

elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of mr. robert ferrars.  after a few moments'
chat, john dashwood, recollecting that fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course of
life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her most
unfavourable opinion of his head and heart.

 
 ___________________________
 
certainly should have represented it to edward in a very
strong light.  'my dear fellow,' i should have said, 'consider what you
are doing.  you are making a most disgraceful connection, and such a
one as your family are unanimous in disapproving.' i cannot help
thinking, in short, that means might have been found.  but now it is
all too late.  he must be starved, you know;--that is certain;
absolutely starved."

he had just settled this point with great composure, when the entrance
of mrs. john dashwood put an end to the subject.  but though she never
spoke of it out of her own family, elinor could see its influence on
her mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which she
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself.  she
even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that elinor and her
sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see more of
them;--an exertion in which her husband, who attended her into the
room, and hung enamoured over her 
 
 ___________________________
 
nation, and forcing proper medicines on her at night,
trusted, like marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
felt no real alarm.

a very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her
bed, elinor was very ready to adopt mrs. jennings's advice, of sending
for the palmers' apothecary.

he came, examined his patient, and though encouraging miss dashwood to
expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health, yet, by
pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing the
word "infection" to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to mrs. palmer,
on her baby's account.  mrs. jennings, who had been inclined from the
first to think marianne's complaint more serious than elinor, now
looked very grave on mr. harris's report, and confirming charlotte's
fears and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate removal with
her infant;
 
 ___________________________
 
e he was preparing to go, colonel
brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise.--here, however, the kindness of mrs. jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the colonel away while his love was in so much
uneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive them both, she
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should want him to
play at piquet of an evening, while miss dashwood was above with her
sister, &c. she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was
gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affect to demur; especially as mrs. jennings's entreaty was
warmly seconded by mr. palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself,
in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise miss
dashwood in any emergence.

marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements.
she knew not that she had been the m
 
 ___________________________
 
eans of sending the owners of
cleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival.  it
gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of mrs. palmer; and as it
gave her likewise no concern, she never mentioned her name.

two days passed away from the time of mr. palmer's departure, and her
situation continued, with little variation, the same.  mr. harris, who
attended her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and
miss dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful.  mrs. jennings had determined very early
in the seizure that marianne would never get over it, and colonel
brandon, who was chiefly of use in listening to mrs. jennings's
forebodings, was not in a state of mind to resist their influence.  he
tried to reason himself out of fears, which the different judgment of
the apothecary seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each day
in which he was left entirely a
 
 ___________________________
 
room, where she knew he
was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present.

it was no time for hesitation.  her fears and her difficulties were
immediately before him.  her fears, he had no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of:--he listened to them in silent despondence;--but
her difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that
seemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his mind,
he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch mrs. dashwood.
elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. she thanked him
with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to hurry off his
servant with a message to mr. harris, and an order for post-horses
directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.

the comfort of such a friend at that moment as colonel brandon--or such
a companion for her mother,--how gratefully was it felt!--a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose
friendship might soothe her
 
 ___________________________
 
le in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner lobby,
assured her that they were already in the house.  she rushed to the
drawing-room,--she entered it,--and saw only willoughby.



chapter 44


elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him, obeyed
the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room,
and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended by
his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of command than
supplication,

"miss dashwood, for half an hour--for ten minutes--i entreat you to
stay."

"no, sir," she replied with firmness, "i shall not stay.  your business
cannot be with me.  the servants, i suppose, forgot to tell you that
mr. palmer was not in the house."

"had they told me," he cried with vehemence, "that mr. palmer and all
his relations were at the devil, it would not have turned me from the
door.  my business is with you, and only you."

"with me!"--in the utmost amazement--"well, sir,--be quick--and if you
can
 
 ___________________________
 
 abruptness, a moment afterwards--"is out
of danger.  i heard it from the servant.  god be praised!--but is it
true? is it really true?"

elinor would not speak.  he repeated the inquiry with yet greater
eagerness.

"for god's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not?"

"we hope she is."

he rose up, and walked across the room.

"had i known as much half an hour ago--but since i am here,"--speaking
with a forced vivacity as he returned to his seat--"what does it
signify?--for once, miss dashwood--it will be the last time,
perhaps--let us be cheerful together.--i am in a fine mood for
gaiety.-- tell me honestly"--a deeper glow overspreading his
cheeks--"do you think me most a knave or a fool?"

elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever.  she began to
think that he must be in liquor;--the strangeness of such a visit, and
of such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this
impression she immediately rose, saying,

"mr. willoughby, i advise you at present to ret
 
 ___________________________
 
ur to me almost from the first, was of a
kind--it is astonishing, when i reflect on what it was, and what she
was, that my heart should have been so insensible!  but at first i must
confess, my vanity only was elevated by it.  careless of her happiness,
thinking only of my own amusement, giving way to feelings which i had
always been too much in the habit of indulging, i endeavoured, by every
means in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, without any design
of returning her affection."

miss dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him with the most
angry contempt, stopped him, by saying,

"it is hardly worth while, mr. willoughby, for you to relate, or for me
to listen any longer.  such a beginning as this cannot be followed by
any thing.-- do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the
subject."

"i insist on you hearing the whole of it," he replied, "my fortune was
never large, and i had always been expensive, always in the habit of
associating with people of better income 
 
 ___________________________
 
t a hard-hearted rascal i was!"

they were both silent for a few moments.  elinor first spoke.

"did you tell her that you should soon return?"

"i do not know what i told her," he replied, impatiently; "less than
was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more
than was justified by the future.  i cannot think of it.--it won't
do.--then came your dear mother to torture me farther, with all her
kindness and confidence.  thank heaven! it did torture me.  i was
miserable.  miss dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to look back on my own misery.  i owe such a grudge to myself
for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my past
sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now.  well, i
went, left all that i loved, and went to those to whom, at best, i was
only indifferent.  my journey to town--travelling with my own horses,
and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--my own reflections
so cheerful--when i looked forward 
 
 ___________________________
 
party, a dance at his house in the evening.--had he not told me as
an inducement that you and your sister were to be there, i should have
felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.  the next
morning brought another short note from marianne--still affectionate,
open, artless, confiding--everything that could make my conduct most
hateful.  i could not answer it.  i tried--but could not frame a
sentence.  but i thought of her, i believe, every moment of the day.
if you can pity me, miss dashwood, pity my situation as it was then.
with my head and heart full of your sister, i was forced to play the
happy lover to another woman!--those three or four weeks were worse
than all.  well, at last, as i need not tell you, you were forced on
me; and what a sweet figure i cut!--what an evening of agony it was!--
marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me willoughby in
such a tone!--oh, god!--holding out her hand to me, asking me for an
explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in
 
 ___________________________
 
.  she
must be attached to you, or she would not have married you.  to treat
her with unkindness, to speak of her slightingly is no atonement to
marianne--nor can i suppose it a relief to your own conscience."

"do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh.-- "she does
not deserve your compassion.--she knew i had no regard for her when we
married.--well, married we were, and came down to combe magna to be
happy, and afterwards returned to town to be gay.--and now do you pity
me, miss dashwood?--or have i said all this to no purpose?-- am i--be
it only one degree--am i less guilty in your opinion than i was
before?--my intentions were not always wrong.  have i explained away
any part of my guilt?"

"yes, you have certainly removed something--a little.-- you have proved
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than i had believed you.  you have
proved your heart less wicked, much less wicked.  but i hardly
know--the misery that you have inflicted--i hardly know what could have
made it wors
 
 ___________________________
 
ept off every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful
of betraying herself to her sister.  short was the time, however, in
which that fear could affect her, for within half an hour after
willoughby's leaving the house, she was again called down stairs by the
sound of another carriage.--eager to save her mother from every
unnecessary moment's horrible suspense, she ran immediately into the
hall, and reached the outward door just in time to receive and support
her as she entered it.

mrs. dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had produced
almost the conviction of marianne's being no more, had no voice to
inquire after her, no voice even for elinor; but she, waiting neither
for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;--and her
mother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as much
overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.  she
was supported into the drawing-room between her daughter and her
friend;--and there, shedding te
 
 ___________________________
 
ars of joy, though still unable to
speak, embraced elinor again and again, turning from her at intervals
to press colonel brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at once her
gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss
of the moment.  he shared it, however, in a silence even greater than
her own.

as soon as mrs. dashwood had recovered herself, to see marianne was her
first desire; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child,
rendered dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.
elinor's delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only
checked by an apprehension of its robbing marianne of farther
sleep;--but mrs. dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when
the life of a child was at stake, and marianne, satisfied in knowing
her mother was near her, and conscious of being 
 
 ___________________________
 
too weak for
conversation, submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by
every nurse around her.  mrs. dashwood would sit up with her all night;
and elinor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to bed.  but
the rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hours of the
most wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off by
irritation of spirits.  willoughby, "poor willoughby," as she now
allowed herself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she would
not but have heard his vindication for the world, and now blamed, now
acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly befor
 
 ___________________________
 
aded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect on marianne
might be; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be
happy with another; and for a moment wished willoughby a widower.
then, remembering colonel brandon, reproved herself, felt that to his
sufferings and his constancy far more than to his rival's, the reward
of her sister was due, and wished any thing rather than mrs.
willoughby's death.

the shock of colonel brandon's errand at barton had been much softened
to mrs. dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great was her
uneasiness about marianne, that she had already determined to set out
for cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any further
intelligence, and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,
that the careys were then expected every moment to fetch margaret away,
as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be infection.

marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness of
mrs. dashwood's looks and spiri
 
 ___________________________
 
 from something more than
his affection for marianne, or the consciousness of its being known to
others; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying
complexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence of many
past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that resemblance
between marianne and eliza already acknowledged, and now strengthened
by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.

mrs. dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than her daughter, but
with a mind very differently influenced, and therefore watching to very
different effect, saw nothing in the colonel's behaviour but what arose
from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actions
and words of marianne she persuaded herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned.

at the end of another day or two, marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, mrs. dashwood, urged equally by he
 
 ___________________________
 
r own and her
daughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to barton.  on her
measures depended those of her two friends; mrs. jennings could not
quit cleveland during the dashwoods' stay; and colonel brandon was soon
brought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable.  at his and mrs.
jennings's united request in return, mrs. dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better
accommodation of her sick child; and the colonel, at the joint
invitation of mrs. dashwood and mrs. jennings, whose active good-nature
made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,
engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks.

the day of separation and departure arrived; and marianne, after taking
so particular and lengthened a leave of mr
 
 ___________________________
 
s. jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
colonel brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious that she
should engross at least half.  mrs. dashwood and elinor then followed,
and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, and
feel their own dullness, till mrs. jennings was summoned to her chaise
to take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young
companions; and colonel brandon immediately afterwards took his
solitary way to delaford.

the dashwoods were two days on the road, and marianne bore her journey
on both, without essential fatigue.  every thing that the most zealous
affection, the most solici
 
 ___________________________
 
dulged.  as soon as they entered the house, marianne with a
kiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through her
tears, "tell mama," withdrew from her sister and walked slowly up
stairs.  elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable
as what she now sought; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its
result, and a resolution of reviving the subject again, should marianne
fail to do it, she turned into the parlour to fulfill her parting
injunction.



chapter 47


mrs. dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her former
favourite.  she rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his
imputed guilt;--she was sorry for him;--she wished him happy.  but the
feelings of the past could not be recalled.--nothing could restore him
with a faith unbroken--a character unblemished, to marianne.  nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through his
means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards eliza.  nothing
could replace him, therefore,
 
 ___________________________
 
 in her former esteem, nor injure the
interests of colonel brandon.

had mrs. dashwood, like her daughter, heard willoughby's story from
himself--had she witnessed his distress, and been under the influence
of his countenance and his manner, it is probable that her compassion
would have been greater.  but it was neither in elinor's power, nor in
her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailed
explanation, as had at first been called forth in herself.  reflection
had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of
willoughby's deserts;--she wished, ther
 
 ___________________________
 
lly due to his
character, without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy
astray.

in the evening, when they were all three together, marianne began
voluntarily to speak of him again;--but that it was not without an
effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for
some time previously sitting--her rising colour, as she spoke,--and her
unsteady voice, plainly shewed.

"i wish to assure you both," said she, "that i see every thing--as you
can desire me to do."

mrs. dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothing
tenderness, had not elinor, who really wished to hear her sister's
unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence.  marianne
slowly continued--

"it is a great relief to me--what elinor told me this morning--i have
now heard exactly what i wished to hear."--for some moments her voice
was lost; but recovering herself, she added, and with greater calmness
than before--"i am now perfectly satisfied, i wish for no change.  i
never could ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 reckons as nothing.  he would have had a wife of whose
temper he could make no complaint, but he would have been always
necessitous--always poor; and probably would soon have learned to rank
the innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far
more importance, even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a
wife."

"i have not a doubt of it," said marianne; "and i have nothing to
regret--nothing but my own folly."

"rather say your mother's imprudence, my child," said mrs. dashwood;
"she must be answerable."

marianne would not let her proceed;--and elinor, satisfied that each
felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that might
weaken her sister's spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first
subject, immediately continued,

"one observation may, i think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the
story--that all willoughby's difficulties have arisen from the first
offence against virtue, in his behaviour to eliza williams.  that crime
has been the origin of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the succeeding letters.
she was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of his measures.

their man-servant had been sent one morning to exeter on business; and
when, as he waited at table, he had satisfied the inquiries of his
mistress as to the event of his errand, this was his voluntary
communication--

"i suppose you know, ma'am, that mr. ferrars is married."

marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon elinor, saw her
turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.  mrs. dashwood,
whose eyes, as she answered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively
taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by elinor's
countenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by marianne's situation, knew not on which child to
bestow her principal attention.

the servant, who saw only that miss marianne was taken ill, had sense
enough to call one of the maids, who, with mrs. dashwood's assistance,
supported her into the other room.  by that time, marianne 
 
 ___________________________
 
was rather
better, and her mother leaving her to the care of margaret and the
maid, returned to elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so far
recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an
inquiry of thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.  mrs. dashwood
immediately took all that trouble on herself; and elinor had the
benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.

"who told you that mr. ferrars was married, thomas?"

"i see mr. ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in exeter, and his lady
too, miss steele as was.  they was stopping in a chaise at the door of
the new london inn, as i went there with a message from sally at the
park to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. i happened to look up
as i went by the chaise, and so i
 
 ___________________________
 
did she tell you she was married, thomas?"

"yes, ma'am. she smiled, and said how she had changed her name since
she was in these parts.  she was always a very affable and free-spoken
young lady, and very civil behaved.  so, i made free to wish her joy."

"was mr. ferrars in the carriage with her?"

"yes, ma'am, i just see him leaning back in it, but he did not look
up;--he never was a gentleman much for talking."

elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting himself
forward; and mrs. dashwood probably found the same explanation.

"was there no one else in the carriage?"

"no, ma'am, only they two."

"do you know where they came from?"

"they come straight from town, as miss lucy--mrs. ferrars told me."

"and are they going farther westward?"

"yes, ma'am--but not to bide long.  they will soon be back again, and
then they'd be sure and call here."

mrs. dashwood now looked at her daughter; but elinor knew better than
to expect them.  she recognised the whole of lucy in the message, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 voice, to her mother, that they were probably going
down to mr. pratt's, near plymouth.

thomas's intelligence seemed over.  elinor looked as if she wished to
hear more.

"did you see them off, before you came away?"

"no, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but i could not bide any
longer; i was afraid of being late."

"did mrs. ferrars look well?"

"yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she was
always a very handsome young lady--and she seemed vastly contented."

mrs. dashwood could think of no other question, and thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed.
marianne had already sent to say, that she should eat nothing more.
mrs. dashwood's and elinor's appetites were equally lost, and margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both
her sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as they had often
had to be careless of their meals, she had never been obliged to go
without her dinner before.

when t
 
 ___________________________
 
he dessert and the wine were arranged, and mrs. dashwood and
elinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in a
similarity of thoughtfulness and silence.  mrs. dashwood feared to
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation.  she now
found that she had erred in relying on elinor's representation of
herself; and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly
softened at the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness,
suffering as she then had suffered for marianne.  she found that she
had been misled by the careful, the considerate attention of her
daughter, to think the attachment, which once she had so well
understood, much slighter 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their
own discretion.

not a syllable passed aloud.  they all waited in silence for the
appearance of their visitor.  his footsteps were heard along the gravel
path; in a moment he was in the passage, and in another he was before
them.

his countenance, as he entered the room, was not too happy, even for
elinor.  his complexion was white with agitation, and he looked as if
fearful of his reception, and conscious that he merited no kind one.
mrs. dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes of
that daughter, by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to be
guided in every thing, met with a look of forced complacency, gave him
her hand, and wished him joy.

he coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.  elinor's lips
had moved with her mother's, and, when the moment of action was over,
she wished that she had shaken hands with him too.  but it was then too
late, and with a countenance meaning to be open, she sat d
 
 ___________________________
 
own again and
talked of the weather.

marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal her
distress; and margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole of
the case, thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and therefore
took a seat as far from him as she could, and maintained a strict
silence.

when elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause took place.  it was put an end to by mrs. dashwood, who
felt obliged to hope that he had left mrs. ferrars very well.  in a
hurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.

another pause.

elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said,

"is mrs. ferrars at longstaple?"

"at longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise.-- "no, my mother
is in town."

"i meant," said elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to inquire
for mrs. edward ferrars."

she dared not look up;--but her mother and marianne bot
 
 ___________________________
 
om eighteen to nineteen: lucy appeared everything
that was amiable and obliging.  she was pretty too--at least i thought
so then; and i had seen so little of other women, that i could make no
comparisons, and see no defects.  considering everything, therefore, i
hope, foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since in every
way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable
piece of folly."

the change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness
of the dashwoods, was such--so great--as promised them all, the
satisfaction of a sleepless night.  mrs. dashwood, too happy to be
comfortable, knew not how to love edward, nor praise elinor enough, how
to be enough thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversation
together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and society of both.

marianne could speak her happiness only by tears.  comparisons would
occur--regrets would arise;--and he
 
 ___________________________
 
l forgive him
much sooner."

in what state the affair stood at present between them, edward knew
not, for no communication with any of his family had yet been attempted
by him.  he had quitted oxford within four and twenty hours after
lucy's letter arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearest
road to barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, with
which that road did not hold the most intimate connection.  he could do
nothing till he were assured of his fate with miss dashwood; and by his
rapidity in seeking that fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the
jealousy with which he had once thought of colonel brandon, in spite of
the modesty with which he rated his own deserts, and the politeness
with which he talked of his doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect
a very cruel reception.  it was his business, however, to say that he
did, and he said it very prettily.  what he might say on the subject a
twelvemonth after, must be referred to the imagination of husbands
 
 ___________________________
 
ome favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on that he rested for the residue of their
income.  but elinor had no such dependence; for since edward would
still be unable to marry miss morton, and his chusing herself had been
spoken of in mrs. ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evil
than his chusing lucy steele, she feared that robert's offence would
serve no other purpose than to enrich fanny.

about four days after edward's arrival colonel brandon appeared, to
complete mrs. dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at barton, more company
with her than her house would hold.  edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and colonel brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the park; from whence he usually returned
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tete
before breakfast.

a three weeks' residence at delaford, where, in his evening hours at
least, he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
six and seventeen, brought him to barton in a temper of mind
which needed all the improvement in marianne's looks, all the kindness
of her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's language, to
make it cheerful.  among such friends, however, and such flattery, he
did revive.  no rumour of lucy's marriage had yet reached him:--he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering.  every thing was
explained to him by mrs. dashwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoice
in what he had done for mr. ferrars, since eventually it promoted the
interest of elinor.

it would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced in the good
opinion of each other, as they advanced in each other's acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise.  their resemblance in good principles
and good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably
have been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their be
 
 ___________________________
 
w with, and poor nancy had not seven shillings in
the world;--so i was very glad to give her five guineas to take her
down to exeter, where she thinks of staying three or four weeks with
mrs. burgess, in hopes, as i tell her, to fall in with the doctor
again.  and i must say that lucy's crossness not to take them along
with them in the chaise is worse than all.  poor mr. edward! i cannot
get him out of my head, but you must send for him to barton, and miss
marianne must try to comfort him."

mr. dashwood's strains were more solemn.  mrs. ferrars was the most
unfortunate of women--poor fanny had suffered agonies of
sensibility--and he considered the existence of each, under such a
blow, with grateful wonder.  robert's offence was unpardonable, but
lucy's was infinitely worse.  neither of them were ever again to be
mentioned to mrs. ferrars; and even, if she might hereafter be induced
to forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledged as her
daughter, nor be permitted to appear in her pres
 
 ___________________________
 
e had one again.

in spite of his being allowed once more to live, however, he did not
feel the continuance of his existence secure, till he had revealed his
present engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, he
feared, might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carry him off
as rapidly as before.  with apprehensive caution therefore it was
revealed, and he was listened to with unexpected calmness.  mrs.
ferrars at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying
miss dashwood, by every argument in her power;--told him, that in miss
morton he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune;--and
enforced the assertion, by observing that miss morton was the daughter
of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds, while miss dashwood was only
the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than three; but when
she found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her
representation, he was by no means inclined to be guided by it, she
judged it wisest, from the exper
 
 ___________________________
 
ble to visit edward and his wife in their parsonage by
michaelmas, and she found in elinor and her husband, as she really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world.  they had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of colonel brandon and marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows.

they were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends.  mrs. ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the dashwoods were at the
expense of a journey from sussex to do them honour.

"i will not say that i am disappointed, my dear sister," said john, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of delaford
house, "that would be saying too much, for certainly you have been one
of the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is.  but, i
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call colonel brandon
brother.  his property here, his place, his house, every thing is in
such respectable and ex
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the highest state of affection and influence.
lucy became as necessary to mrs. ferrars, as either robert or fanny;
and while edward was never cordially forgiven for having once intended
to marry her, and elinor, though superior to her in fortune and birth,
was spoken of as an intruder, she was in every thing considered, and
always openly acknowledged, to be a favourite child.  they settled in
town, received very liberal assistance from mrs. ferrars, were on the
best terms imaginable with the dashwoods; and setting aside the
jealousies and ill-will continually subsisting between fanny and lucy,
in which their husbands of course took a part, as well as the frequent
domestic disagreements between robert and lucy themselves, nothing
could exceed the harmony in which they all lived together.

what edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son, might have
puzzled many people to find out; and what robert had done to succeed to
it, might have puzzled them still more.  it was an arrangement,
ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ght be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in every
particular, from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home, and
from the regular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be supposed no
less contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of an
exchange.

elinor's marriage divided her as little from her family as could well
be contrived, without rendering the cottage at barton entirely useless,
for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time with
her.  mrs. dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure
in the frequency of her visits at delaford; for her wish of bringing
marianne and colonel brandon together was hardly less earnest, though
rather more liberal than what john had expressed.  it was now her
darling object.  precious as was the company of her daughter to her,
she desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her
valued friend; and to see marianne settled at the mansion-house was
equally the wish of edward and el
 
 ___________________________
 
inor.  they each felt his sorrows, and
their own obligations, and marianne, by general consent, was to be the
reward of all.

with such a confederacy against her--with a knowledge so intimate of
his goodness--with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself,
which at last, though long after it was observable to everybody
else--burst on her--what could she do?

marianne dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate.  she was born to
discover the falsehood of her own opinions, and to counteract, by her
conduct, her most favourite maxims.  she was born to overcome an
affection formed so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment
superior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
her hand to another!--and that other, a man who had suffered no less
than herself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two years
before, she had considered too ol
 
 ___________________________
 
ur,
nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,
and in sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderable degree of
domestic felicity.

for marianne, however--in spite of his incivility in surviving her
loss--he always retained that decided regard which interested him in
every thing that befell her, and made her his secret standard of
perfection in woman;--and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him
in after-days as bearing no comparison with mrs. brandon.

mrs. dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage, without
attempting a removal to delaford; and fortunately for sir john and mrs.
jennings, when marianne was taken from them, margaret had reached an
age highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for being
supposed to have a lover.

between barton and delaford, there was that constant communication
which strong family affection would naturally dictate;--and among the
merits and the happiness of elinor and marianne, let it not be ranked
as t