r many generations, they had lived in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surrounding acquaintance.  the late owner of this estate was a single
man, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.  but her
death, which happened ten years before his own, produced a great
alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and received
into his house the family of his nephew mr. henry dashwood, the legal
inheritor of the norland estate, and the person to whom he intended to
bequeath it.  in the society of his nephew and niece, and their
children, the old gentleman's days were comfortably spent.  his
attachment to them all increased.  the constant attention of mr. and
mrs. henry dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a re
 
 ___________________________
 
lish to his existence.

by a former marriage, mr. henry dashwood had one son: by his present
lady, three daughters.  the son, a steady respectable young man, was
amply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.  by his own
marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to his
wealth.  to him therefore the succession to the norland estate was not
so really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independent
of what might arise to them from their father's inheri