en to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some
addition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was full
of engagements.  luckily lady middleton's mother had arrived at barton
within the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman,
he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine.  the young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectly
satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished for
no more.

mrs. jennings, lady middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,
fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, and
rather vulgar.  she was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.  marianne was
vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards elinor
to see how she bore these attac
 
 ___________________________
 
ks, with an earnestness which gave
elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as mrs. jennings's.

colonel brandon, the friend of sir john, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than lady middleton was to be
his wife, or mrs. jennings to be lady middleton's mother.  he was
silent and grave.  his appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of marianne and margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his
address was particularly gentlemanlike.

there was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of lady middleton
was s
 
 ___________________________
 
f taste.  his pleasure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, was
estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and
thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every
exquisite power of enjoyment.  she was perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanity
required.



chapter 8


mrs. jennings was a widow with an ample jointure.  she had only two
daughters, both of whom she had lived to see respectably married, and
she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the
world.  in the promotion of this object she was zealously active, as
far as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.  she was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the
advantage of raising the blushes 
 
 ___________________________
 
barton decisively to
pronounce that colonel brandon was very much in love with marianne
dashwood.  she rather suspected it to be so, on the very first evening
of their being together, from his listening so attentively while she
sang to them; and when the visit was returned by the middletons' dining
at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again.
it must be so.  she was perfectly convinced of it.  it would be an
excellent match, for he was rich, and she was handsome.  mrs. jennings
had been anxious to see colonel brandon well married, ever since her
connection with sir john first brought him to her knowledge; and she
was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl.

the immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable, for
it supplied her with endless jokes against them both.  at the park she
laughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at marianne.  to the former
her raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferen
 
 ___________________________
 
t; but to the latter it was at first
incomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knew
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.

mrs. dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of
her daughter, ventured to clear mrs. jennings from the probability of
wishing to throw ridicule on his age.

"but at least, mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured.  colonel brandon
is certainly younger than mrs. jennings, but he is old enough to be my
father; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must have
long outlived every sensation of the kind.  it is too ridiculous!  when
is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect him?"

"i
 
 ___________________________
 

colonel brandon's partiality for marianne, which had so early been
discovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to elinor, when
it ceased to be noticed by them.  their attention and wit were drawn
off to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other had
incurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his feelings
began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiments
which mrs. jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction, were now
actually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblance
of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of mr.
willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was no
hindrance to the regard of colonel brandon.  she saw it with concern;
for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when opposed to a
very lively one of five and twenty? and as she could not even wish him
successful, she heartily wished
 
 ___________________________
 
t is exactly what i think of him," cried marianne.

"do not boast of it, however," said elinor, "for it is injustice in
both of you.  he is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and
i never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him."

"that he is patronised by you," replied willoughby, "is certainly in
his favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach in
itself.  who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a
woman as lady middleton and mrs. jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?"

"but perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and marianne will
make amends for the regard of lady middleton and her mother.  if their
praise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not more
undiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"in defence of your protege you can even be saucy."

"my protege, as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense will always
have attractions for me.  yes, marianne, even in a man bet
 
 ___________________________
 
to norland, which she brought with
her from sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought it
possible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on her
present home.

elinor's happiness was not so great.  her heart was not so much at
ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure.  they afforded
her no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind,
nor that could teach her to think of norland with less regret than
ever.  neither lady middleton nor mrs. jennings could supply to her the
conversation she missed; although the latter was an everlasting talker,
and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her a
large share of her discourse.  she had already repeated her own history
to elinor three or four times; and had elinor's memory been equal to
her means of improvement, she might have known very early in their
acquaintance all the particulars of mr. jennings's last illness, and
what he said to his wife a few minutes before he died.
 
 ___________________________
 
resently he took
up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it was all
tumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of
white paper; and put it into his pocket-book."

for such particulars, stated on such authority, elinor could not
withhold her credit; nor was she disposed to it, for the circumstance
was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself.

margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactory
to her sister.  when mrs. jennings attacked her one evening at the
park, to give the name of the young man who was elinor's particular
favourite, which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,
margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying, "i must not
tell, may i, elinor?"

this of course made every body laugh; and elinor tried to laugh too.
but the effort was painful.  she was convinced that margaret had fixed
on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a
standing joke with mrs. jennings
 
 ___________________________
 
they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.  among the
rest there was one for colonel brandon;--he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room.

"what is the matter with brandon?" said sir john.

nobody could tell.

"i hope he has had no bad news," said lady middleton.  "it must be
something extraordinary that could make colonel brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."

in about five minutes he returned.

"no bad news, colonel, i hope;" said mrs. jennings, as soon as he
entered the room.

"none at all, ma'am, i thank you."

"was it from avignon?  i hope it is not to say that your sister is
worse."

"no, ma'am. it came from town, and is merely a letter of business."

"but how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only a
letter of business?  come, come, this won't do, colonel; so let us hear
the truth of it."

"my dear madam," said lady middleton, "recollect what you are saying."

"perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin fanny is m
 
 ___________________________
 
arried?" said
mrs. jennings, without attending to her daughter's reproof.

"no, indeed, it is not."

"well, then, i know who it is from, colonel.  and i hope she is well."

"whom do you mean, ma'am?" said he, colouring a little.

"oh! you know who i mean."

"i am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, addressing lady middleton,
"that i should receive this letter today, for it is on business which
requires my immediate attendance in town."

"in town!" cried mrs. jennings.  "what can you have to do in town at
this time of year?"

"my own loss is great," he continued, "in being obliged to leave so
agreeable a party; but i am the more concerned, as i fear my presence
is necessary to gain your admittance at whitwell."

what a blow upon them all was this!

"but if you write a note to the housekeeper, mr. brandon," said
marianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"

he shook his head.

"we must go," said sir john.--"it shall not be put off when we are so
near it.  
 
 ___________________________
 
dable.

"well, then, when will you come back again?"

"i hope we shall see you at barton," added her ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
whitwell till you return."

"you are very obliging.  but it is so uncertain, when i may have it in
my power to return, that i dare not engage for it at all."

"oh! he must and shall come back," cried sir john.  "if he is not here
by the end of the week, i shall go after him."

"ay, so do, sir john," cried mrs. jennings, "and then perhaps you may
find out what his business is."

"i do not want to pry into other men's concerns.  i suppose it is
something he is ashamed of."

colonel brandon's horses were announced.

"you do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added sir john.

"no. only to honiton.  i shall then go post."

"well, as you are resolved to go, i wish you a good journey.  but you
had better change your mind."

"i assure you it is not in my power."

he then took leave of the whole party.

"is there n
 
 ___________________________
 
o chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this
winter, miss dashwood?"

"i am afraid, none at all."

"then i must bid you farewell for a longer time than i should wish to
do."

to marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing.

"come colonel," said mrs. jennings, "before you go, do let us know what
you are going about."

he wished her a good morning, and, attended by sir john, left the room.

the complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto
restrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again and
again how provoking it was to be so disappointed.

"i can guess what his business is, however," said mrs. jennings
exultingly.

"can you, ma'am?" said almost every body.

"yes; it is about miss williams, i am sure."

"and who is miss
 
 ___________________________
 
st.  they both seemed delighted with their drive; but said
only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the others
went on the downs.

it was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long.  some more of the
careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly
twenty to table, which sir john observed with great contentment.
willoughby took his usual place between the two elder miss dashwoods.
mrs. jennings sat on elinor's right hand; and they had not been long
seated, before she leant behind her and willoughby, and said to
marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "i have found you out in
spite of all your tricks.  i know where you spent the morning."

marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, "where, pray?"--

"did not you know," said willoughby, "that we had been out in my
curricle?"

"yes, yes, mr. impudence, i know that very well, and i was determined
to find out where you had been to.-
 
 ___________________________
 
- i hope you like your house, miss
marianne.  it is a very large one, i know; and when i come to see you,
i hope you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much when
i was there six years ago."

marianne turned away in great confusion.  mrs. jennings laughed
heartily; and elinor found that in her resolution to know where they
had been, she had actually made her own woman enquire of mr.
willoughby's groom; and that she had by that method been informed that
they had gone to allenham, and spent a considerable time there in
walking about the garden and going all over the house.

elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seemed very unlikely
that willoughby should propose, or marianne consent, to enter the house
while mrs. smith was in 
 
 ___________________________
 
it, with whom marianne had not the smallest
acquaintance.

as soon as they left the dining-room, elinor enquired of her about it;
and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance
related by mrs. jennings was perfectly true.  marianne was quite angry
with her for doubting it.

"why should you imagine, elinor, that we did not go there, or that we
did not see the house?  is not it what you have often wished to do
yourself?"

"yes, marianne, but i would not go while mrs. smith was there, and with
no other companion than mr. willoughby."

"mr. willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to shew
that house; and as he went in an open carriage, it was impossible to
have any other compani
 
 ___________________________
 
not always evince its propriety."

"on the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it, elinor; for if
there had been any real impropriety in what i did, i should have been
sensible of it at the time, for we always know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction i could have had no pleasure."

"but, my dear marianne, as it has already exposed you to some very
impertinent remarks, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of
your own conduct?"

"if the impertinent remarks of mrs. jennings are to be the proof of
impropriety in conduct, we are all offending every moment of our lives.
i value not her censure any more than i should do her commendation.  i
am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over mrs.
smith's grounds, or in seeing her house.  they will one day be mr.
willoughby's, and--"

"if they were one day to be your own, marianne, you would not be
justified in what you have done."

she blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying to her;
and afte
 
 ___________________________
 
hing could be
more forlorn than the furniture,--but if it were newly fitted up--a
couple of hundred pounds, willoughby says, would make it one of the
pleasantest summer-rooms in england."

could elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others,
she would have described every room in the house with equal delight.



chapter 14


the sudden termination of colonel brandon's visit at the park, with his
steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised the
wonder of mrs. jennings for two or three days; she was a great
wonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all
the comings and goings of all their acquaintance.  she wondered, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there must
be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that could
have befallen him, with a fixed determination that he should not escape
them all.

"something very melancholy must be the matter, i am sure," said she.
"i could see it in his fac
 
 ___________________________
 
s rather sickly.  i would lay any wager it is about
miss williams.  it is not so very likely he should be distressed in his
circumstances now, for he is a very prudent man, and to be sure must
have cleared the estate by this time.  i wonder what it can be!  may be
his sister is worse at avignon, and has sent for him over.  his setting
off in such a hurry seems very like it.  well, i wish him out of all
his trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain."

so wondered, so talked mrs. jennings.  her opinion varying with every
fresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable as they arose.
elinor, though she felt really interested in the welfare of colonel
brandon, could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly away,
which mrs. jennings was desirous of her feeling; for besides that the
circumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting amazement or
variety of speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed of.  it was
engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sist
 
 ___________________________
 
igible.  i would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct."

elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering her sister's
youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, were all sunk in mrs. dashwood's romantic
delicacy.

it was several days before willoughby's name was mentioned before
marianne by any of her family; sir john and mrs. jennings, indeed, were
not so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;--but
one evening, mrs. dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of
shakespeare, exclaimed,

"we have never finished hamlet, marianne; our dear willoughby went away
before we could get through it.  we will put it by, that when he comes
again...but it may be months, perhaps, before that happens."

"months!" cried marianne, with strong surprise.  "no--nor many weeks."

mrs. dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but
 
 ___________________________
 
t's instructions,
extended.

sir john never came to the dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.
on the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their visitor,
towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them for both.

"you must drink tea with us to night," said he, "for we shall be quite
alone--and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we shall be a
large party."

mrs. jennings enforced the necessity.  "and who knows but you may raise
a dance," said she.  "and that will tempt you, miss marianne."

"a dance!" cried marianne.  "impossible! who is to dance?"

"who! why yourselves, and the careys, and whitakers to be sure.--what!
you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless is gone!"

"i wish with all my soul," cried sir john, "that willoughby were among
us again."

this, and marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to edward.  "and who
i
 
 ___________________________
 
ore her, must force her attention, and engross
her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.

from a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table, she was
roused one morning, soon after edward's leaving them, by the arrival of
company.  she happened to be quite alone.  the closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drew
her eyes to the window, and she saw a large party walking up to the
door.  amongst them were sir john and lady middleton and mrs. jennings,
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were quite unknown
to her.  she was sitting near the window, and as soon as sir john
perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open
the casement to speak to him, though the space was so short between the
door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at one
without being heard at the other.

"well," said he, "we have brought you some strange
 
 ___________________________
 
rs.  how do you like
them?"

"hush! they will hear you."

"never mind if they do.  it is only the palmers.  charlotte is very
pretty, i can tell you.  you may see her if you look this way."

as elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes, without
taking that liberty, she begged to be excused.

"where is marianne? has she run away because we are come? i see her
instrument is open."

"she is walking, i believe."

they were now joined by mrs. jennings, who had not patience enough to
wait till the door was opened before she told her story.  she came
hallooing to the window, "how do you do, my dear?  how does mrs.
dashwood do?  and where are your sisters?  what! all alone! you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you.  i have brought my other son
and daughter to see you.  only think of their coming so suddenly!  i
thought i heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i thought of
nothing but whether it might not be colonel brandon come back again; so
i said to sir john, i do think i hear a carriage; perhaps it is colonel
brandon come back again"--

elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; lady middleton introduced the two
strangers; mrs. dashwood and margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while mrs. jennings
continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by sir john.

mrs. palmer was several years younger than lady middleton, and totally
unlike her in every respect.  she was short and plump, had a very
pretty face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be.  her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister's,
but they were much more prepossessing.  she came in with a smile,
smiled all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ade it so charming!  only look, sister, how
delightful every thing is! how i should like such a house for myself!
should not you, mr. palmer?"

mr. palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise his eyes from the
newspaper.

"mr. palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing; "he never does
sometimes.  it is so ridiculous!"

this was quite a new idea to mrs. dashwood; she had never been used to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking with
surprise at them both.

mrs. jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, and
continued her account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeing
their friends, without ceasing till every thing was told.  mrs. palmer
laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite an
agreeable surprise.

"you may believe how glad we all were to see them," added mrs.
jennings, leaning forward towards elinor, and speaking in a low voice
as if she meant
 
 ___________________________
 
owever, i can't help wishing they
had not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,
for they came all round by london upon account of some business, for
you know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it was
wrong in her situation.  i wanted her to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you all!"

mrs. palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any harm.

"she expects to be confined in february," continued mrs. jennings.

lady middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, and
therefore exerted herself to ask mr. palmer if there was any news in
the paper.

"no, none at all," he replied, and read on.

"here comes marianne," cried sir john.  "now, palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty girl."

he immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and
ushered her in himself.  mrs. jennings asked her, as soon as she
appeared, if she had not been to allenham; and mrs. palmer laughed so
heartily at t
 
 ___________________________
 
solutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased.  but they had no curiosity to
see how mr. and mrs. palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way.  they attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good.  but sir john would not be satisfied--the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come.  lady middleton too, though
she did not press their mother, pressed them.  mrs. jennings and mrs.
palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young ladies were obliged to yield.

"why should they ask us?" said marianne, as soon as they were gone.
"the rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us."

"they mean no less to be civil and kind to us now," said elinor, "by
these frequent invitations, than by those which we rec
 
 ___________________________
 
gly?" continued mrs. palmer--"then it must be some other
place that is so pretty i suppose."

when they were seated in the dining room, sir john observed with regret
that they were only eight all together.

"my dear," said he to his lady, "it is very provoking that we should be
so few.  why did not you ask the gilberts to come to us today?"

"did not i tell you, sir john, when you spoke to me about it before,
that it could not be done?  they dined with us last."

"you and i, sir john," said mrs. jennings, "should not stand upon such
ceremony."

"then you would be very ill-bred," cried mr. palmer.

"my love you contradict every body," said his wife with her usual
laugh.  "do you know that you are quite rude?"

"i did not know i contradicted any body in calling your mother
ill-bred."

"ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natured old lady,
"you have taken charlotte off my hands, and cannot give her back again.
so there i have the whip hand of you."

charlotte laughed heartily to thi
 
 ___________________________
 
.  mr.
palmer is the kind of man i like."



chapter 21


the palmers returned to cleveland the next day, and the two families at
barton were again left to entertain each other.  but this did not last
long; elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head, had
hardly done wondering at charlotte's being so happy without a cause, at
mr. palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities, and at the strange
unsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife, before sir
john's and mrs. jennings's active zeal in the cause of society,
procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe.

in a morning's excursion to exeter, they had met with two young ladies,
whom mrs. jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be her
relations, and this was enough for sir john to invite them directly to
the park, as soon as their present engagements at exeter were over.
their engagements at exeter instantly gave way before such an
invitation, and lady middleton was thrown into no little ala
 
 ___________________________
 
rm on the
return of sir john, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life, and of whose
elegance,--whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof; for
the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all.  their being her relations too made it so much the
worse; and mrs. jennings's attempts at consolation were therefore
unfortunately founded, when she advised her daughter not to care about
their being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must put
up with one another.  as it was impossible, however, now to prevent
their coming, lady middleton resigned herself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with merely
giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times
every day.

the young ladies arrive
 
 ___________________________
 
cried lucy, who generally made an amendment
to all her sister's assertions.  "though we have seen him once or twice
at my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well."

elinor heard all this with attention and surprise.  "and who was this
uncle?  where did he live?  how came they acquainted?"  she wished very
much to have the subject continued, though she did not chuse to join in
it herself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time in
her life, she thought mrs. jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it.  the manner
in which miss steele had spoken of edward, increased her curiosity; for
it struck her as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion
of that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know something to his
disadvantage.--but her curiosity was unavailing, for no farther notice
was taken of mr. ferrars's name by miss steele when alluded to, or even
openly mentioned by sir john.



chapt
 
 ___________________________
 
nd was silent.

"do you know mr. robert ferrars?" asked elinor.

"not at all--i never saw him; but i fancy he is very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"a great coxcomb!" repeated miss steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in marianne's music.-- "oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, i dare say."

"no sister," cried lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are not great coxcombs."

"i can answer for it that miss dashwood's is not," said mrs. jennings,
laughing heartily; "for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
young men i ever saw; but as for lucy, she is such a sly little
creature, there is no finding out who she likes."

"oh," cried miss steele, looking significantly round at them, "i dare
say lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as miss
dashwood's."

elinor blushed in spite of herself.  lucy bit her lip, and looked
angrily at her sister.  a mutual silence took place for some time.
lucy first put an end to it by say
 
 ___________________________
 
t be spared; sir john would not hear of their going; and in spite of
their numerous and long arranged engagements in exeter, in spite of the
absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately, which was
in full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed on to stay
nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
that festival which requires a more than ordinary share of private
balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance.



chapter 25


though mrs. jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of
the year at the houses of her children and friends, she was not without
a settled habitation of her own.  since the death of her husband, who
had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town, she had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near portman
square.  towards this home, she began on the approach of january to
turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and very
unexpectedly by them, asked the elder misses
 
 ___________________________
 
 dashwood to accompany her.
elinor, without observing the varying complexion of her sister, and the
animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gave
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believed herself
to be speaking their united inclinations.  the reason alleged was their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the
year.  mrs. jennings received the refusal with some surprise, and
repeated her invitation immediately.

"oh, lord! i am sure your mother can spare you very well, and i do beg
you will favour me with your company, for i've quite set my heart upon
it.  don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for i shan't
put myself at all out of my way for you.  it will only be sending betty
by the coach, and i hope i can afford that.  we three shall be able to
go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if you 
 
 ___________________________
 
h you, it
shall not be my fault.  i shall speak a good word for you to all the
young men, you may depend upon it."

"i have a notion," said sir john, "that miss marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if her elder sister would come into it.  it is very
hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because miss
dashwood does not wish it.  so i would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you are tired of barton, without saying a word to miss
dashwood about it."

"nay," cried mrs. jennings, "i am sure i shall be monstrous glad of
miss marianne's company, whether miss dashwood will go or not, only the
more the merrier say i, and i thought it would be more comfortable for
them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back.  but one or
the other, if not both of them, i must have.  lord bless me! how do you
think i can live poking by myself, i who have been always used till
this winter to have charlotte with 
 
 ___________________________
 
etter."

"i thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," said marianne, with warmth:
"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness i am capable of,
to be able to accept it.  but my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--i
feel the justice of what elinor has urged, and if she were to be made
less happy, less comfortable by our absence--oh! no, nothing should
tempt me to leave her.  it should not, must not be a struggle."

mrs. jennings repeated her assurance that mrs. dashwood could spare
them perfectly well; and elinor, who now understood her sister, and saw
to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by her
eagerness to be with willoughby again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother's
decision, from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any
support in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could not
approve of for marianne, and which on her own a
 
 ___________________________
 
though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," said elinor, "you
have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which
occurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily removed."

marianne's countenance sunk.

"and what," said mrs. dashwood, "is my dear prudent elinor going to
suggest?  what formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward?  do let
me hear a word about the expense of it."

"my objection is this; though i think very well of mrs. jennings's
heart, she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure, or
whose protection will give us consequence."

"that is very true," replied her mother, "but of her society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always appear in public with lady
middleton."

"if elinor is frightened away by her dislike of mrs. jennings," said
marianne, "at least it need not prevent my accepting her invitation.  i
have no such scruples, and i am sure
 
 ___________________________
 
 i could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."

elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards
the manners of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty in
persuading marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would go
likewise, as she did not think it proper that marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that mrs. jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours.  to this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that edward ferrars, by lucy's account, was
not to be in town before february; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"i will have you both go," said mrs. dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical.  you will have much pleasure in being in london, and
especially in being together; a
 
 ___________________________
 
esign by saying, as calmly as she could, "i like edward ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether i am
ever known to them or not."

mrs. dashwood smiled, and said nothing.  marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

after very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted.  mrs. jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.  sir john was
delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants in
london, was something.  even lady middleton took the trouble of being
delighted, which was putting herself rather out of her way; and as for
the miss steeles, especially lucy, they had never been so happy in
t
 
 ___________________________
 
nd at the moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.
her mother's affliction was hardly less, and elinor was the only one of
the three, who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short of
eternal.

their departure took place in the first week in january.  the
middletons were to follow in about a week.  the miss steeles kept their
station at the park, and were to quit it only with the rest of the
family.



chapter 26


elinor could not find herself in the carriage with mrs. jennings, and
beginning a journey to london under her protection, and as her guest,
without wondering at her own situation, so short had their acquaintance
with that lady been, so wholly unsuited were they in age and
disposition, and so many had been her objections against such a measure
only a few days before! but these objections had all, with that happy
ardour of youth which marianne and her mother equally shared, been
overcome or overlooked; and elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt
of willough
 
 ___________________________
 
e.  should the result of her
observations be unfavourable, she was determined at all events to open
the eyes of her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions would be
of a different nature--she must then learn to avoid every selfish
comparison, and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfaction
in the happiness of marianne.

they were three days on their journey, and marianne's behaviour as they
travelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance and
companionableness to mrs. jennings might be expected to be.  she sat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely
ever voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque beauty
within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively
addressed to her sister.  to atone for this conduct therefore, elinor
took immediate possession of the post of civility which she had
assigned herself, behaved with the greatest attention to mrs. jennings,
talked with her, laughed with her, and list
 
 ___________________________
 
ened to her whenever she
could; and mrs. jennings on her side treated them both with all
possible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their ease and
enjoyment, and only disturbed that she could not make them choose their
own dinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets.  they reached town by
three o'clock the third day, glad to be released, after such a journey,
from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire.

the house was handso
 
 ___________________________
 
e footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed
for her to the two-penny post.  this decided the matter at once.

her spirits still continued very high; but there was a flutter in them
which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister, and this
agitation increased as the evening drew on.  she could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room, seemed
anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage.

it was a great satisfaction to elinor that mrs. jennings, by being much
engaged in her own room, could see little of what was passing.  the tea
things were brought in, and already had marianne been disappointed more
than once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenly
heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house, elinor
felt secure of its announcing willoughby's approach, and marianne,
starting up, moved towards the door.  every thing was silent; this
could not be borne many seconds; she opened the door, advanced a 
 
 ___________________________
 
 after his rival; and at length, by way of saying something,
she asked if he had been in london ever since she had seen him last.
"yes," he replied, with some embarrassment, "almost ever since; i have
been once or twice at delaford for a few days, but it has never been in
my power to return to barton."

this, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back to
her remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place, with
the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to mrs. jennings, and she
was fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on the
subject than she had ever felt.

mrs. jennings soon came in.  "oh! colonel," said she, with her usual
noisy cheerfulness, "i am monstrous glad to see you--sorry i could not
come before--beg your pardon, but i have been forced to look about me a
little, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since i have been
at home, and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do
after one has been away for any 
 
 ___________________________
 
auty can do more.  ah! poor man! he has
been dead these eight years and better.  but colonel, where have you
been to since we parted?  and how does your business go on?  come,
come, let's have no secrets among friends."

he replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries, but
without satisfying her in any.  elinor now began to make the tea, and
marianne was obliged to appear again.

after her entrance, colonel brandon became more thoughtful and silent
than he had been before, and mrs. jennings could not prevail on him to
stay long.  no other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.
the disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day.  they had not long finished
their breakfast before mrs. palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few minutes she came laughing into the room: so delighted to see
them al
 
 ___________________________
 
angry at their accepting her mother's invitation after having
declined her own, though at the same time she would never have forgiven
them if they had not come!

"mr. palmer will be so happy to see you," said she; "what do you think
he said when he heard of your coming with mama?  i forget what it was
now, but it was something so droll!"

after an hour or two spent in what her mother called comfortable chat,
or in other words, in every variety of inquiry concerning all their
acquaintance on mrs. jennings's side, and in laughter without cause on
mrs. palmer's, it was proposed by the latter that they should all
accompany her to some shops where she had business that morning, to
which mrs. jennings and elinor readily consented, as having likewise
some purchases to make themselves; and marianne, though declining it at
first was induced to go likewise.

wherever they went, she was evidently always on the watch.  in bond
street especially, where much of their business lay, her eyes were in
constant i
 
 ___________________________
 
other, you must be wrong in permitting an engagement
between a daughter so young, a man so little known, to be carried on in
so doubtful, so mysterious a manner!  i long to inquire; and how will
my interference be borne."

she determined, after some consideration, that if appearances continued
many days longer as unpleasant as they now were, she would represent in
the strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some serious
enquiry into the affair.

mrs. palmer and two elderly ladies of mrs. jennings's intimate
acquaintance, whom she had met and invited in the morning, dined with
them.  the former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening
engagements; and elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table
for the others.  marianne was of no use on these occasions, as she
would never learn the game; but though her time was therefore at her
own disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure
to her than to elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety of
expectation an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the pain of disappointment.  she sometimes endeavoured
for a few minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and she
returned to the more interesting employment of walking backwards and
forwards across the room, pausing for a moment whenever she came to the
window, in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap.



chapter 27


"if this open weather holds much longer," said mrs. jennings, when they
met at breakfast the following morning, "sir john will not like leaving
barton next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day's
pleasure.  poor souls!  i always pity them when they do; they seem to
take it so much to heart."

"that is true," cried marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to the
window as she spoke, to examine the day.  "i had not thought of that.
this weather will keep many sportsmen in the country."

it was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits were 
 
 ___________________________
 
down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance.  "how much they
must enjoy it! but" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannot be
expected to last long.  at this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it.  frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity.  in another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer--nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"

"at any rate," said elinor, wishing to prevent mrs. jennings from
seeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she did, "i dare say we
shall have sir john and lady middleton in town by the end of next week."

"ay, my dear, i'll warrant you we do.  mary always has her own way."

"and now," silently conjectured elinor, "she will write to combe by
this day's post."

but if she did, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy
which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact.  whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as elinor was from feeling 
 
 ___________________________
 
ess with which
he often watched marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse than
when at barton.

about a week after their arrival, it became certain that willoughby was
also arrived.  his card was on the table when they came in from the
morning's drive.

"good god!" cried marianne, "he has been here while we were out."
elinor, rejoiced to be assured of his being in london, now ventured to
say, "depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow."  but marianne
seemed hardly to hear her, and on mrs. jennings's entrance, escaped with
the precious card.

this event, while it raised the spirits of elinor, restored to those of
her sister all, and more than all, their former agitation.  from this
moment her mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing him every
hour of the day, made her unfit for any thing.  she insisted on being
left behind, the next morning, when the others went out.

elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passing in berkeley street
during their absence; but a moment's glance
 
 ___________________________
 
 at her sister when they
returned was enough to inform her, that willoughby had paid no second
visit there.  a note was just then brought in, and laid on the table.

"for me!" cried marianne, stepping hastily forward.

"no, ma'am, for my mistress."

but marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.

"it is indeed for mrs. jennings; how provoking!"

"you are expecting a letter, then?" said elinor, unable to be longer
silent.

"yes, a little--not much."

after a short pause.  "you have no confidence in me, marianne."

"nay, elinor, this reproach from you--you who have confidence in no
one!"

"me!" returned elinor in some confusion; "indeed, marianne, i have
nothing to tell."

"nor i," answered marianne with energy, "our situations then are alike.
we have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do not
communicate,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and i, because i conceal nothing."

elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she was
not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to
press for greater openness in marianne.

mrs. jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read it
aloud.  it was from lady middleton, announcing their arrival in conduit
street the night before, and requesting the company of her mother and
cousins the following evening.  business on sir john's part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in berkeley street.
the invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it was in common civility to mrs. jennings, that
they should both attend her o
 
 ___________________________
 
hat lady middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.

mr. and mrs. palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they had
not seen before since their arrival in town, as he was careful to avoid
the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and therefore
never came near her, they received no mark of recognition on their
entrance.  he looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who they
were, and merely nodded to mrs. jennings from the other side of the
room.  marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered: it
was enough--he was not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposed to
receive or communicate pleasure.  after they had been assembled about
an hour, mr. palmer sauntered towards the miss dashwoods to express his
surprise on seeing them in town, though colonel brandon had been first
informed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself said
something very droll on hearing that they were to co
 
 ___________________________
 
me.

"i thought you were both in devonshire," said he.

"did you?" replied elinor.

"when do you go back again?"

"i do not know." and thus ended their discourse.

never had marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise.  she
complained of it as they returned to berkeley street.

"aye, aye," said mrs. jennings, "we know the reason of all that very
well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, you
would not have been a bit tired: and to say the truth it was not very
pretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited."

"invited!" cried marianne.

"so my daughter middleton told me, for it seems sir john met him
somewhere in the street this morning." marianne said no more, but
looked exceedingly hurt.  impatient in this situation to be doing
something that might lead to her
 
 ___________________________
 
 sister's relief, elinor resolved to
write the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fears
for the health of marianne, to procure those inquiries which had been
so long delayed; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by
perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that marianne was again
writing to willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any other
person.

about the middle of the day, mrs. jennings went out by herself on
business, and elinor began her letter directly, while marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating all
that had passed, her suspicions of willoughby's inconstancy, urging her
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from marianne an account
of her real situation with respect to him.

her lett
 
 ___________________________
 
t to mr.
willoughby is very generally known."

"it cannot be generally known," returned elinor, "for her own family do
not know it."

he looked surprised and said, "i beg your pardon, i am afraid my
inquiry has been impertinent; but i had not supposed any secrecy
intended, as they openly correspond, and their marriage is universally
talked of."

"how can that be? by whom can you have heard it mentioned?"

"by many--by some of whom you know nothing, by others with whom you are
most intimate, mrs. jennings, mrs. palmer, and the middletons.  but
still i might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhaps
rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something to
support its doubts, if i had not, when the servant let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to mr. willoughby in
your sister's writing.  i came to inquire, but i was convinced before i
could ask the question.  is every thing finally settled?  is it
impossible to-?  but i have no right, and i could hav
 
 ___________________________
 
f her mind on other points; she was left, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of colonel brandon's
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.



chapter 28


nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make elinor
regret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for willoughby
neither came nor wrote.  they were engaged about the end of that time
to attend lady middleton to a party, from which mrs. jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this party,
marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and seeming
equally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared, without one
look of hope or one expression of pleasure.  she sat by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of lady middleton's
arrival, without once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude,
lost in her own thoughts, and insensible of her sister's presence; and
when at last
 
 ___________________________
 
my letters?  will you not shake hands with me?"

he could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painful to him, and he
held her hand only for a moment.  during all this time he was evidently
struggling for composure.  elinor watched his countenance and saw its
expression becoming more tranquil.  after a moment's pause, he spoke
with calmness.

"i did myself the honour of calling in berkeley street last tuesday,
and very much regretted that i was not fortunate enough to find
yourselves and mrs. jennings at home.  my card was not lost, i hope."

"but have you not received my notes?" cried marianne in the wildest
anxiety.  "here is some mistake i am sure--some dreadful mistake.  what
can be the meaning of it?  tell me, willoughby; for heaven's sake tell
me, what is the matter?"

he made no reply; his complexion changed and all his embarrassment
returned; but as if, on catching the eye of the young lady with whom he
had been previously talking, he felt the necessity of instant exertion,
he recove
 
 ___________________________
 
ster would entreat lady middleton to take them home, as she was
too miserable to stay a minute longer.

lady middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informed
that marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to her
wish of going away, and making over her cards to a friend, they
departed as soon the carriage could be found.  scarcely a word was
spoken during their return to berkeley street.  marianne was in a
silent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as mrs. jennings
was luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room,
where hartshorn restored her a little to herself.  she was soon
undressed and in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone, her
sister then left her, and while she waited the return of mrs. jennings,
had leisure enough for thinking over the past.

that some kind of engagement had subsisted between willoughby and
marianne she could not doubt, and that willoughby was weary of it,
seemed equally clear; for however marianne m
 
 ___________________________
 
ng
together; and the restless state of marianne's mind not only prevented
her from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed, but
requiring at once solitude and continual change of place, made her
wander about the house till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of every
body.

at breakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to eat any thing; and
elinor's attention was then all employed, not in urging her, not in
pitying her, nor in appearing to regard her, but in endeavouring to
engage mrs. jennings's notice entirely to herself.

as this was a favourite meal with mrs. jennings, it lasted a
considerable time, and they were just setting themselves, after it,
round the common working table, when a letter was delivered to
marianne, which she eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of a
death-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room.  elinor, who saw as
plainly by this, as if she had seen the direction, that it must come
from willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness at heart as ma
 
 ___________________________
 
de her
hardly able to hold up her head, and sat in such a general tremour as
made her fear it impossible to escape mrs. jennings's notice.  that good
lady, however, saw only that marianne had received a letter from
willoughby, which appeared to her a very good joke, and which she
treated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh, that she would find it to
her liking.  of elinor's distress, she was too busily employed in
measuring lengths of worsted for her rug, to see any thing at all; and
calmly continuing her talk, as soon as marianne disappeared, she said,

"upon my word, i never saw a young woman so desperately in love in
 
 ___________________________
 
 me on purpose to buy wedding
clothes?  come, come, this won't do.  because you are so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
thing, i can tell you, for it has been known all over town this ever so
long.  i tell every body of it and so does charlotte."

"indeed, ma'am," said elinor, very seriously, "you are mistaken.
indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report, and
you will find that you have though you will not believe me now."

mrs. jennings laughed again, but elinor had not spirits to say more,
and eager at all events to know what willoughby had written, hurried
away to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw marianne
stretched on the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three others laying by her.  elinor drew near, but without
saying a word; and seating herself on the bed, took her hand, kissed
her affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst of
tears, which at first was scarcely 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
very different mind of a very different person, who had no other
connection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him with
every thing that passed, elinor forgot the immediate distress of her
sister, forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread, and so
entirely forgot how long she had been in the room, that when on hearing
a carriage drive up to the door, she went to the window to see who
could be coming so unreasonably early, she was all astonishment to
perceive mrs. jennings's chariot, which she knew had not been ordered
till one.  determined not to quit marianne, though hopeless of
contributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse
herself from attending mrs. jennings, on account of her sister being
indisposed.  mrs. jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern for
its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and elinor, after seeing
her safe off, returned to marianne, whom she found attempting to rise
from the bed, and whom she reached just in
 
 ___________________________
 
rning again to the three letters which now
raised a much stronger curiosity than before, directly ran over the
contents of all.  the first, which was what her sister had sent him on
their arrival in town, was to this effect.

                         berkeley street, january.

     "how surprised you will be, willoughby, on
     receiving this; and i think you will feel something
     more than surprise, when you know that i am in town.
     an opportunity of coming hither, though with mrs.
     jennings, was a temptation we could not resist.
     i wish you may receive this in time to come here
     to-night, but i will not depend on it.  at any rate
     i shall expect you to-morrow. for the present, adieu.

                                             "m.d."

her second note, which had been written on the morning after the dance
at the middletons', was in these words:--

     "i cannot express my disappointment in having
     missed you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment
     at n
 
 ___________________________
 
an she be?--whom did i ever hear him talk of as young and
attractive among his female acquaintance?--oh! no one, no one--he
talked to me only of myself."

another pause ensued; marianne was greatly agitated, and it ended thus.

"elinor, i must go home.  i must go and comfort mama.  can not we be
gone to-morrow?"

"to-morrow, marianne!"

"yes, why should i stay here? i came only for willoughby's sake--and
now who cares for me? who regards me?"

"it would be impossible to go to-morrow. we owe mrs. jennings much more
than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a
hasty removal as that."

"well then, another day or two, perhaps; but i cannot stay here long, i
cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people.
the middletons and palmers--how am i to bear their pity?  the pity of
such a woman as lady middleton!  oh, what would he say to that!"

elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she did so; but
no attitude could give her ease; and in restle
 
 ___________________________
 
ss pain of mind and body
she moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at
all, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance.  some lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till mrs. jennings
returned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless.



chapter 30


mrs. jennings came immediately to their room on her return, and without
waiting to have her request of admittance answered, opened the door and
walked in with a look of real concern.

"how do you do my dear?"--said she in a voice of great compassion to
marianne, who turned away her face without attempting to answer.

"how is she, miss dashwood?--poor thing! she looks very bad.-- no
wonder.  ay, it is but too true.  he is to be married very soon--a
good-for-nothing fellow!  i have no patience with him.  mrs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
."
elinor, pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive,
though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner,
said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,
while marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist her into
the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it.

when there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate more and was calmer
than her sister had expected.  had she tried to speak, or had she been
conscious of half mrs. jennings's well-meant but ill-judged attentions
to her, this calmness could not have been maintained; but not a
syllable escaped her lips; and the abstraction of her thoughts
preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing before her.

elinor, who did justice to mrs. jennings's kindness, though its
effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous, made
her those acknowledgments, and returned her those civilities, which her
sister could not make or return for herself.  their g
 
 ___________________________
 
, and felt that every thing was due to her
which might make her at all less so.  she treated her therefore, with
all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the
last day of its holidays.  marianne was to have the best place by the
fire, was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, and to
be amused by the relation of all the news of the day.  had not elinor,
in the sad countenance of her sister, seen a check to all mirth, she
could have been entertained by mrs. jennings's endeavours to cure a
disappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and a
good fire.  as soon, however, as the consciousness of all this was
forced by continual repetition on marianne, she could stay no longer.
with a hasty exclamation of misery, and a sign to her sister not to
follow her, she directly got up and hurried out of the room.

"poor soul!" cried mrs. jennings, as soon as she was gone, "how it
grieves me to see her!  and i declare if she is not gone away without
fin
 
 ___________________________
 
ken no positive engagement with my sister."

"law, my dear!  don't pretend to defend him.  no positive engagement
indeed! after taking her all over allenham house, and fixing on the
very rooms they were to live in hereafter!"

elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject farther, and
she hoped it was not required of her for willoughby's; since, though
marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth.  after a short silence on both sides, mrs. jennings,
with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.

"well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will be
all the better for colonel brandon.  he will have her at last; aye,
that he will.  mind me, now, if they an't married by mid-summer.  lord!
how he'll chuckle over this news!  i hope he will come tonight.  it
will be all to one a better match for your sister.  two thousand a year
without debt or drawback--except the little love-child, indeed; aye, i
had forgot her; but she may
 
 ___________________________
 
 was all the notice that her sister received
from her.

"i will leave you," said elinor, "if you will go to bed." but this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first
refused to do.  her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion,
however, soon softened her to compliance, and elinor saw her lay her
aching head on the pillow, and as she hoped, in a way to get some quiet
rest before she left her.

in the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined by
mrs. jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in her hand.

"my dear," said she, entering, "i have just recollected that i have
some of the finest old constantia wine in the house that ever was
tasted, so i have brought a glass of it for your sister.  my poor
husband! how fond he was of it!  whenever he had a touch of his old
colicky gout, he said it did him more good than any thing else in the
world.  do take it to your sister."

"dear ma'am," replied elinor, smiling at the difference of the
complain
 
 ___________________________
 
ts for which it was recommended, "how good you are!  but i have
just left marianne in bed, and, i hope, almost asleep; and as i think
nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give me
leave, i will drink the wine myself."

mrs. jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes
earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and elinor, as she
swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a
colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healing
powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself
as on her sister.

colonel brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his manner
of looking round the room for marianne, elinor immediately fancied that
he neithe
 
 ___________________________
 
r expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he
was already aware of what occasioned her absence.  mrs. jennings was
not struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walked
across the room to the tea-table where elinor presided, and whispered--
"the colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  he knows nothing of it;
do tell him, my dear."

he shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers, and, with a look
which perfectly assured her of his good information, inquired after her
sister.

"marianne is not well," said she.  "she has been indisposed all day,
and we have persuaded her to go to bed."
 
 ___________________________
 
ched to her.  he has been very deceitful! and, in some
points, there seems a hardness of heart about him."

"ah!" said colonel brandon, "there is, indeed!  but your sister does
not--i think you said so--she does not consider quite as you do?"

"you know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would still
justify him if she could."

he made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject was
necessarily dropped.  mrs. jennings, who had watched them with pleasure
while they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of miss
dashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on colonel
brandon's side, as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of
hope and happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole evening
more serious and thoughtful than usual.



chapter 31


from a night of more sleep than she had expected, marianne awoke the
next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 on
marianne's, as before.  sometimes she could believe willoughby to be as
unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at others, lost every
consolation in the impossibility of acquitting him.  at one moment she
was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world, at
another she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a third
could resist it with energy.  in one thing, however, she was uniform,
when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the
presence of mrs. jennings, and in a determined silence when obliged to
endure it.  her heart was hardened against the belief of mrs.
jennings's entering into her sorrows with any compassion.

"no, no, no, it cannot be," she cried; "she cannot feel.  her kindness
is not sympathy; her good-nature is not tenderness.  all that she wants
is gossip, and she only likes me now because i supply it."

elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which her
sister was often led in her opinion of others, by the irrit
 
 ___________________________
 
lities and an
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid.  she expected
from other people the same opinions and feelings as her own, and she
judged of their motives by the immediate effect of their actions on
herself.  thus a circumstance occurred, while the sisters were together
in their own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of mrs.
jennings still lower in her estimation; because, through her own
weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself, though
mrs. jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill.

with a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smiling,
from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she entered their room, saying,

"now, my dear, i bring you something that i am sure will do you good."

marianne heard enough.  in one moment her imagination placed before her
a letter from willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory, convincing; and
instantly followed by wil
 
 ___________________________
 
loughby himself, rushing eagerly into the room
to inforce, at her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances
of his letter.  the work of one moment was destroyed by the next.  the
hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, was before her;
and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an
ecstasy of more than hope, she felt as if, till that instant, she had
never suffered.

the cruelty of mrs. jennings no language, within her reach in her
moments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed; and now she could
reproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes with
passionate violence--a reproach, however, so entirely lost on its
object, that after many expressions of pity, she withdrew, still
referring her to the letter of comfort.  but the letter, when she was
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort.  willoughby filled
every page.  her mother, still confident of their engageme
 
 ___________________________
 
gh the whole of it.

all her impatience to be at home again now returned; her mother was
dearer to her than ever; dearer through the very excess of her mistaken
confidence in willoughby, and she was wildly urgent to be gone.
elinor, unable herself to determine whether it were better for marianne
to be in london or at barton, offered no counsel of her own except of
patience till their mother's wishes could be known; and at length she
obtained her sister's consent to wait for that knowledge.

mrs. jennings left them earlier than usual; for she could not be easy
till the middletons and palmers were able to grieve as much as herself;
and positively refusing elinor's offered attendance, went out alone for
the rest of the morning.  elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the
pain she was going to communicate, and perceiving, by marianne's
letter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it, then
sat down to write her mother an account of what had passed, and entreat
her directions for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the future; while marianne, who came into the
drawing-room on mrs. jennings's going away, remained fixed at the table
where elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over
her for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondly
over its effect on her mother.

in this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, was
startled by a rap at the door.

"who can this be?" cried elinor.  "so early too! i thought we had been
safe."

marianne moved to the window--

"it is colo
 
 ___________________________
 
nel brandon!" said she, with vexation.  "we are never safe
from him."

"he will not come in, as mrs. jennings is from home."

"i will not trust to that," retreating to her own room.  "a man who has
nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on
that of others."

the event proved her conjecture right, though it was founded on
injustice and error; for colonel brandon did come in; and elinor, who
was convinced that solicitude for marianne brought him thither, and who
saw that solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look, and in his
anxious though brief inquiry after her, could no
 
 ___________________________
 
t forgive her sister
for esteeming him so lightly.

"i met mrs. jennings in bond street," said he, after the first
salutation, "and she encouraged me to come on; and i was the more
easily encouraged, because i thought it probable that i might find you
alone, which i was very desirous of doing.  my object--my wish--my sole
wish in desiring it--i hope, i believe it is--is to be a means of
giving comfort;--no, i must not say comfort--not present comfort--but
conviction, lasting conviction to your sister's mind.  my regard for
her, for yourself, for your mother--will yo
 
 ___________________________
 
, which
she could wish her not to indulge!

against the interest of her own individual comfort, mrs. dashwood had
determined that it would be better for marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at barton, where every thing within her view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing willoughby before her, such as she had always seen
him there.  she recommended it to her daughters, therefore, by all
means not to shorten their visit to mrs. jennings; the length of which,
though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at
least five or six weeks.  a variety of occupations, of objects, and of
company, which could not be procured at barton, would be inevitable
there, and might yet, she hoped, cheat marianne, at times, into some
interest beyond herself, and even into some amusement, much as the
ideas of both might now be spurned by her.

from all danger of seeing willoughby again, her mother considered her
to be at least equal
 
 ___________________________
 
to her sister; and elinor, on the other
hand, suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid edward
entirely, comforted herself by thinking, that though their longer stay
would therefore militate against her own happiness, it would be better
for marianne than an immediate return into devonshire.

her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing willoughby's
name mentioned, was not thrown away.  marianne, though without knowing
it herself, reaped all its advantage; for neither mrs. jennings, nor
sir john, nor even mrs. palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her.
elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards
herself, but that was impossible, and she was obliged to listen day
after day to the indignation of them all.

sir john, could not have thought it possible.  "a man of whom he had
always had such reason to think well!  such a good-natured fellow!  he
did not believe there was a bolder rider in england!  it was an
unaccountable business.  he wished him at
 
 ___________________________
 
s conversed with
confidence.  his chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or
could oblige herself to speak to him.  these assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself, and
these gave elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; but
mrs. jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that the
colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could neither prevail
on him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
midsummer, they would not be married till michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all.  the good understanding
between the colonel and miss dashwood seemed rather to declare that the
honours of the mulberry-tree, th
 
 ___________________________
 
e canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be made over to her; and mrs. jennings had, for some time ceased to
think at all of mrs. ferrars.

early in february, within a fortnight from the receipt of willoughby's
letter, elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he
was married.  she had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she was
desirous that marianne should not receive the first notice of it from
the public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.

she received th
 
 ___________________________
 
 know, at barton, that you
should not stay above a month.  but i thought, at the time, that you
would most likely change your mind when it came to the point.  it would
have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and
sister came.  and now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone.  i
am amazingly glad you did not keep to your word."

elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced to use all her
self-command to make it appear that she did not.

"well, my dear," said mrs. jennings, "and how did you travel?"

"not in the stage, i assure you," replied miss steele, with quick
exultation; "we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau to
attend us.  dr. davies was coming to town, and so we thought we'd join
him in a post-chaise; and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or
twelve shillings more than we did."

"oh, oh!" cried mrs. jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the doctor is
a single man, i warrant you."

"there now," said miss steele, affectedly simpering, "ever
 
 ___________________________
 
 part i declare i never
think about him from one hour's end to another.  'lord! here comes your
beau, nancy,' my cousin said t'other day, when she saw him crossing the
street to the house.  my beau, indeed! said i--i cannot think who you
mean.  the doctor is no beau of mine."

"aye, aye, that is very pretty talking--but it won't do--the doctor is
the man, i see."

"no, indeed!" replied her cousin, with affected earnestness, "and i beg
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."

mrs. jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she
certainly would not, and miss steele was made completely happy.

"i suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, miss
dashwood, when they come to town," said lucy, returning, after a
cessation of hostile hints, to the charge.

"no, i do not think we shall."

"oh, yes, i dare say you will."

elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.

"what a charming thing it is that mrs. dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time tog
 
 ___________________________
 
ether!"

"long a time, indeed!" interposed mrs. jennings.  "why, their visit is
but just begun!"

lucy was silenced.

"i am sorry we cannot see your sister, miss dashwood," said miss
steele.  "i am sorry she is not well--" for marianne had left the room
on their arrival.

"you are very good.  my sister will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much plagued lately with
nervous head-aches, which make her unfit for company or conversation."

"oh, dear, that is a great pity! but such old friends as lucy and
me!--i th
 
 ___________________________
 
 them.

"oh, if that's all," cried miss steele, "we can just as well go and see
her."

elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper; but she
was saved the trouble of checking it, by lucy's sharp reprimand, which
now, as on many occasions, though it did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sister, was of advantage in governing those of the other.



chapter 33


after some opposition, marianne yielded to her sister's entreaties, and
consented to go out with her and mrs. jennings one morning for half an
hour. she expressly conditioned, however, for paying no visits, and
would do no more than accompany them to gray's in sackville street,
where elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewels of her mother.

when they stopped at the door, mrs. jennings recollected that there was
a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call; and as
she had no business at gray's, it was resolved, that while her young
friends transacted t
 
 ___________________________
 
ay," said he, "but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take harry to see the wild beasts at
exeter exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with mrs. ferrars.
harry was vastly pleased.  this morning i had fully intended to call on
you, if i could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has always so
much to do on first coming to town.  i am come here to bespeak fanny a
seal.  but tomorrow i think i shall certainly be able to call in
berkeley street, and be introduced to your friend mrs. jennings.  i
understand she is a woman of very good fortune.  and the middletons
too, you must introduce me to them.  as my mother-in-law's relations, i
shall be happy to show them every respect.  they are excellent
neighbours to you in the country, i understand."

"excellent indeed.  their attention to our comfort, their friendliness
in every particular, is more than i can express."

"i am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed.
but so it ought to be; they are people of large fo
 
 ___________________________
 
us a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing.  it was a great satisfaction to us
to hear it, i assure you."

elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and was not sorry to
be spared the necessity of answering him, by the arrival of mrs.
jennings's servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited for
them at the door.

mr. dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to mrs. jennings
at the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being able to
call on them the next day, took leave.

his visit was duly paid.  he came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but she was so much engaged
with her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where."
mrs. jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on mrs. john da
 
 ___________________________
 
shwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her.  his manners to them, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to mrs. jennings, most attentively civil; and on colonel
brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to him.

after staying with them half an hour, he asked elinor to walk with him
to conduit street, and introduce him to sir john and lady middleton.
the weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented.  as soon as
they were out of the house, his enquiries began.

"who is colonel brandon?  is he a 
 
 ___________________________
 
e exceedingly pretty.  we have cleared away all the old thorns
that grew in patches over the brow."

elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself; and was very
thankful that marianne was not present, to share the provocation.

having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and to do away the
necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters, in his
next visit at gray's his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began
to congratulate elinor on having such a friend as mrs. jennings.

"she seems a most valuable woman indeed--her house, her style of
living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an acquaintance
that has not only been of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may
prove materially advantageous.--her inviting you to town is certainly a
vast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speaks altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when she dies you will not be
forgotten.-- she must have a great deal to leave."

"nothing at all, i shou
 
 ___________________________
 
seriously to convince him that there was no
likelihood of her marrying colonel brandon; but it was an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention.  he had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
colonel brandon, or a legacy from mrs. jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.

they were lucky enough to find lady middleton at home, and sir john
came in before their visit ended.  abundance of civilities passed on
all sides.  sir john was ready to like anybody, and though mr. dashwood
did not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a very
good-natured fellow: while lady middleton saw enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and mr. dashwood
went away delighted with
 
 ___________________________
 
 both.

"i shall have a charming account to carry to fanny," said he, as he
walked back with his sister.  "lady middleton is really a most elegant
woman!  such a woman as i am sure fanny will be glad to know.  and mrs.
jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter.  your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only knew that mrs. jennings was the widow of a
man who had got all his money in a low way; and fanny and mrs. ferrars
were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughters
were such kind of women as fanny would like to associate with.  but now
i can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."



chapter 34


mrs. john dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on mrs. jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the form
 
 ___________________________
 
 unworthy
her notice; and as for lady middleton, she found her one of the most
charming women in the world!

lady middleton was equally pleased with mrs. dashwood.  there was a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually
attracted them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

the same manners, however, which recommended mrs. john dashwood to the
good opinion of lady middleton did not suit the fancy of mrs. jennings,
and to her she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking woman
of uncordial address, who met her husband's sisters without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on berkeley street, she sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence.

elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,
whether edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced fanny
voluntarily to mention his name before her, till ab
 
 ___________________________
 
ice was his card found on
the table, when they returned from their morning's engagements.  elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

the dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in harley street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months.  their sisters and mrs. jennings were invited
likewise, and john dashwood was careful to secure colonel brandon, who,
always glad to be where the miss dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  they were to
meet mrs. ferrars; but elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party.  the expectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promis
 
 ___________________________
 
hen she told her that edward
certainly would not be in harley street on tuesday, and even hoped to
be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept
away by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not conceal
when they were together.

the important tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies
to this formidable mother-in-law.

"pity me, dear miss dashwood!" said lucy, as they walked up the stairs
together--for the middletons arrived so directly after mrs. jennings,
that they all followed the servant at the same time--"there is nobody
here but you, that can feel for me.--i declare i can hardly stand.
good gracious!--in a moment i shall see the person that all my
happiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"--

elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being miss morton's mother, rather than her own,
whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assured
her, and with great sincerity, that she did p
 
 ___________________________
 
rself--or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her, because
her real situation was unknown.  but that it was so, had not only been
declared by lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over again the
next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, lady middleton
set her down in berkeley street on the chance of seeing elinor alone,
to tell her how happy she was.

the chance proved a lucky one, for a message from mrs. palmer soon
after she arrived, carried mrs. jennings away.

"my dear friend," cried lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "i
come to talk to you of my happiness.  could anything be so flattering
as mrs. ferrars's way of treating me yesterday?  so exceeding affable
as she was!--you know how i dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--but
the very moment i was introduced, there was such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite took a fancy to
me.  now was not it so?-- you saw it all; and was not you quite struck
wit
 
 ___________________________
 
e distress of hearing
marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of
the pain that had attended their recent meeting--and this she had every
reason to expect.



chapter 36


within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers announced to the
world, that the lady of thomas palmer, esq. was safely delivered of a
son and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connections who knew it before.

this event, highly important to mrs. jennings's happiness, produced a
temporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influenced, in a
like degree, the engagements of her young friends; for as she wished to
be as much as possible with charlotte, she went thither every morning as
soon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in the evening;
and the miss dashwoods, at the particular request of the middletons,
spent the whole of every day in conduit street. for their own comfort
they would much rather have remained, at least all
 
 ___________________________
 
 indifference from the former, or of disgust in
the latter.  an effort even yet lighter might have made her their
friend.  would they only have laughed at her about the doctor!  but so
little were they, anymore than the others, inclined to oblige her, that
if sir john dined from home, she might spend a whole day without
hearing any other raillery on the subject, than what she was kind
enough to bestow on herself.

all these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totally
unsuspected by mrs. jennings, that she thought it a delightful thing
for the girls to be together; and generally congratulated her young
friends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid old
woman so long.  she joined them sometimes at sir john's, sometimes at
her own house; but wherever it was, she always came in excellent
spirits, full of delight and importance, attributing charlotte's well
doing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail
of her situation, as only miss steele had curiosi
 
 ___________________________
 
fferent times, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing his
father of it; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world.

i come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell mrs. john dashwood.  it so happened that while her two sisters
with mrs. jennings were first calling on her in harley street, another
of her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to her.  but while the imaginations
of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.  in the present
instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely h
 
 ___________________________
 
 all, for she did not think he deserved the
compliment of rational opposition.

as john dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,
his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
struck him during the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her approbation, when they got home.  the consideration of mrs.
dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while mrs. jennings's engagements kept her from home.  the expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was altogether an
attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his
father.  fanny was startled at the proposal.

"i do not see how it can be done," said she, "without affronting lady
middleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise i should be
exceedingly glad to do it.  you know i am always ready to pay them
 
 ___________________________
 
 the first and second editions, volume ii ended.]




chapter 37


mrs. palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother felt
it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her; and,
contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day, returned from
that period to her own home, and her own habits, in which she found the
miss dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.

about the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in
berkeley street, mrs. jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit to
mrs. palmer, entered the drawing-room, where elinor was sitting by
herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to
hear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it, by saying,

"lord! my dear miss dashwood! have you heard the news?"

"no, ma'am.  what is it?"

"something so strange!  but you shall hear it all.-- when i got to mr.
palmer's, i found charlotte quite in a fuss about the ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ough lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows better than
any body how to make the most of every thing; i dare say, if mrs.
ferrars would only allow him five hundred a-year, she would make as
good an appearance with it as any body else would with eight.  lord!
how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours--or a little
bigger--with two maids, and two men; and i believe i could help them to
a housemaid, for my betty has a sister out of place, that would fit
them exactly."

here mrs. jennings ceased, and as elinor had had time enough to collect
her thoughts, she was able to give such an answer, and make such
observations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce.
happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interest
in it; that mrs. jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be the
case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to edward; and happy
above all the rest, in the absence of marianne, she felt very well able
to speak of the affair withou
 
 ___________________________
 
 of its event really
was; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its being
possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of edward and
lucy.  what mrs. ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear; and still more anxious to
know how edward would conduct himself.  for him she felt much
compassion;--for lucy very little--and it cost her some pains to
procure that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.

as mrs. jennings could talk on no other subject, elinor soon saw the
necessity of preparing marianne for its discussion.  no time was to be
lost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted with the real truth,
and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others,
without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against edward.

elinor's office was a painful one.--she was going to remove what she
really believed to be her sister's chief consolation,--to give such
parti
 
 ___________________________
 
engaged
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of
bitterness;--to meet lucy without betraying the smallest increase of
dislike to her;--and even to see edward himself, if chance should bring
them together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality.-- these
were great concessions;--but where marianne felt that she had injured,
no reparation could be too much for her to make.

she performed her promise of being discreet, to admiration.--she
attended to all that mrs. jennings had to say upon the subject, with an
unchanging complexion, dissented from her in nothing, and was heard
three times to say, "yes, ma'am."--she listened to her praise of lucy
with only moving from one chair to another, and when mrs. jennings
talked of edward's affection, it cost her only a spasm in her
throat.--such advances towards heroism in her sister, made elinor feel
equal to any thing herself.

the next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from their
brother, who came with a 
 
 ___________________________
 
sible!"

"well may you wonder, marianne," replied her brother, "at the obstinacy
which could resist such arguments as these.  your exclamation is very
natural."

marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her promises, and
forbore.

"all this, however," he continued, "was urged in vain.  edward said
very little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner.
nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement.  he would
stand to it, cost him what it might."

"then," cried mrs. jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "he has acted like an honest man! i beg your pardon, mr.
dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, i should have thought him a
rascal.  i have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for lucy steele is my cousin, and i believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband."

john dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wished to o
 
 ___________________________
 
eans speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam.  miss lucy steele is, i dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
and to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle's care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as mrs. ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. in
short, i do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom
you have a regard for, mrs. jennings.  we all wish her extremely happy;
and mrs. ferrars's conduct throughout the whole, has been such as every
conscientious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt.  it has
been dignified and liberal.  edward has drawn his own lot, and i fear
it will be a bad one."

marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and elinor's heart wrung
for the feelings of edward, while braving his mother's threats, for a
woman who could not reward him.

"well, sir," said mrs. jennings, "and how did it end
 
 ___________________________
 
nnot conceive a situation more
deplorable.  the interest of two thousand pounds--how can a man live on
it?--and when to that is added the recollection, that he might, but for
his own folly, within three months have been in the receipt of two
thousand, five hundred a-year (for miss morton has thirty thousand
pounds,) i cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition.  we must
all feel for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him."

"poor young man!" cried mrs. jennings, "i am sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so i would tell him if i
could see him.  it is not fit that he should be living about at his own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns."

elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards edward, though she
could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"if he would only have done as well by himself," said john dashwood,
"as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have been
in his proper situation, and woul
 
 ___________________________
 
d have wanted for nothing.  but as it
is, it must be out of anybody's power to assist him.  and there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than all--his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
that estate upon robert immediately, which might have been edward's, on
proper conditions.  i left her this morning with her lawyer, talking
over the business."

"well!" said mrs. jennings, "that is her revenge.  everybody has a way
of their own.  but i don't think mine would be, to make one son
independent, because another had plagued me."

marianne got up and walked about the room.

"can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man," continued john,
"than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which might
have been his own?  poor edward!  i feel for him sincerely."

a few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded his
visit; and with repeated a
 
 ___________________________
 
ssurances to his sisters that he really
believed there was no material danger in fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regarded mrs. ferrars's conduct, the
dashwoods', and edward's.

marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room; and
as her vehemence made reserve impossible in elinor, and unnecessary in
mrs. jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
party.



chapter 38


mrs. jennings was very warm in her praise of edward's conduct, but only
elinor and marianne understood its true merit.  they only knew how
little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and how small was the
consolation, beyond the consciousness of doing right, that could remain
to him in the loss of friends and fortune.  elinor gloried in his
integrity; and marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his
pu
 
 ___________________________
 
ith all the pain of
continual self-reproach, regretted most bitterly that she had never
exerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment.  her mind was so much weakened that she
still fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited her more.

nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards, of affairs
in harley street, or bartlett's buildings.  but though so much of the
matter was known to them already, that mrs. jennings might have had
enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking after
more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and
inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing but the
hindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented her going to them
within that time.

the third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars, was so
fine, so beautiful a sunday as to draw many to kensington gardens,
though it was only the second week in march.  mrs. jen
 
 ___________________________
 
nings and elinor
were of the number; but marianne, who knew that the willoughbys were
again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.

an intimate acquaintance of mrs. jennings joined them soon after they
entered the gardens, and elinor was not sorry that by her continuing
with them, and engaging all mrs. jennings's conversation, she was
herself left to quiet reflection.  she saw nothing of the willoughbys,
nothing of edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could by
any chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to her.  but at last
she found herself with some surprise, accosted by miss steele, who,
though looking rather shy, expressed great satisfaction in meeting
them, and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of
mrs. jennings, left her own party for a short time, to join th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir's.
mrs. jennings immediately whispered to elinor,

"get it all out of her, my dear.  she will tell you any thing if you
ask.  you see i cannot leave mrs. clarke."

it was lucky, however, for mrs. jennings's curiosity and elinor's too,
that she would tell any thing without being asked; for nothing would
otherwise have been learnt.

"i am so glad to meet you;" said miss steele, taking her familiarly by
the arm--"for i wanted to see you of all things in the world."  and
then lowering her voice, "i suppose mrs. jennings has heard all about
it.  is she angry?"

"not at all, i believe, with you."

"that is a good thing.  and lady middleton, is she angry?"

"i cannot suppose it possible that she should
 
 ___________________________
 
ed!'"

"well," said elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst.
you have got your answer ready."

miss steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach of
her own party made another more necessary.

"oh, la! here come the richardsons.  i had a vast deal more to say to
you, but i must not stay away from them not any longer.  i assure you
they are very genteel people.  he makes a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach.  i have not time to speak to mrs. jennings
about it myself, but pray tell her i am quite happy to hear she is not
in anger against us, and lady middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sister away, and mrs. jennings
should want company, i am sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with her for as long a time as she likes.  i suppose lady middleton
won't ask us any more this bout.  good-by; i am sorry miss marianne was
not here.  remember me kindly to her.  la! if you have not got your
spotted muslin on
 
 ___________________________
 
!--i wonder you was not afraid of its being torn."

such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time only to pay
her farewell compliments to mrs. jennings, before her company was
claimed by mrs. richardson; and elinor was left in possession of
knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time, though
she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and
foreplanned in her own mind.  edward's marriage with lucy was as firmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remained as absolutely
uncertain, as she had concluded it would be;--every thing depended,
exactly after her expectation, on his getting that prefer
 
 ___________________________
 
ment, of
which, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance.

as soon as they returned to the carriage, mrs. jennings was eager for
information; but as elinor wished to spread as little as possible
intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, she
confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, as
she felt assured that lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, would
choose to have known.  the continuance of their engagement, and the
means that were able to be taken for promoting its end, was all her
communication; and this produced from mrs. jennings the following
na
 
 ___________________________
 
 say that, thank god! though we have suffered
     dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy
     as we must always be in one another's love.  we have
     had great trials, and great persecutions, but
     however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge
     many friends, yourself not the least among them,
     whose great kindness i shall always thankfully
     remember, as will edward too, who i have told of
     it.  i am sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise
     dear mrs. jennings, i spent two happy hours with
     him yesterday afternoon, he would not hear of our
     parting, though earnestly did i, as i thought my
     duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,
     and would have parted for ever on the spot, would
     he consent to it; but he said it should never be,
     he did not regard his mother's anger, while he could
     have my affections; our prospects are not very
     bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and hope for
     the best; he will be orda
 
 ___________________________
 
ined shortly; and should
     it ever be in your power to recommend him to any
     body that has a living to bestow, am very sure you
     will not forget us, and dear mrs. jennings too,
     trust she will speak a good word for us to sir john,
     or mr. palmer, or any friend that may be able to
     assist us.--poor anne was much to blame for what
     she did, but she did it for the best, so i say
     nothing; hope mrs. jennings won't think it too much
     trouble to give us a call, should she come this way
     any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my
     cousins would be proud to know her.--my paper reminds
     me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully
     and respectfully remembered to her, and to sir john,
     and lady middleton, and the dear children, when you
     chance to see them, and love to miss marianne,

                                      "i am, &c."

as soon as elinor had finished 
 
 ___________________________
 
it, she performed what she concluded to
be its writer's real design, by placing it in the hands of mrs.
jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and
praise.

"very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye, that was quite
proper to let him be off if he would.  that was just like lucy.--poor
soul! i wish i could get him a living, with all my heart.--she calls me
dear mrs. jennings, you see.  she is a good-hearted girl as ever
lived.--very well upon my word.  that sentence is very prettily turned.
yes, yes, i will go and see her, sure enough.  how attentive she is, to
think of every body!--thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.  it is as
pretty a letter as ever i saw, and does lucy's head and heart great
credit."



chapter 39


the miss dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,
and marianne's impatience to be gone increased every day.  she sighed
for th
 
 ___________________________
 
 marianne could not be brought
to acknowledge.  she began, however, seriously to turn her thoughts
towards its accomplishment, and had already mentioned their wishes to
their kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence of her
good-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining them from
home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. the palmers were to remove to cleveland about
the end of march, for the easter holidays; and mrs. jennings, with both
her friends, received a very warm invitation from charlotte to go with
them.  this would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy
of miss dashwood;--but it was inforced with so much real politeness by
mr. palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amendment of his
manners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy,
induced her to accept it with pleasure.

when she told marianne what she had done, however, her first reply was
not very auspicious.

"cleve
 
 ___________________________
 
ter delay.  from cleveland, which
was within a few miles of bristol, the distance to barton was not
beyond one day, though a long day's journey; and their mother's servant
might easily come there to attend them down; and as there could be no
occasion of their staying above a week at cleveland, they might now be
at home in little more than three weeks' time.  as marianne's affection
for her mother was sincere, it must triumph with little difficulty,
over the imaginary evils she had started.

mrs. jennings was so far from being weary of her guests, that she
pressed them very earnestly to return with her again from cleveland.
elinor was grateful for the attention, but it could not alter her
design; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained, every
thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be;--and
marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that
were yet to divide her from barton.

"ah! colonel, i do not know what you and i shall do without the m
 
 ___________________________
 
iss
dashwoods;"--was mrs. jennings's address to him when he first called on
her, after their leaving her was settled--"for they are quite resolved
upon going home from the palmers;--and how forlorn we shall be, when i
come back!--lord! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two
cats."

perhaps mrs. jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous sketch of their
future ennui, to provoke him to make that offer, which might give
himself an escape from it;--and if so, she had soon afterwards good
reason to think her object gained; for, on elinor's moving to the
window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print, which she
was going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it with a look of
particular meaning, and conversed with her there for several minutes.
the effect of his discourse on the lady 
 
 ___________________________
 
f her hopes, in the
interval of marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some words
of the colonel's inevitably reached her ear, in which he seemed to be
apologising for the badness of his house.  this set the matter beyond a
doubt.  she wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessary to do so;
but supposed it to be the proper etiquette.  what elinor said in reply
she could not distinguish, but judged from the motion of her lips, that
she did not think that any material objection;--and mrs. jennings
commended her in her heart for being so honest.  they then talked on
for a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable, when another
lucky stop in marianne's performance brought her these words in the
colonel's calm voice,--

"i am afraid it cannot take place very soon."

astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, she was almost
ready to cry out, "lord! what should hinder it?"--but checking her
desire, confined herself to this silent ejaculation.

"this is very strange!--sure he
 
 ___________________________
 
 need not wait to be older."

this delay on the colonel's side, however, did not seem to offend or
mortify his fair companion in the least, for on their breaking up the
conference soon afterwards, and moving different ways, mrs. jennings
very plainly heard elinor say, and with a voice which shewed her to
feel what she said,

"i shall always think myself very much obliged to you."

mrs. jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only wondered that
after hearing such a sentence, the colonel should be able to take leave
of them, as he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go away
without making her any reply!--she had not thought her old friend could
have made so indifferent a suitor.

what had really passed between them was to this effect.

"i have heard," said he, with great compassion, "of the injustice your
friend mr. ferrars has suffered from his family; for if i unde
 
 ___________________________
 
d him a very
comfortable income.  such as it is, however, my pleasure in presenting
it to him, will be very great.  pray assure him of it."

elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly have been
greater, had the colonel been really making her an offer of his hand.
the preferment, which only two days before she had considered as
hopeless for edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--and
she, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it!--her
emotion was such as mrs. jennings had attributed to a very different
cause;--but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might
have a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,
and her gratitude for the particular friendship, which together
prompted colonel brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly
expressed.  she thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke of
edward's principles and disposition with that praise which she knew
them to deserve; and promised to undertake the commission wit
 
 ___________________________
 

means, that she would not on any account make farther opposition.
edward, she believed, was still in town, and fortunately she had heard
his address from miss steele.  she could undertake therefore to inform
him of it, in the course of the day.  after this had been settled,
colonel brandon began to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and then it was that he
mentioned with regret, that the house was small and indifferent;--an
evil which elinor, as mrs. jennings had supposed her to do, made very
light of, at least as far as regarded its size.

"the smallness of the house," said she, "i cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income."

by which the colonel was surprised to find that she was considering mr.
ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation; for
he did not suppose it possible that delaford living could supply such
an income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to
 
 ___________________________
 
, i must think very differently of him from what i now do,
if i am not as ready to be useful to him then as i sincerely wish i
could be at present.  what i am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,
since it can advance him so little towards what must be his principal,
his only object of happiness.  his marriage must still be a distant
good;--at least, i am afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"

such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended the
delicate feelings of mrs. jennings; but after this narration of what
really passed between colonel brandon and elinor, while they stood at
the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage.



chapter 40


"well, miss dashwood," said mrs. jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soon
as the gentleman had withdrawn, "i do not ask you what the colonel has
been saying to you; for though, up
 
 ___________________________
 
 sensibly.  there are
not many men who would act as he has done.  few people who have so
compassionate a heart!  i never was more astonished in my life."

"lord! my dear, you are very modest.  i an't the least astonished at it
in the world, for i have often thought of late, there was nothing more
likely to happen."

"you judged from your knowledge of the colonel's general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur."

"opportunity!" repeated mrs. jennings--"oh! as to that, when a man has
once made up his mind to such a thing, somehow or other he will soon
find an opportunity.  well, my dear, i wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, i think i
shall soon know where to look for them."

"you mean to go to delaford after them i suppose," said elinor, with a
faint smile.

"aye, my dear, that i do, indeed.  and as to the house being a bad one,
i do not know what the colonel would be at, for it is as good 
 
 ___________________________
 
a one as
ever i saw."

"he spoke of its being out of repair."

"well, and whose fault is that? why don't he repair it?--who should do
it but himself?"

they were interrupted by the servant's coming in to announce the
carriage being at the door; and mrs. jennings immediately preparing to
go, said,--

"well, my dear, i must be gone before i have had half my talk out.
but, however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall be
quite alone.  i do not ask you to go with me, for i dare say your mind
is too full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you must
long to tell your sister all about it."

marianne had left the room before the conversation began.

"certainly, ma'am, i shall tell marianne of it; but i shall not mention
it at presen
 
 ___________________________
 
t to any body else."

"oh! very well," said mrs. jennings rather disappointed.  "then you
would not have me tell it to lucy, for i think of going as far as
holborn to-day."

"no, ma'am, not even lucy if you please.  one day's delay will not be
very material; and till i have written to mr. ferrars, i think it ought
not to be mentioned to any body else.  i shall do that directly.  it is
of importance that no time should be lost with him, for he will of
course have much to do relative to his ordination."

this speech at first puzzled mrs. jennings exceed
 
 ___________________________
 
not immediately comprehend.  a few moments' reflection, however,
produced a very happy idea, and she exclaimed;--

"oh, ho!--i understand you.  mr. ferrars is to be the man.  well, so
much the better for him.  ay, to be sure, he must be ordained in
readiness; and i am very glad to find things are so forward between
you.  but, my dear, is not this rather out of character?  should not
the colonel write himself?--sure, he is the proper person."

elinor did not quite understand the beginning of mrs. jennings's
speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion.

"colonel brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one to
announce his intentions to mr. ferrars than himself."

"and so you are forced to do it.  well that is an odd kind of delicacy!
however, i will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to write.)  you
know your own concerns best.  so goodby, my dear.  i have not heard of
any thing to please me so well since charlotte was brou
 
 ___________________________
 
d,
and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject.

how she should begin--how she should express herself in her note to
edward, was now all her concern.  the particular circumstances between
them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but she equally feared to say too
much or too little, and sat deliberating over her paper, with the pen
in her hand, till broken in on by the entrance of edward himself.

he had met mrs. jennings at the door in her way to the carriage, as he
came to leave his farewell card; and she, after apologising for not
returning herself, had obliged him to enter, by saying that miss
dashwood was above, and wanted to speak with him on very particular
business.

elinor had just been congratulating herself, in the midst of her
perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herself
properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving the
information by word of mouth, when her visitor en
 
 ___________________________
 
 with it; which, with the consciousness of
what she had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made her
feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.  he too was much
distressed; and they sat down together in a most promising state of
embarrassment.--whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on
first coming into the room, he could not recollect; but determining to
be on the safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he could
say any thing, after taking a chair.

"mrs. jennings told me," said he, "that you wished to speak with me, at
least i understood her so--or i certainly should not have intruded on
you in such a manner; though at the same time, i should have been
extremely sorry to leave london without seeing you and your sister;
especially as it will most likely be some time--it is not probable that
i should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again.  i go to oxford
tomorrow."

"you would not have gone, however," said elinor, recovering herself,
and determined 
 
 ___________________________
 
to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as
possible, "without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not been
able to give them in person.  mrs. jennings was quite right in what she
said.  i have something of consequence to inform you of, which i was on
the point of communicating by paper.  i am charged with a most
agreeable office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.)
colonel brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to
say, that understanding you mean to take orders, he has great pleasure
in offering you the living of delaford now just vacant, and only wishes
it were more valuable.  allow me to congratulate you on
 
 ___________________________
 
d wishes for his
happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on his,
with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power of
expressing it.

"when i see him again," said elinor to herself, as the door shut him
out, "i shall see him the husband of lucy."

and with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down to reconsider the
past, recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings of
edward; and, of course, to reflect on her own with discontent.

when mrs. jennings came home, though she returned from seeing people
whom she had never seen before, and of whom therefore she must have a
great deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by the important
secret in her possession, than by anything else, that she reverted to
it again as soon as elinor appeared.

"well, my dear," she cried, "i sent you up the young man.  did not i
do right?--and i suppose you had no great difficulty--you did not find
him very unwilling to accept your proposal?"

"no, ma'am; th
 
 ___________________________
 
at was not very likely."

"well, and how soon will he be ready?--for it seems all to depend upon
that."

"really," said elinor, "i know so little of these kind of forms, that i
can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but i suppose two or three months will complete his
ordination."

"two or three months!" cried mrs. jennings; "lord! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the colonel wait two or three months! lord
bless me!--i am sure it would put me quite out of patience!--and though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor mr. ferrars, i do think
it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.  sure
somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is in
orders already."

"my dear ma'am," said elinor, "what can you be thinking of?-- why,
colonel brandon's only object is to be
 
 ___________________________
 
o the probability of their not
waiting for any thing more.



chapter 41


edward, having carried his thanks to colonel brandon, proceeded with
his happiness to lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time he
reached bartlett's buildings, that she was able to assure mrs.
jennings, who called on her again the next day with her
congratulations, that she had never seen him in such spirits before in
her life.

her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain; and
she joined mrs. jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
being all comfortably together in delaford parsonage before michaelmas.
so far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give elinor
that credit which edward would give her, that she spoke of her
friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on miss dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise her, for she believed her 
 
 ___________________________
 
ek since john dashwood had called in berkeley
street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visit.--this was an obligation, however,
which not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companions.  marianne, not
contented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to
prevent her sister's going at all; and mrs. jennings, though her
carriage was always at elinor's service, so very much disliked mrs.
john dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after
the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by taking
edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again.  the consequence was, that elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to run
the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman, whom neither of the others had
s
 
 ___________________________
 
 way, which of all things was
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,
assurance, from john to elinor, of the promptitude with which he should
come to see her at delaford, was all that foretold any meeting in the
country.

it amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to send
her to delaford;--a place, in which, of all others, she would now least
chuse to visit, or wish to reside; for not only was it considered as
her future home by her brother and mrs. jennings, but even lucy, when
they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there.

very early in april, and tolerably early in the day, the two parties
from hanover square and berkeley street set out from their respective
homes, to meet, by appointment, on the road.  for the convenience of
charlotte and her child, they were to be more than two days on their
journey, and mr. palmer, travelling more expeditiously with colonel
brandon, was to join them at cleveland soon after their arrival.

ma
 
 ___________________________
 
during their stay
at cleveland.  with great surprise therefore, did she find herself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner.  she had
depended on a twilight walk to the grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred
her from it; but a heavy and settled rain even she could not fancy dry
or pleasant weather for walking.

their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.  mrs. palmer
had her child, and mrs. jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged lady middleton's engagements,
and wondered whether mr. palmer and colonel brandon would get farther
than reading that night.  elinor, however little concerned in it,
joined in their discourse; and marianne, who had the knack of finding
her way in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by
the family in general, soon procured herself a book.

nothing was wanting on mrs. palmer's side that constant and frie
 
 ___________________________
 
ely; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend of
mr. ferrars, and the kind confidante of himself, talked to her a
great deal of the parsonage at delaford, described its deficiencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them.--his
behaviour to her in this, as well as in every other particular, his
open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify mrs. jennings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have been enough, perhaps, had not elinor still, as from the
first, believed marianne his real favourite, to make her suspect it
herself.  but as it was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her
head, except by mrs. jennings's suggestion; and she could not help
believing herself the nicest observer of the two;--she watched his
eyes, while mrs. jennings thought only of his behaviour;--and while his
looks of anxious solicitude on marianne's feeling, in
 
 ___________________________
 
nly astonished at her sister's
composure, who, though attending and nursing her the whole day, against
marianne's inclination, and forcing proper medicines on her at night,
trusted, like marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
felt no real alarm.

a very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her
bed, elinor was very ready to adopt mrs. jennings's advice, of sending
for the palmers' apothecary.

he came, examined his patient, and though encouraging miss dashwood to
expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health, yet, by
pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing the
word "infection" to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to mrs. palmer,
on her baby's account.  mrs. jennings, who had been inclined from the
first to think marianne's complaint more serious than elinor, now
looked very grave on mr. harri
 
 ___________________________
 
eir apprehensions as
idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be
withstood.  her departure, therefore, was fixed on; and within an hour
after mr. harris's arrival, she set off, with her little boy and his
nurse, for the house of a near relation of mr. palmer's, who lived a
few miles on the other side of bath; whither her husband promised, at
her earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two; and whither she was
almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany her.  mrs. jennings,
however, with a kindness of heart which made elinor really love her,
declared her resolution of not stirring from cleveland as long as
marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care,
to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from; and
elinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,
desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often by her better
experience in nursing, of material use.

poor marianne, languid and low from the nature o
 
 ___________________________
 
f her malady, and
feeling herself universally ill, could no longer hope that tomorrow
would find her recovered; and the idea of what tomorrow would have
produced, but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe; for
on that day they were to have begun their journey home; and, attended
the whole way by a servant of mrs. jennings, were to have taken their
mother by surprise on the following forenoon.  the little she said was
all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though elinor tried to
raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she then really believed
herself, that it would be a very short one.

the next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was no
amendment, did not appear worse.  their party was now farther reduced;
for mr. palmer
 
 ___________________________
 
, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by his wife, was persuaded at last by colonel brandon to perform his
promise of following her; and while he was preparing to go, colonel
brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise.--here, however, the kindness of mrs. jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the colonel away while his love was in so much
uneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive them both, she
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should want him to
play at piquet of an evening, while miss dashwood was above with her
sister, &c. she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was
gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, coul
 
 ___________________________
 
d not
long even affect to demur; especially as mrs. jennings's entreaty was
warmly seconded by mr. palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself,
in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise miss
dashwood in any emergence.

marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements.
she knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners of
cleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival.  it
gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of mrs. palmer; and as it
gave her likewise no concern, she never 
 
 ___________________________
 
mentioned her name.

two days passed away from the time of mr. palmer's departure, and her
situation continued, with little variation, the same.  mr. harris, who
attended her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and
miss dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful.  mrs. jennings had determined very early
in the seizure that marianne would never get over it, and colonel
brandon, who was chiefly of use in listening to mrs. jennings's
forebodings, was not in a state of mind to resist their influence.  he
tried to reason himself out of fears, which the different judgment of
the apothecary seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each day
in which he was left entirely alone, were but too favourable for the
admission of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel from his
mind the persuasion that he should see marianne no more.

on the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipations of
both were almost done
 
 ___________________________
 
 sister, however, still sanguine, was
willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
having sat up to have her bed made; and carefully administering the
cordials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction, sink at last into a
slumber, from which she expected the most beneficial effects.  her
sleep, though not so quiet as elinor wished to see it, lasted a
considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself, she
resolved to sit with her during the whole of it.  mrs. jennings,
knowing nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early to
bed; her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreating
herself in the housekeeper's room, and elinor remained alone with
marianne.

the repose of the latter became more and more disturbed; and her
sister, who watched, with unremitting attention her continual change of
posture, and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint
which passed her lips, was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful
a slumb
 
 ___________________________
 
about
twelve o'clock, and she returned to her sister's apartment to wait for
the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of the
night.  it was a night of almost equal suffering to both.  hour after
hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on marianne's side, and
in the most cruel anxiety on elinor's, before mr. harris appeared.  her
apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all her former
security; and the servant who sat up with her, for she would not allow
mrs. jennings to be called, only tortured her more, by hints of what
her mistress had always thought.

marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on her
mother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it gave a pang to the
heart of poor elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifled with
so many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief,
fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing had
been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her suffering mother
ar
 
 ___________________________
 
ging a very unexpected and
unpleasant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger to
be material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment
must procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was
communicated to elinor.  he promised to call again in the course of
three or four hours, and left both the patient and her anxious
attendant more composed than he had found them.

with strong concern, and with many reproaches for not being called to
their aid, did mrs. jennings hear in the morning of what had passed.
her former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left her no
doubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to elinor, her
conviction of her sister's danger would not allow her to offer the
comfort of hope.  her heart was really grieved.  the rapid decay, the
early death of a girl so young, so lovely as marianne, must have struck
a less interested person with concern.  on mrs. jennings's compassion
she had other claims.  she had been fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r three months her companion, was
still under her care, and she was known to have been greatly injured,
and long unhappy.  the distress of her sister too, particularly a
favourite, was before her;--and as for their mother, when mrs. jennings
considered that marianne might probably be to her what charlotte was to
herself, her sympathy in her sufferings was very sincere.

mr. harris was punctual in his second visit;--but he came to be
disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce.  his
medicines had failed;--the fever was unabated; and marianne only more
quiet--not more herself--remained in a heavy stupor.  elinor, catching
all, and more than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to call in
further advice.  but he judged it
 
 ___________________________
 
pplication, of whose success he was as
confident as the last, and his visit concluded with encouraging
assurances which reached the ear, but could not enter the heart of miss
dashwood.  she was calm, except when she thought of her mother; but she
was almost hopeless; and in this state she continued till noon,
scarcely stirring from her sister's bed, her thoughts wandering from
one image of grief, one suffering friend to another, and her spirits
oppressed to the utmost by the conversation of mrs. jennings, who
scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the
many weeks of previous indisposition which marianne's disappointment
had brought on.  elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and it
gave fresh misery to her reflections.

about noon, however, she began--but with a caution--a dread of
disappointment which for some time kept her silent, even to her
friend--to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
sister's pulse;--she waited, watched, and ex
 
 ___________________________
 
amined it again and
again;--and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under
exterior calmness, than all her foregoing distress, ventured to
communicate her hopes.  mrs. jennings, though forced, on examination,
to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young friend from
indulging a thought of its continuance;--and elinor, conning over every
injunction of distrust, told herself likewise not to hope.  but it was
too late.  hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious
flutter, she bent over her sister to watch--she hardly knew for what.
half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed her.
others even arose to confirm it.  her breath, h
 
 ___________________________
 
ered elinor with signs of amendment; and marianne fixed her eyes
on her with a rational, though languid, gaze.  anxiety and hope now
oppressed her in equal degrees, and left her no moment of tranquillity
till the arrival of mr. harris at four o'clock;--when his assurances,
his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his
expectation, gave her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.

marianne was in every respect materially better, and he declared her
entirely out of danger.  mrs. jennings, perhaps satisfied with the
partial justification of her forebodings which had been found in their
late alarm, allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the
probability of an entire recovery.

elinor could not be cheerful.  her joy was of a different kind, and led
to any thing rather than to gaiety.  marianne restored to life, health,
friends, and to her doting mother, was an idea to fill her heart with
sensations of exqu
 
 ___________________________
 
earance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every
doubt.

the time was now drawing on, when colonel brandon might be expected
back.  at ten o'clock, she trusted, or at least not much later her
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must
now be travelling towards them.  the colonel, too!--perhaps scarcely
less an object of pity!--oh!--how slow was the progress of time which
yet kept them in ignorance!

at seven o'clock, leaving marianne still sweetly asleep, she joined
mrs. jennings in the drawing-room to tea.  of breakfast she had been
kept by her fears, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating
much;--and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of
content as she brought to it, was particularly welcome.  mrs. jennings
would have persuaded her, at its conclusion, to take some rest before
her mother's arrival, and allow her to take her place by marianne; but
elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that moment
about her, and she was 
 
 ___________________________
 
not to be kept away from her sister an
unnecessary instant.  mrs. jennings therefore attending her up stairs
into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,
left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and retired to her
own room to write letters and sleep.

the night was cold and stormy.  the wind roared round the house, and
the rain beat against the windows; but elinor, all happiness within,
regarded it not.  marianne slept through every blast; and the
travellers--they had a rich reward in store, for every present
inconvenience.

the cloc
 
 ___________________________
 
while it told the excess of her poor
mother's alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.

never in her life had elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as at
that moment.  the knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the
carriage stopt at the door--of her doubt--her dread--perhaps her
despair!--and of what she had to tell!--with such knowledge it was
impossible to be calm.  all that remained to be done was to be speedy;
and, therefore staying only till she could leave mrs. jennings's maid
with her sister, she hurried down stairs.

the bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner lobby,
assured her that they were already in the house.  she rushed to the
drawing-room,--she entered it,--and saw only willoughby.



chapter 44


elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him, obeyed
the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room,
and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended by
his hastily advancing, and say
 
 ___________________________
 
s hardly a day in which i did not catch a
glimpse of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant
watchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire to keep
out of your sight, could have separated us so long.  i avoided the
middletons as much as possible, as well as everybody else who was
likely to prove an acquaintance in common.  not aware of their being in
town, however, i blundered on sir john, i believe, the first day of his
coming, and the day after i had called at mrs. jennings's.  he asked me
to a party, a dance at his house in the evening.--had he not told me as
an inducement that you and your sister were to be there, i should have
felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.  the next
morning brought another short note from marianne--still affectionate,
open, artless, confiding--everything that could make my conduct most
hateful.  i could not answer it.  i tried--but could not frame a
sentence.  but i thought of her, i believe, every moment of the day.
if
 
 ___________________________
 
 to
me.--that he had cut me ever since my marriage, i had seen without
surprise or resentment.  now, however, his good-natured, honest, stupid
soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for your sister,
could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought
to--though probably he did not think it would--vex me horridly.  as
bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that marianne
dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at cleveland--a letter that
morning received from mrs. jennings declared her danger most
imminent--the palmers are all gone off in a fright, &c.--i was too much
shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the
undiscerning sir john.  his heart was softened in seeing mine suffer;
and so much of his ill-will was done away, that when we parted, he
almost shook me by the hand while he reminded me of an old promise
about a pointer puppy.  what i felt on hearing that your sister was
dying--and dying too, believing me the greatest villain upon earth
 
 ___________________________
 
cellent man, is
well established."

"i know it is,"--replied her mother seriously, "or after such a warning,
i should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be pleased
by it.  but his coming for me as he did, with such active, such ready
friendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men."

"his character, however," answered elinor, "does not rest on one act of
kindness, to which his affection for marianne, were humanity out of the
case, would have prompted him.  to mrs. jennings, to the middletons, he
has been long and intimately known; they equally love and respect him;
and even my own knowledge of him, though lately acquired, is very
considerable; and so highly do i value and esteem him, that if marianne
can be happy with him, i shall be as ready as yourself to think our
connection the greatest blessing to us in the world.  what answer did
you give him?--did you allow him to hope?"

"oh! my love, i could not then talk of hope to him or to myself.
marianne might at th
 
 ___________________________
 
ery
different effect, saw nothing in the colonel's behaviour but what arose
from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actions
and words of marianne she persuaded herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned.

at the end of another day or two, marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, mrs. dashwood, urged equally by her own and her
daughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to barton.  on her
measures depended those of her two friends; mrs. jennings could not
quit cleveland during the dashwoods' stay; and colonel brandon was soon
brought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable.  at his and mrs.
jennings's united request in return, mrs. dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better
accommodation of her sick child; and the colonel, at the joint
invitation of mrs. dashwood and mrs. jennings, whose active good-nature
made he
 
 ___________________________
 
r friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,
engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks.

the day of separation and departure arrived; and marianne, after taking
so particular and lengthened a leave of mrs. jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
colonel brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious that she
should engross at least half.  mrs. dashwood and elinor then followed,
and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, and
feel their own dullness, till mrs. jennings was summoned to 
 
 ___________________________
 
what peculiar misery should i have left you, my nurse, my
friend, my sister!--you, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my
latter days; who had known all the murmurings of my heart!--how should
i have lived in your remembrance!--my mother too! how could you have
consoled her!--i cannot express my own abhorrence of myself.  whenever
i looked towards the past, i saw some duty neglected, or some failing
indulged.  every body seemed injured by me.  the kindness, the
unceasing kindness of mrs. jennings, i had repaid with ungrateful
contempt.  to the middletons, to the palmers, the steeles, to every
common acquaintance even, i had been insolent and unjust; with a heart
hardened against their merits, and a temper irritated by their very
attention.--to john, to fanny,--yes, even to them, little as they
deserve, i had given less than their due.  but you,--you above all,
above my mother, had been wronged by me.  i, and only i, knew your
heart and its sorrows; yet to what did it influence me?--not 
 
 ___________________________
 
supposed, be settled at delaford.--delaford,--that
place in which so much conspired to give her an interest; which she
wished to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid.  she saw them
in an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in lucy, the active,
contriving manager, uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with
the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her
economical practices;--pursuing her own interest in every thought,
courting the favour of colonel brandon, of mrs. jennings, and of every
wealthy friend.  in edward--she knew not what she saw, nor what she
wished to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothing pleased her; she turned away
her head from every sketch of him.

elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in london
would write to them to announce the event, and give farther
particulars,--but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, no
tidings.  though uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend.  they were a
 
 ___________________________
 
disposition and manner of thinking, would probably
have been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and two sisters
fond of each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment.

the letters from town, which a few days before would have made every
nerve in elinor's body thrill with transport, now arrived to be read
with less emotion than mirth.  mrs. jennings wrote to tell the
wonderful tale, to vent her honest indignation against the jilting
girl, and pour forth her compassion towards poor mr. edward, who, she
was sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by all
accounts, almost broken-hearted, at oxford.-- "i do think," she
continued, "nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two days
before lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me.  not a soul
suspected anything of the matter, not even nancy, who, poor soul!  cam
 
 ___________________________
 
lays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, elinor,
as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying
till every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in barton
church early in the autumn.

the first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at the
mansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of the
parsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;--could
chuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.  mrs. jennings's
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; for
she was able to visit edward and his wife in their parsonage by
michaelmas, and she found in elinor and her husband, as she really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world.  they had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of colonel brandon and marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows.

they were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends.  mrs. ferrars came to i