her vulgar.  she was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.  marianne was
vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards elinor
to see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gave
elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as mrs. jennings's.

colonel brandon, the friend of sir john, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than lady middleton was to be
his wife, or mrs. jennings to be lady middleton's mother.  he was
silent and grave.  his appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of marianne and margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his
address was particularly gentlemanlik
 
 ___________________________
 
e.

there was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of lady middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
colonel brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of sir john and his
mother-in-law was interesting.  lady middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,
who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what related to themselves.

in the evening, as marianne was discovered to be musical, she was
invited to play.  the instrument was unlocked, every body prepared to
be charmed, and marianne, who sang very well, at the
 
 ___________________________
 
ng up music, although by her mother's account, she
had played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.

marianne's performance was highly applauded.  sir john was loud in his
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversation
with the others while every song lasted.  lady middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one's attention could be diverted
from music for a moment, and asked marianne to sing a particular song
which marianne had just finished.  colonel brandon alone, of all the
party, heard her without being in raptures.  he paid her only the
compliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him on the
occasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless
want of taste.  his pleasure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, was
estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and
thirty mi
 
 ___________________________
 
he
world.  in the promotion of this object she was zealously active, as
far as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.  she was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the
advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady by
insinuations of her power over such a young man; and this kind of
discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at barton decisively to
pronounce that colonel brandon was very much in love with marianne
dashwood.  she rather suspected it to be so, on the very first evening
of their being together, from his listening so attentively while she
sang to them; and when the visit was returned by the middletons' dining
at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again.
it must be so.  she was perfectly convinced of it.  it would be an
excellent match, for he was rich, and she was handsome.  mrs. jennings
had been anxious to see colonel brandon w
 
 ___________________________
 
she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.

mrs. dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of
her daughter, ventured to clear mrs. jennings from the probability of
wishing to throw ridicule on his age.

"but at least, mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured.  colonel brandon
is certainly younger than mrs. jennings, but he is old enough to be my
father; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must have
long outlived every sensation of the kind.  it is too ridiculous!  when
is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect him?"

"infirmity!" said elinor, "do you call colonel brandon infirm?  i can
easily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to my
mother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the us
 
 ___________________________
 
anced age of forty."

"mama, you are not doing me justice.  i know very well that colonel
brandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive of
losing him in the course of nature.  he may live twenty years longer.
but thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony."

"perhaps," said elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen had better not have
any thing to do with matrimony together.  but if there should by any
chance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty, i should
not think colonel brandon's being thirty-five any objection to his
marrying her."

"a woman of seven and twenty," said marianne, after pausing a moment,
"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home be
uncomfortable, or her fortune small, i can suppose that she might bring
herself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the
provision and security of a wife.  in his marrying such a woman
therefore there would be nothing unsuitable.  it would be a compact of
convenience, and the world wo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld be satisfied.  in my eyes it would be
no marriage at all, but that would be nothing.  to me it would seem
only a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at the
expense of the other."

"it would be impossible, i know," replied elinor, "to convince you that
a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-five
anything near enough to love, to make him a desirable companion to her.
but i must object to your dooming colonel brandon and his wife to the
constant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced to
complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel in
one of his shoulders."

"but he talked of flannel waistcoats," said marianne; "and with me a
flannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."

"had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised him
half so much.  confess, mari
 
 ___________________________
 
 was
all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every
brighter period, as capable of attaching her; and his behaviour
declared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as his abilities
were strong.

her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
marriage had been raised, by his prospect of riches, was led before the
end of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulate
herself on having gained two such sons-in-law as edward and willoughby.

colonel brandon's partiality for marianne, which had so early been
discovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to elinor, when
it ceased to be noticed by them.  their attention and wit were drawn
off to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other had
incurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his feelings
began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiments
which mrs. jennings had as
 
 ___________________________
 
signed him for her own satisfaction, were now
actually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblance
of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of mr.
willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was no
hindrance to the regard of colonel brandon.  she saw it with concern;
for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when opposed to a
very lively one of five and twenty? and as she could not even wish him
successful, she heartily wished him indifferent.  she liked him--in
spite of his gravity and reserve, she beheld in him an object of
interest.  his manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserve
appeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits than of any
natural gloominess of temper.  sir john had dropped hints of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere always the same; and though she
did not oppose the parties arranged by her husband, provided every
thing were conducted in style and her two eldest children attended her,
she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from them than she might
have experienced in sitting at home;--and so little did her presence
add to the pleasure of the others, by any share in their conversation,
that they were sometimes only reminded of her being amongst them by her
solicitude about her troublesome boys.

in colonel brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, did elinor find
a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities, excite
the interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion.
willoughby was out of the question.  her admiration and regard, even
her sisterly regard, was all his own; but he was a lover; his
attentions were wholly marianne's, and a far less agreeable man might
have been more generally pleasing.  colonel brandon, unfortunately for
himself, had no such encouragement to thin
 
 ___________________________
 
 in
existence."

"well, then, he is lately dead, marianne, for i am sure there was such
a man once, and his name begins with an f."

most grateful did elinor feel to lady middleton for observing, at this
moment, "that it rained very hard," though she believed the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to her, than from her
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as
delighted her husband and mother.  the idea however started by her, was
immediately pursued by colonel brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject of
rain by both of them.  willoughby opened the piano-forte, and asked
marianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours of
different people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground.  but not so
easily did elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her.

a party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see a
very fine place about twelve miles from barton, 
 
 ___________________________
 
belonging to a
brother-in-law of colonel brandon, without whose interest it could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders
on that head.  the grounds were declared to be highly beautiful, and
sir john, who was particularly warm in their praise, might be allowed
to be a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to visit them, at
least, twice every summer for the last ten years.  they contained a
noble piece of water; a sail on which was to a form a great part of the
morning's amusement; cold provisions were 
 
 ___________________________
 
l.

by ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where they
were to breakfast.  the morning was rather favourable, though it had
rained all night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun frequently appeared.  they were all in high spirits and
good humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to the
greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.

while they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.  among the
rest there was one for colonel brandon;--he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room.

"what is the matter with brandon?" said sir john.

nobody could tell.

"i hope he has had no bad news," said lady middleton.  "it must be
something extraordinary that could make colonel brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."

in about five minutes he returned.

"no bad news, colonel, i hope;" said mrs. jennings, as soon as he
entered the room.

"none at all, ma'am, i thank you."

"was it from avignon?
 
 ___________________________
 
.  i would lay fifty guineas the letter was
of his own writing."

"i have no doubt of it," replied marianne.

"there is no persuading you to change your mind, brandon, i know of
old," said sir john, "when once you are determined on anything.  but,
however, i hope you will think better of it.  consider, here are the
two miss careys come over from newton, the three miss dashwoods walked
up from the cottage, and mr. willoughby got up two hours before his
usual time, on purpose to go to whitwell."

colonel brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of
disappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to be
unavoidable.

"well, then, when will you come back again?"

"i hope we shall see you at barton," added her ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
whitwell till you return."

"you are very obliging.  but it is so uncertain, when i may have it in
my power to return, that i dare not engage for it at all."

"oh! he must and shall come back,
 
 ___________________________
 
" cried sir john.  "if he is not here
by the end of the week, i shall go after him."

"ay, so do, sir john," cried mrs. jennings, "and then perhaps you may
find out what his business is."

"i do not want to pry into other men's concerns.  i suppose it is
something he is ashamed of."

colonel brandon's horses were announced.

"you do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added sir john.

"no. only to honiton.  i shall then go post."

"well, as you are resolved to go, i wish you a good journey.  but you
had better change your mind."

"i assure you it is not in my power."

he then took leave of the whole party.

"is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this
winter, miss dashwood?"

"i am afraid, none at all."

"then i must bid you farewell for a longer time than i should 
 
 ___________________________
 
h
and village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we have so
often admired.  i did not see it to advantage, for nothing could be
more forlorn than the furniture,--but if it were newly fitted up--a
couple of hundred pounds, willoughby says, would make it one of the
pleasantest summer-rooms in england."

could elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others,
she would have described every room in the house with equal delight.



chapter 14


the sudden termination of colonel brandon's visit at the park, with his
steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised the
wonder of mrs. jennings for two or three days; she was a great
wonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all
the comings and goings of all their acquaintance.  she wondered, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there must
be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that could
have befallen him, with a fixed determination that he sh
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
family it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother.  the
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home; many more
of his hours were spent there than at allenham; and if no general
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the rest
of the day was spent by himself at the side of marianne, and by his
favourite pointer at her feet.

one evening in particular, about a week after colonel brandon left the
country, his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the objects around him; and on mrs. dashwood's happening
to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he warmly
opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as
perfect with him.

"what!" he exclaimed--"improve this dear cottage!  no. that i will
never consent to.  not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inch
to its size, if my feelings are regarded."

"do no
 
 ___________________________
 
r was opened before she told her story.  she came
hallooing to the window, "how do you do, my dear?  how does mrs.
dashwood do?  and where are your sisters?  what! all alone! you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you.  i have brought my other son
and daughter to see you.  only think of their coming so suddenly!  i
thought i heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them.  i thought of
nothing but whether it might not be colonel brandon come back again; so
i said to sir john, i do think i hear a carriage; perhaps it is colonel
brandon come back again"--

elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; lady middleton introduced the two
strangers; mrs. dashwood and margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while mrs. jennings
continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by sir john.

mrs. palmer 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
besides it is such a way off.  i know why you inquire about him, very
well; your sister is to marry him.  i am monstrous glad of it, for then
i shall have her for a neighbour you know."

"upon my word," replied elinor, "you know much more of the matter than
i do, if you have any reason to expect such a match."

"don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what every body talks
of.  i assure you i heard of it in my way through town."

"my dear mrs. palmer!"

"upon my honour i did.--i met colonel brandon monday morning in
bond-street, just before we left town, and he told me of it directly."

"you surprise me very much.  colonel brandon tell you of it!  surely
you must be mistaken.  to give such intelligence to a person who could
not be interested in it, even if it were true, is not what i should
expect colonel brandon to do."

"but i do assure you it was so, for all that, and i will tell you how
it happened.  when we met him, he turned back and walked with us; and
so we began talking of my bro
 
 ___________________________
 
ny in his favour, however small, was pleasing to her.

"i am so glad we are got acquainted at last," continued
charlotte.--"and now i hope we shall always be great friends.  you
can't think how much i longed to see you!  it is so delightful that you
should live at the cottage!  nothing can be like it, to be sure!  and i
am so glad your sister is going to be well married!  i hope you will be
a great deal at combe magna.  it is a sweet place, by all accounts."

"you have been long acquainted with colonel brandon, have not you?"

"yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.-- he was a
particular friend of sir john's. i believe," she added in a low voice,
"he would have been very glad to have had me, if he could.  sir john
and lady middleton wished it very much.  but mama did not think the
match good enough for me, otherwise sir john would have mentioned it to
the colonel, and we should have been married immediately."

"did not colonel brandon know of sir john's proposal to your mother
before it wa
 
 ___________________________
 
marianne,
starting up, moved towards the door.  every thing was silent; this
could not be borne many seconds; she opened the door, advanced a few
steps towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute, returned
into the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heard
him would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her feelings at that
instant she could not help exclaiming, "oh, elinor, it is willoughby,
indeed it is!" and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his arms,
when colonel brandon appeared.

it was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and she immediately
left the room.  elinor was disappointed too; but at the same time her
regard for colonel brandon ensured his welcome with her; and she felt
particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive
that she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing
him.  she instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him, that he even
observed marianne as she quitted the room, with such astonishment a
 
 ___________________________
 
 for me.  however, i got a very good husband, and i
don't know what the greatest beauty can do more.  ah! poor man! he has
been dead these eight years and better.  but colonel, where have you
been to since we parted?  and how does your business go on?  come,
come, let's have no secrets among friends."

he replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries, but
without satisfying her in any.  elinor now began to make the tea, and
marianne was obliged to appear again.

after her entrance, colonel brandon became more thoughtful and silent
than he had been before, and mrs. jennings could not prevail on him to
stay long.  no other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.
the disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day.  they had not long finished
their breakfast before mrs. palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and

 
 ___________________________
 
ral plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to lady middleton's regret, she
had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feelings of her young companions.  pleased to find
herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she had
expected, elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real
enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or
abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.

colonel brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with
them almost every day; he came to look at marianne and talk to elinor,
who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from
any other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much
concern his continued regard for her sister.  she feared it was a
strengthening regard.  it grieved her to see the earnestness with which
he often watched marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse than
when at barton.

about a week 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed no mark of recognition on their
entrance.  he looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who they
were, and merely nodded to mrs. jennings from the other side of the
room.  marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered: it
was enough--he was not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposed to
receive or communicate pleasure.  after they had been assembled about
an hour, mr. palmer sauntered towards the miss dashwoods to express his
surprise on seeing them in town, though colonel brandon had been first
informed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself said
something very droll on hearing that they were to come.

"i thought you were both in devonshire," said he.

"did you?" replied elinor.

"when do you go back again?"

"i do not know." and thus ended their discourse.

never had marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise.  she
complained of it as they returned to berkeley street.

"aye, aye," said
 
 ___________________________
 
 directly, while marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating all
that had passed, her suspicions of willoughby's inconstancy, urging her
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from marianne an account
of her real situation with respect to him.

her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, and
colonel brandon was announced.  marianne, who had seen him from the
window, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before he
entered it.  he looked more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding miss dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
particular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word.
elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her
sister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening.  it was not the
first time of her feeling the sam
 
 ___________________________
 
 correspondence she was not astonished to hear.

he listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing to speak,
rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion,
"to your sister i wish all imaginable happiness; to willoughby that he
may endeavour to deserve her,"--took leave, and went away.

elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of colonel brandon's
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.



chapter 28


nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make elinor
regret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for willoughby
neither came nor wrote.  they were engaged about the end of that time
to attend lady middleton to a party, from which mrs. jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this party,
marianne, wholl
 
 ___________________________
 
lenham house, and fixing on the
very rooms they were to live in hereafter!"

elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject farther, and
she hoped it was not required of her for willoughby's; since, though
marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth.  after a short silence on both sides, mrs. jennings,
with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.

"well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will be
all the better for colonel brandon.  he will have her at last; aye,
that he will.  mind me, now, if they an't married by mid-summer.  lord!
how he'll chuckle over this news!  i hope he will come tonight.  it
will be all to one a better match for your sister.  two thousand a year
without debt or drawback--except the little love-child, indeed; aye, i
had forgot her; but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and then
what does it signify?  delaford is a nice place, i can tell you;
exactly what i call a nice old fashioned place
 
 ___________________________
 
 place!  a butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw.  to my fancy,
a thousand times prettier than barton park, where they are forced to
send three miles for their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer than
your mother.  well, i shall spirit up the colonel as soon as i can.
one shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down.  if we can but
put willoughby out of her head!"

"ay, if we can do that, ma'am," said elinor, "we shall do very well
with or without colonel brandon." and then rising, she went away to
join marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room,
leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which,
till elinor's entrance, had been her only light.

"you had better leave me," was all the notice that her sister received
from her.

"i will leave you," said elinor, "if you will go to bed." but this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first
refused to do.  her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasio
 
 ___________________________
 
lmost asleep; and as i think
nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give me
leave, i will drink the wine myself."

mrs. jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes
earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and elinor, as she
swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a
colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healing
powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself
as on her sister.

colonel brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his manner
of looking round the room for marianne, elinor immediately fancied that
he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he
was already aware of what occasioned her absence.  mrs. jennings was
not struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walked
across the room to the tea-table where elinor presided, and whispered--
"the colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  he knows nothing of it;
do tell him, my d
 
 ___________________________
 

a moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself, "and
your sister--how did she--"

"her sufferings have been very severe.  i have only to hope that they
may be proportionately short.  it has been, it is a most cruel
affliction.  till yesterday, i believe, she never doubted his regard;
and even now, perhaps--but i am almost convinced that he never was
really attached to her.  he has been very deceitful! and, in some
points, there seems a hardness of heart about him."

"ah!" said colonel brandon, "there is, indeed!  but your sister does
not--i think you said so--she does not consider quite as you do?"

"you know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would still
justify him if she could."

he made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject was
necessarily dropped.  mrs. jennings, who had watched them with pleasure
while they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of miss
dashwood's communica
 
 ___________________________
 
ings's going away, remained fixed at the table
where elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over
her for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondly
over its effect on her mother.

in this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, was
startled by a rap at the door.

"who can this be?" cried elinor.  "so early too! i thought we had been
safe."

marianne moved to the window--

"it is colonel brandon!" said she, with vexation.  "we are never safe
from him."

"he will not come in, as mrs. jennings is from home."

"i will not trust to that," retreating to her own room.  "a man who has
nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on
that of others."

the event proved her conjecture right, though it was founded on
injustice and error; for colonel brandon did come in; and elinor, who
was convinced that solicitude for marianne brought him thither, and who
saw that solicitude
 
 ___________________________
 
ked at him anxiously, saying,

"what? have you met him to--"

"i could meet him no other way.  eliza had confessed to me, though most
reluctantly, the name of her lover; and when he returned to town, which
was within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, he to
defend, i to punish his conduct.  we returned unwounded, and the
meeting, therefore, never got abroad."

elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a man and a
soldier she presumed not to censure it.

"such," said colonel brandon, after a pause, "has been the unhappy
resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter! and so imperfectly
have i discharged my trust!"

"is she still in town?"

"no; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for i found her near
her delivery, i removed her and her child into the country, and there
she remains."

recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably dividing elinor
from her sister, he put an end to his visit, receiving from her again
the same grateful acknowledgments, and le
 
 ___________________________
 
as the former had hoped to see.  not that marianne
appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for she listened to
it all with the most steady and submissive attention, made neither
objection nor remark, attempted no vindication of willoughby, and
seemed to shew by her tears that she felt it to be impossible.  but
though this behaviour assured elinor that the conviction of this guilt
was carried home to her mind, though she saw with satisfaction the
effect of it, in her no longer avoiding colonel brandon when he called,
in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits less violently
irritated than before, she did not see her less wretched.  her mind did
become settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection.  she felt the
loss of willoughby's character yet more heavily than she had felt the
loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of miss williams, the
misery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his designs might
 
 ___________________________
 
irst
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
interest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined (though rather
against the opinion of sir john) that as mrs. willoughby would at once
be a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with her as soon
as she married.

colonel brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome
to miss dashwood.  he had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate
discussion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which he had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence.  his chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it di
 
 ___________________________
 
tly
kind; to mrs. jennings, most attentively civil; and on colonel
brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to him.

after staying with them half an hour, he asked elinor to walk with him
to conduit street, and introduce him to sir john and lady middleton.
the weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented.  as soon as
they were out of the house, his enquiries began.

"who is colonel brandon?  is he a man of fortune?"

"yes; he has very good property in dorsetshire."

"i am glad of it.  he seems a most gentlemanlike man; and i think,
elinor, i may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life."

"me, brother! what do you mean?"

"he likes you.  i observed him narrowly, and am convinced of it.  what
is the amount of his fortune?"

"i believe about two thousand a year."

"two thousand a-year;" and then working himself up to a pitch of
enthusiastic gener
 
 ___________________________
 
osity, he added, "elinor, i wish with all my heart it
were twice as much, for your sake."

"indeed i believe you," replied elinor; "but i am very sure that
colonel brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying me."

"you are mistaken, elinor; you are very much mistaken.  a very little
trouble on your side secures him.  perhaps just at present he may be
undecided; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back; his
friends may all advise him against it.  but some of those little
attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix
him, in spite of himself.  and there can be no reason why you should
not try for him.  it is not to be supposed
 
 ___________________________
 
 that any prior attachment on
your side--in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is
quite out of the question, the objections are insurmountable--you have
too much sense not to see all that.  colonel brandon must be the man;
and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with
you and your family.  it is a match that must give universal
satisfaction.  in short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering his
voice to an important whisper--"will be exceedingly welcome to all
parties." recollecting himself, however, he added, "that is, i mean to
say--your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled; fanny
particularly, for she has your interest very much at heart, i assure
you.  a
 
 ___________________________
 
taken, however.
i question whether marianne now, will marry a man worth more than five
or six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and i am very much deceived if
you do not do better.  dorsetshire!  i know very little of dorsetshire;
but, my dear elinor, i shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;
and i think i can answer for your having fanny and myself among the
earliest and best pleased of your visitors."

elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no
likelihood of her marrying colonel brandon; but it was an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention.  he had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
colonel brandon, or a legacy from mrs. jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.

they were lucky enou
 
 ___________________________
 
r husband's sisters without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on berkeley street, she sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence.

elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,
whether edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced fanny
voluntarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell her that
his marriage with miss morton was resolved on, or till her husband's
expectations on colonel brandon were answered; because she believed
them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.  the
intelligence however, which she would not give, soon flowed from
another quarter.  lucy came very shortly to claim elinor's compassion
on being unable to see edward, though he had arrived in town with mr.
and mrs. dashwood.  he dared not come to bartlett's buildings for fear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to 
 
 ___________________________
 
g's engagements.  elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

the dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in harley street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months.  their sisters and mrs. jennings were invited
likewise, and john dashwood was careful to secure colonel brandon, who,
always glad to be where the miss dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  they were to
meet mrs. ferrars; but elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party.  the expectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect
in
 
 ___________________________
 
g it by any farther assertion; and marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

before her removing from norland, elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of john dashwood on his following the other gentlemen
into the room, were officiously handed by him to colonel brandon for
his admiration.

"these are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, i dare say, be pleased with them.  i do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

the colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done any thing painted by
miss dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they w
 
 ___________________________
 
 we think
and speak."

and so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-law's hands,
to admire them herself as they ought to be admired.

mrs. ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing herself up more
stiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter philippic, "miss
morton is lord morton's daughter."

fanny looked very angry too, and her husband was all in a fright at his
sister's audacity.  elinor was much more hurt by marianne's warmth than
she had been by what produced it; but colonel brandon's eyes, as they
were fixed on marianne, declared that he noticed only what was amiable
in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister
slighted in the smallest point.

marianne's feelings did not stop here.  the cold insolence of mrs.
ferrars's general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to her, to foretell
such difficulties and distresses to elinor, as her own wounded heart
taught her to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse of
affectionate sensibility, she moved 
 
 ___________________________
 
 dear," immediately gave her
her salts; and sir john felt so desperately enraged against the author
of this nervous distress, that he instantly changed his seat to one
close by lucy steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account of
the whole shocking affair.

in a few minutes, however, marianne was recovered enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirits retained
the impression of what had passed, the whole evening.

"poor marianne!" said her brother to colonel brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention,-- "she has not such good
health as her sister,--she is very nervous,--she has not elinor's
constitution;--and one must allow that there is something very trying
to a young woman who has been a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions.  you would not think it perhaps, but marianne was
remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as elinor.--
now you see it is all gone."



chapter 35


elinor's curiosity to see mrs. ferr
 
 ___________________________
 
ss steeles may not be in town any more.  i am sure you will like
them; indeed, you do like them, you know, very much already, and so
does my mother; and they are such favourites with harry!"

mr. dashwood was convinced.  he saw the necessity of inviting the miss
steeles immediately, and his conscience was pacified by the resolution
of inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bringing elinor to town as colonel brandon's wife, and marianne as
their visitor.

fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that had
procured it, wrote the next morning to lucy, to request her company and
her sister's, for some days, in harley street, as soon as lady
middleton could spare them.  this was enough to make lucy really and
reasonably happy.  mrs. dashwood seemed actually working for her,
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!  such
an opportunity of being with edward and his family 
 
 ___________________________
 
offer of his hand.
the preferment, which only two days before she had considered as
hopeless for edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--and
she, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it!--her
emotion was such as mrs. jennings had attributed to a very different
cause;--but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might
have a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,
and her gratitude for the particular friendship, which together
prompted colonel brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly
expressed.  she thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke of
edward's principles and disposition with that praise which she knew
them to deserve; and promised to undertake the commission with
pleasure, if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office
to another.  but at the same time, she could not help thinking that no
one could so well perform it as himself.  it was an office in short,
from which, unwilling to give edward the pain of 
 
 ___________________________
 
receiving an
obligation from her, she would have been very glad to be spared
herself;-- but colonel brandon, on motives of equal delicacy, declining
it likewise, still seemed so desirous of its being given through her
means, that she would not on any account make farther opposition.
edward, she believed, was still in town, and fortunately she had heard
his address from miss steele.  she could undertake therefore to inform
him of it, in the course of the day.  after this had been settled,
colonel brandon began to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and then it was that he
mentioned with regret, that the house was small and indifferent;--an
evil which elinor, as mrs. jennings had supposed her to do, made very
light of, at least as far as regarded its size.

"the smallness of the house," said she, "i cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income."

by which the colonel was surprised to find that she wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 not as ready to be useful to him then as i sincerely wish i
could be at present.  what i am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,
since it can advance him so little towards what must be his principal,
his only object of happiness.  his marriage must still be a distant
good;--at least, i am afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"

such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended the
delicate feelings of mrs. jennings; but after this narration of what
really passed between colonel brandon and elinor, while they stood at
the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage.



chapter 40


"well, miss dashwood," said mrs. jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soon
as the gentleman had withdrawn, "i do not ask you what the colonel has
been saying to you; for though, upon my honour, i tried to keep out of
hearing, i could not help catching 
 
 ___________________________
 
enough to understand his business.
and i assure you i never was better pleased in my life, and i wish you
joy of it with all my heart."

"thank you, ma'am," said elinor.  "it is a matter of great joy to me;
and i feel the goodness of colonel brandon most sensibly.  there are
not many men who would act as he has done.  few people who have so
compassionate a heart!  i never was more astonished in my life."

"lord! my dear, you are very modest.  i an't the least astonished at it
in the world, for i have often thought of late, there was nothing more
likely to happen."

"you judged from your knowledge of the colonel's general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur."

"opportunity!" repeated
 
 ___________________________
 
"oh, ho!--i understand you.  mr. ferrars is to be the man.  well, so
much the better for him.  ay, to be sure, he must be ordained in
readiness; and i am very glad to find things are so forward between
you.  but, my dear, is not this rather out of character?  should not
the colonel write himself?--sure, he is the proper person."

elinor did not quite understand the beginning of mrs. jennings's
speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion.

"colonel brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one to
announce his intentions to mr. ferrars than himself."

"and so you are forced to do it.  well that is an odd kind of delicacy!
however, i will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to write.)  you
know your own concerns best.  so goodby, my dear.  i have not heard of
any thing to please me so well since charlotte was brought to bed."

and away she went; but returning again in a moment,

"i have just been thinking of betty's sister, my dear.
 
 ___________________________
 
 to oxford
tomorrow."

"you would not have gone, however," said elinor, recovering herself,
and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as
possible, "without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not been
able to give them in person.  mrs. jennings was quite right in what she
said.  i have something of consequence to inform you of, which i was on
the point of communicating by paper.  i am charged with a most
agreeable office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.)
colonel brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to
say, that understanding you mean to take orders, he has great pleasure
in offering you the living of delaford now just vacant, and only wishes
it were more valuable.  allow me to congratulate you on having so
respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish that the
living--it is about two hundred a-year--were much more considerable,
and such as might better enable you to--as might be more than a
temporary accommodation to your
 
 ___________________________
 
self--such, in short, as might establish
all your views of happiness."

what edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be expected
that any one else should say for him.  he looked all the astonishment
which such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail of
exciting; but he said only these two words,

"colonel brandon!"

"yes," continued elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of the
worst was over, "colonel brandon means it as a testimony of his concern
for what has lately passed--for the cruel situation in which the
unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you--a concern which i
am sure marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share; and
likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character, and
his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion."

"colonel brandon give me a living!--can it be possible?"

"the unkindness of your own relations has made you astonish
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to find
friendship any where."

"no," replied he, with sudden consciousness, "not to find it in you;
for i cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, i owe it
all.--i feel it--i would express it if i could--but, as you well know,
i am no orator."

"you are very much mistaken.  i do assure you that you owe it entirely,
at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and colonel brandon's
discernment of it.  i have had no hand in it.  i did not even know,
till i understood his design, that the living was vacant; nor had it
ever occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift.
as a friend of mine, of my family, he may, perhaps--indeed i know he
has, still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word, you owe
nothing to my solicitation."

truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action, but
she was at the same time so unwilling to appear as
 
 ___________________________
 
 the benefactress of
edward, that she acknowledged it with hesitation; which probably
contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently
entered it.  for a short time he sat deep in thought, after elinor had
ceased to speak;--at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said,

"colonel brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability.  i have
always heard him spoken of as such, and your brother i know esteems him
highly.  he is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners perfectly
the gentleman."

"indeed," replied elinor, "i believe that you will find him, on farther
acquaintance, all that you have heard him to be, and as you will be
such very near neighbours (for i understand the parsonage is almost
close to the mansion-house,) it is particularly important that he
should be
 
 ___________________________
 
 all this."

edward made no answer; but when she had turned away her head, gave her
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he
might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the
mansion-house much greater.

"colonel brandon, i think, lodges in st. james street," said he, soon
afterwards, rising from his chair.

elinor told him the number of the house.

"i must hurry away then, to give him those thanks which you will not
allow me to give you; to assure him that he has made me a very--an
exceedingly happy man."

elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted, with a very
earnest assurance on her side of her unceasing good wishes for his
happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on his,
with 
 
 ___________________________
 
 or three months!" cried mrs. jennings; "lord! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the colonel wait two or three months! lord
bless me!--i am sure it would put me quite out of patience!--and though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor mr. ferrars, i do think
it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.  sure
somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is in
orders already."

"my dear ma'am," said elinor, "what can you be thinking of?-- why,
colonel brandon's only object is to be of use to mr. ferrars."

"lord bless you, my dear!--sure you do not mean to persuade me that the
colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to mr.
ferrars!"

the deception could not continue after this; and an explanation
immediately took place, by which both gained considerable amusement for
the moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for mrs.
jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another, and still
without forfeiting her expe
 
 ___________________________
 
of surprise and satisfaction was over, "and very likely may
be out of repair; but to hear a man apologising, as i thought, for a
house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor,
and i think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds!--and to
you too, that had been used to live in barton cottage!-- it seems quite
ridiculous.  but, my dear, we must touch up the colonel to do some
thing to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them, before lucy
goes to it."

"but colonel brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living's
being enough to allow them to marry."

"the colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two thousand a-year
himself, he thinks that nobody else can marry on less.  take my word
for it, that, if i am alive, i shall be paying a visit at delaford
parsonage before michaelmas; and i am sure i shan't go if lucy an't
there."

elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their not
waiting for any thing more.



chapter 41


edward, having carr
 
 ___________________________
 
ied his thanks to colonel brandon, proceeded with
his happiness to lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time he
reached bartlett's buildings, that she was able to assure mrs.
jennings, who called on her again the next day with her
congratulations, that she had never seen him in such spirits before in
her life.

her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain; and
she joined mrs. jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
being all comfortably together in delaford parsonage before michaelmas.
so 
 
 ___________________________
 
far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give elinor
that credit which edward would give her, that she spoke of her
friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on miss dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing in
the world for those she really valued.  as for colonel brandon, she was
not only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover truly
anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and scarcely
resolved to avail herself, at delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.

it was now above a week since john dashwood had called in berkeley
street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife's indisposition, b
 
 ___________________________
 
to the drawing-room.--nobody was there.

"fanny is in her own room, i suppose," said he:--"i will go to her
presently, for i am sure she will not have the least objection in the
world to seeing you.-- very far from it, indeed.  now especially there
cannot be--but however, you and marianne were always great
favourites.--why would not marianne come?"--

elinor made what excuse she could for her.

"i am not sorry to see you alone," he replied, "for i have a good deal
to say to you.  this living of colonel brandon's--can it be true?--has
he really given it to edward?--i heard it yesterday by chance, and was
coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it."

"it is perfectly true.--colonel brandon has given the living of
delaford to edward."

"really!--well, this is very astonishing!--no relationship!--no
connection between them!--and now that livings fetch such a
price!--what was the value of this?"

"about two hundred a year."

"very well--and for the next presentation to a living of that
value--su
 
 ___________________________
 
pposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, and
likely to vacate it soon--he might have got i dare say--fourteen
hundred pounds.  and how came he not to have settled that matter before
this person's death?--now indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a
man of colonel brandon's sense!--i wonder he should be so improvident
in a point of such common, such natural, concern!--well, i am convinced
that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human
character.  i suppose, however--on recollection--that the case may
probably be this.  edward is only to hold the living till the person to
whom the colonel has really sold the presentation, is old enough to
take it.--aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; an
 
 ___________________________
 
d by relating that
she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from colonel
brandon to edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on which
it was given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

"it is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after hearing what she
said--"what could be the colonel's motive?"

"a very simple one--to be of use to mr. ferrars."

"well, well; whatever colonel brandon may be, edward is a very lucky
man.--you will not mention the matter to fanny, however, for though i
have broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well,--she will not like
to hear it much talked of."

elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that she
thought fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of wealth
to her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be possibly
impoverished.

"mrs. ferrars," added he, lowering his voice to the tone becoming so
impor
 
 ___________________________
 
least evil of the two, and
she would be glad to compound now for nothing worse.' but however, all
that is quite out of the question--not to be thought of or
mentioned--as to any attachment you know--it never could be--all that
is gone by.  but i thought i would just tell you of this, because i
knew how much it must please you.  not that you have any reason to
regret, my dear elinor.  there is no doubt of your doing exceedingly
well--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  has
colonel brandon been with you lately?"

elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of mr. robert ferrars.  after a few moments'
chat, john dashwood, recollecting that fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and
 
 ___________________________
 
ven proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that elinor and her
sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see more of
them;--an exertion in which her husband, who attended her into the
room, and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to distinguish every
thing that was most affectionate and graceful.



chapter 42


one other short call in harley street, in which elinor received her
brother's congratulations on their travelling so far towards barton
without any expense, and on colonel brandon's being to follow them to
cleveland in a day or two, completed the intercourse of the brother and
sisters in town;--and a faint invitation from fanny, to come to norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all things was
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,
assurance, from john to elinor, of the promptitude with which he should
come to see her at delaford, was all that foretold any meeting in the
country.

it amused her to observe that all her fri
 
 ___________________________
 
e had
depended on a twilight walk to the grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred
her from it; but a heavy and settled rain even she could not fancy dry
or pleasant weather for walking.

their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.  mrs. palmer
had her child, and mrs. jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged lady middleton's engagements,
and wondered whether mr. palmer and colonel brandon would get farther
than reading that night.  elinor, however little concerned in it,
joined in their discourse; and marianne, who had the knack of finding
her way in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by
the family in general, soon procured herself a book.

nothing was wanting on mrs. palmer's side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome.  the
openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want of
recollection an
 
 ___________________________
 
 mornings at billiards, which ought to have been
devoted to business.  she liked him, however, upon the whole, much
better than she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that she
could like him no more;--not sorry to be driven by the observation of
his epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of edward's generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feelings.

of edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now received
intelligence from colonel brandon, who had been into dorsetshire
lately; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend of
mr. ferrars, and the kind confidante of himself, talked to her a
great deal of the parsonage at delaford, described its deficiencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them.--his
behaviour to her in this, as well as in every other particular, his
open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her op
 
 ___________________________
 
y one or two of the simplest of the remedies.



chapter 43


marianne got up the next morning at her usual time; to every inquiry
replied that she was better, and tried to prove herself so, by engaging
in her accustomary employments.  but a day spent in sitting shivering
over the fire with a book in her hand, which she was unable to read, or
in lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour of
her amendment; and when, at last, she went early to bed, more and more
indisposed, colonel brandon was only astonished at her sister's
composure, who, though attending and nursing her the whole day, against
marianne's inclination, and forcing proper medicines on her at night,
trusted, like marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
felt no real alarm.

a very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her
bed, elinor was very ready to adop
 
 ___________________________
 

raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she then really believed
herself, that it would be a very short one.

the next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was no
amendment, did not appear worse.  their party was now farther reduced;
for mr. palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by his wife, was persuaded at last by colonel brandon to perform his
promise of following her; and while he was preparing to go, colonel
brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise.--here, however, the kindness of mrs. jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the colonel away while his love was in so much
uneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive them both, she
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should wa
 
 ___________________________
 
n."

"but she must not go round by london," cried marianne, in the same
hurried manner.  "i shall never see her, if she goes by london."

elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself, and, while
attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse.  it was lower and
quicker than ever!  and marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her
alarm increased so rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantly
for mr. harris, and despatching a messenger to barton for her mother.
to consult with colonel brandon on the best means of effecting the
latter, was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its
performance; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by
her sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she knew he
was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present.

it was no time for hesitation.  her fears and her difficulties were
immediately before him.  her fears, he had no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of:--he listened to them in
 
 ___________________________
 
s were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that
seemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his mind,
he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch mrs. dashwood.
elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. she thanked him
with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to hurry off his
servant with a message to mr. harris, and an order for post-horses
directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.

the comfort of such a friend at that moment as colonel brandon--or such
a companion for her mother,--how gratefully was it felt!--a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose
friendship might soothe her!--as far as the shock of such a summons
could be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,
would lessen it.

he, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the firmness of a
collected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmost
despatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which s
 
 ___________________________
 
he might
look for his return.  not a moment was lost in delay of any kind.  the
horses arrived, even before they were expected, and colonel brandon
only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken
too low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage.  it was then about
twelve o'clock, and she returned to her sister's apartment to wait for
the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of the
night.  it was a night of almost equal suffering to both.  hour after
hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on marianne's side, and
in the most cruel anxiety on elinor's, before mr. harris appeared.  her
app
 
 ___________________________
 
y fear, satisfying every inquiry of her
enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost every
look and every breath.  the possibility of a relapse would of course,
in some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was--but when she
saw, on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of
recovery continued, and saw marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet,
steady, and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every
doubt.

the time was now drawing on, when colonel brandon might be expected
back.  at ten o'clock, she trusted, or at least not much later her
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must
now be travelling towards them.  the colonel, too!--perhaps scarcely
less an object of pity!--oh!--how slow was the progress of time which
yet kept them in ignorance!

at seven o'clock, leaving marianne still sweetly asleep, she joined
mrs. jennings in the drawing-room to tea.  of breakfast she had been
kept by her fears, and of dinner by the
 
 ___________________________
 
voice to
inquire after her, no voice even for elinor; but she, waiting neither
for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;--and her
mother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as much
overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.  she
was supported into the drawing-room between her daughter and her
friend;--and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable to
speak, embraced elinor again and again, turning from her at intervals
to press colonel brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at once her
gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss
of the moment.  he shared it, however, in a silence even greater than
her own.

as soon as mrs. dashwood had recovered herself, to see marianne was her
first desire; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child,
rendered dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.
elinor's delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only
checked by an apprehension o
 
 ___________________________
 
now
allowed herself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she would
not but have heard his vindication for the world, and now blamed, now
acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly before.  but her
promise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful.  she
dreaded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect on marianne
might be; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be
happy with another; and for a moment wished willoughby a widower.
then, remembering colonel brandon, reproved herself, felt that to his
sufferings and his constancy far more than to his rival's, the reward
of her sister was due, and wished any thing rather than mrs.
willoughby's death.

the shock of colonel brandon's errand at barton had been much softened
to mrs. dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great was her
uneasiness about marianne, that she had already determined to set out
for cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any further
intelligence, and had so far settled her 
 
 ___________________________
 
f her joy to
think only of what would increase it.  marianne was restored to her
from a danger in which, as she now began to feel, her own mistaken
judgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to willoughby, had
contributed to place her;--and in her recovery she had yet another
source of joy unthought of by elinor.  it was thus imparted to her, as
soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred.

"at last we are alone.  my elinor, you do not yet know all my
happiness.  colonel brandon loves marianne.  he has told me so himself."

her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised and
not surprised, was all silent attention.

"you are never like me, dear elinor, or i should wonder at your
composure now.  had i sat down to wish for any possible good to my
family, i should have fixed on colonel brandon's marrying one of you as
the object most desirable.  and i believe marianne will be the most
happy with him of the two."

elinor was half inclined to ask her reaso
 
 ___________________________
 
g but my child;--he could not conceal his distress; i saw
that it equalled my own, and he perhaps, thinking that mere friendship,
as the world now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,
not thinking at all, i suppose--giving way to irresistible feelings,
made me acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant, affection for
marianne.  he has loved her, my elinor, ever since the first moment of
seeing her."

here, however, elinor perceived,--not the language, not the professions
of colonel brandon, but the natural embellishments of her mother's
active fancy, which fashioned every thing delightful to her as it chose.

"his regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that willoughby
ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or
constant--which ever we are to call it--has subsisted through all the
knowledge of dear marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthless
young man!--and without selfishness--without encouraging a hope!--could
he have seen her happy with another--
 
 ___________________________
 
such a noble mind!--such openness,
such sincerity!--no one can be deceived in him."

"colonel brandon's character," said elinor, "as an excellent man, is
well established."

"i know it is,"--replied her mother seriously, "or after such a warning,
i should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be pleased
by it.  but his coming for me as he did, with such active, such ready
friendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men."

"his character, however," answered elinor, "does not rest on one act of
kindness, to which his affection for marianne, were humanity out of the
ca
 
 ___________________________
 
by's ever were, but they are of a kind i well know to
be more solidly attaching to marianne.  their gentleness, their genuine
attention to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity is much
more accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness--often
artificial, and often ill-timed of the other.  i am very sure myself,
that had willoughby turned out as really amiable, as he has proved
himself the contrary, marianne would yet never have been so happy with
him, as she will be with colonel brandon."

she paused.--her daughter could not quite agree with her, but her
dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no offence.

"at delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me," added mrs.
dashwood, "even if i remain at barton; and in all probability,--for i
hear it is a large village,--indeed there certainly must be some small
house or cottage close by, that would suit us quite as well as our
present situation."

poor elinor!--here was a new scheme for getting her to delaford!--but
her spi
 
 ___________________________
 
and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for willoughby.



chapter 46


marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not been long
enough to make her recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength, and
her mother's presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her
to remove, within four days after the arrival of the latter, into mrs.
palmer's dressing-room.  when there, at her own particular request, for
she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetching her
mother, colonel brandon was invited to visit her.

his emotion on entering the room, in seeing her altered looks, and in
receiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him, was
such, as, in elinor's conjecture, must arise from something more than
his affection for marianne, or the consciousness of its being known to
others; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying
complexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence of many
past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that r
 
 ___________________________
 
at arose
from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actions
and words of marianne she persuaded herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned.

at the end of another day or two, marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, mrs. dashwood, urged equally by her own and her
daughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to barton.  on her
measures depended those of her two friends; mrs. jennings could not
quit cleveland during the dashwoods' stay; and colonel brandon was soon
brought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable.  at his and mrs.
jennings's united request in return, mrs. dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better
accommodation of her sick child; and the colonel, at the joint
invitation of mrs. dashwood and mrs. jennings, whose active good-nature
made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,
engaged wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks.

the day of separation and departure arrived; and marianne, after taking
so particular and lengthened a leave of mrs. jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
colonel brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious that she
should engross at least half.  mrs. dashwood and elinor then followed,
and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, and
feel their own dullness, till mrs. jennings was summoned to her chaise
to take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young
companions; and colonel brandon immediately afterwards took his
solitary way to delaford.
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
be happy.  i know the summer will pass happily away.  i mean never to
be later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner i shall
divide every moment between music and reading.  i have formed my plan,
and am determined to enter on a course of serious study.  our own
library is too well known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyond
mere amusement.  but there are many works well worth reading at the
park; and there are others of more modern production which i know i can
borrow of colonel brandon.  by reading only six hours a-day, i shall
gain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction which
i now feel myself to want."

elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this;
though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading her
to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at work
in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and
virtuous self-control. her smile however changed to a sigh when she
remembered tha
 
 ___________________________
 

favourite.  she rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his
imputed guilt;--she was sorry for him;--she wished him happy.  but the
feelings of the past could not be recalled.--nothing could restore him
with a faith unbroken--a character unblemished, to marianne.  nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through his
means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards eliza.  nothing
could replace him, therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure the
interests of colonel brandon.

had mrs. dashwood, like her daughter, heard willoughby's story from
himself--had she witnessed his distress, and been under the influence
of his countenance and his manner, it is probable that her compassion
would have been greater.  but it was neither in elinor's power, nor in
her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailed
explanation, as had at first been called forth in herself.  reflection
had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of
willoughby's desert
 
 ___________________________
 
past that might
weaken her sister's spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first
subject, immediately continued,

"one observation may, i think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the
story--that all willoughby's difficulties have arisen from the first
offence against virtue, in his behaviour to eliza williams.  that crime
has been the origin of every lesser one, and of all his present
discontents."

marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and her mother was led
by it to an enumeration of colonel brandon's injuries and merits, warm
as friendship and design could unitedly dictate.  her daughter did not
look, however, as if much of it were heard by her.

elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three following
days, that marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done;
but while her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried to appear
cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of time
upon her health.

margaret returned, and the family were again a
 
 ___________________________
 
!

they would soon, she supposed, be settled at delaford.--delaford,--that
place in which so much conspired to give her an interest; which she
wished to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid.  she saw them
in an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in lucy, the active,
contriving manager, uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with
the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her
economical practices;--pursuing her own interest in every thought,
courting the favour of colonel brandon, of mrs. jennings, and of every
wealthy friend.  in edward--she knew not what she saw, nor what she
wished to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothing pleased her; she turned away
her head from every sketch of him.

elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in london
would write to them to announce the event, and give farther
particulars,--but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, no
tidings.  though uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent fr
 
 ___________________________
 
iend.  they were all thoughtless or indolent.

"when do you write to colonel brandon, ma'am?" was an inquiry which
sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on.

"i wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than to
hear from him again.  i earnestly pressed his coming to us, and should
not be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."

this was gaining something, something to look forward to.  colonel
brandon must have some information to give.

scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a man on
horseback drew 
 
 ___________________________
 
her eyes to the window.  he stopt at their gate.  it was
a gentleman, it was colonel brandon himself.  now she could hear more;
and she trembled in expectation of it.  but--it was not colonel
brandon--neither his air--nor his height.  were it possible, she must
say it must be edward.  she looked again.  he had just dismounted;--she
could not be mistaken,--it was edward.  she moved away and sat down.
"he comes from mr. pratt's purposely to see us.  i will be calm; i will
be mistress of myself."

in a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of the
mistake.  she saw her m
 
 ___________________________
 
 his family had yet been attempted
by him.  he had quitted oxford within four and twenty hours after
lucy's letter arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearest
road to barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, with
which that road did not hold the most intimate connection.  he could do
nothing till he were assured of his fate with miss dashwood; and by his
rapidity in seeking that fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the
jealousy with which he had once thought of colonel brandon, in spite of
the modesty with which he rated his own deserts, and the politeness
with which he talked of his doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect
a very cruel reception.  it was his business, however, to say that he
did, and he said it very prettily.  what he might say on the subject a
twelvemonth after, must be referred to the imagination of husbands and
wives.

that lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with a flourish of
malice against him in her message by thomas, was perfect
 
 ___________________________
 
emed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living
creature, how could i suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly
insisted on sharing my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing but
the most disinterested affection was her inducement?  and even now, i
cannot comprehend on what motive she acted, or what fancied advantage
it could be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not the
smallest regard, and who had only two thousand pounds in the world.
she could not foresee that colonel brandon would give me a living."

"no; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour;
that your own family might in time relent.  and at any rate, she lost
nothing by continuing the engagement, for she has proved that it
fettered neither her inclination nor her actions.  the connection was
certainly a respectable one, and probably gained her consideration
among her friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred, it would
be better for her to marry you than be single."

edward was
 
 ___________________________
 
fe and sacred
as my honour.  i felt that i admired you, but i told myself it was only
friendship; and till i began to make comparisons between yourself and
lucy, i did not know how far i was got.  after that, i suppose, i was
wrong in remaining so much in sussex, and the arguments with which i
reconciled myself to the expediency of it, were no better than
these:--the danger is my own; i am doing no injury to anybody but
myself."

elinor smiled, and shook her head.

edward heard with pleasure of colonel brandon's being expected at the
cottage, as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him,
but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented
his giving him the living of delaford--"which, at present," said he,
"after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion,
he must think i have never forgiven him for offering."

now he felt astonished himself that he had never yet been to the place.
but so little interest had he taken in the matter, that he owed 
 
 ___________________________
 
all his
knowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the parish,
condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to elinor herself, who
had heard so much of it from colonel brandon, and heard it with so much
attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.

one question after this only remained undecided, between them, one
difficulty only was to be overcome.  they were brought together by
mutual affection, with the warmest approbation of their real friends;
their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness
certain--and they only wanted something to live upon.  edward had two
thousand pounds, and elinor one, which, with delaford living, was all
tha
 
 ___________________________
 
edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on that he rested for the residue of their
income.  but elinor had no such dependence; for since edward would
still be unable to marry miss morton, and his chusing herself had been
spoken of in mrs. ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evil
than his chusing lucy steele, she feared that robert's offence would
serve no other purpose than to enrich fanny.

about four days after edward's arrival colonel brandon appeared, to
complete mrs. dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at barton, more company
with her than her house would hold.  edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and colonel brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the park; from whence he usually returned
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tete
before breakfast.

a three weeks' residence at delaford, where, in
 
 ___________________________
 
ission; and therefore, to make it easier to him,
as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by
word of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing
to fanny, he should go to london, and personally intreat her good
offices in his favour.-- "and if they really do interest themselves,"
said marianne, in her new character of candour, "in bringing about a
reconciliation, i shall think that even john and fanny are not entirely
without merit."

after a visit on colonel brandon's side of only three or four days, the
two gentlemen quitted barton together.-- they were to go immediately to
delaford, that edward might have some personal knowledge of his future
home, and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvements
were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple of
nights, he was to proceed on his journey to town.



chapter 50


after a proper resistance on the part of mrs. ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve her from th
 
 ___________________________
 
g promised either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had
been given with fanny.

it was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected, by
edward and elinor; and mrs. ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,
seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more.

with an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,
they had nothing to wait for after edward was in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which colonel brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of elinor, was making
considerable improvements; and after waiting some time for their
completion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments
and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, elinor,
as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying
till every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in barton
church early in the autumn.

the first month after their marriage was spent with their frien
 
 ___________________________
 
ce they could superintend the progress of the
parsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;--could
chuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.  mrs. jennings's
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; for
she was able to visit edward and his wife in their parsonage by
michaelmas, and she found in elinor and her husband, as she really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world.  they had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of colonel brandon and marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows.

they were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends.  mrs. ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the dashwoods were at the
expense of a journey from sussex to do them honour.

"i will not say that i am disappointed, my dear sister," said john, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of delaford
house, "that would be saying too 
 
 ___________________________
 
much, for certainly you have been one
of the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is.  but, i
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call colonel brandon
brother.  his property here, his place, his house, every thing is in
such respectable and excellent condition!--and his woods!--i have not
seen such timber any where in dorsetshire, as there is now standing in
delaford hanger!--and though, perhaps, marianne may not seem exactly
the person to attract him--yet i think it would altogether be advisable
for you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as colonel
brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may
happen--for, when 
 
 ___________________________
 
egular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be supposed no
less contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of an
exchange.

elinor's marriage divided her as little from her family as could well
be contrived, without rendering the cottage at barton entirely useless,
for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time with
her.  mrs. dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure
in the frequency of her visits at delaford; for her wish of bringing
marianne and colonel brandon together was hardly less earnest, though
rather more liberal than what john had expressed.  it was now her
darling object.  precious as was the company of her daughter to her,
she desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her
valued friend; and to see marianne settled at the mansion-house was
equally the wish of edward and elinor.  they each felt his sorrows, and
their own obligations, and marianne, by general consent, was to be the
reward of all.

with such a confederacy 
 
 ___________________________
 
istcoat!

but so it was.  instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible
passion, as once she had fondly flattered herself with expecting,--instead
of remaining even for ever with her mother, and finding her only
pleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in her more calm and
sober judgment she had determined on,--she found herself at nineteen,
submitting to new attachments, entering on new duties, placed in a new
home, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the patroness of a village.

colonel brandon was now as happy, as all those who best loved him,
believed he deserved to be;--in marianne he was consoled for every past
affliction;--her regard and her society restored his mind to animation,
and his spirits to cheerfulness; and that marianne found her own
happiness in forming his, was equally the persuasion and delight of
each observing friend.  marianne could never love by halves; and her
whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it had
once been to willoughby.

willo
 
 ___________________________
 
ughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang; and his
punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of
mrs. smith, who, by stating his marriage with a woman of character, as
the source of her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had he
behaved with honour towards marianne, he might at once have been happy
and rich.  that his repentance of misconduct, which thus brought its
own punishment, was sincere, need not be doubted;--nor that he long
thought of colonel brandon with envy, and of marianne with regret.  but
that he was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from society, or
contracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart, must
not be depended on--for he did neither.  he lived to exert, and
frequently to enjoy himself.  his wife was not always out of humour,
nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,
and in sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderable degree of
domestic felicity.

for marianne, however--i