 to be convinced,
from the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extended
no farther than their maintenance for six months at norland.  he so
frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of
the perpetual demands upon his purse, which a man of any consequence in
the world was beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather to
stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of giving
money away.

in a very few weeks from the day which brought sir john middleton's
first letter to norland, every thing was so far settled in their future
abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters to begin their
journey.

many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved.  "dear, dear norland!" said marianne, as she wandered
alone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; "when
shall i cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--oh!
happy house, could you know what i suffer in now viewing you from thi
 
 ___________________________
 
ble.  when is she dejected or melancholy? when does she try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"



chapter 9


the dashwoods were now settled at barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves.  the house and the garden, with all the objects surrounding
them, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which had
given to norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than norland had been able to afford, since the loss of their
father.  sir john middleton, who called on them every day for the first
fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at
home, could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed.

their visitors, except those from barton park, were not many; for, in
spite of sir john's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at
their service, the independence of mrs. dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children
 
 ___________________________
 
 nothing else."
and then to turn the discourse, she began admiring the house and the
furniture.

this specimen of the miss steeles was enough.  the vulgar freedom and
folly of the eldest left her no recommendation, and as elinor was not
blinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want
of real elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any wish
of knowing them better.

not so the miss steeles.--they came from exeter, well provided with
admiration for the use of sir john middleton, his family, and all his
relations, and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair
cousins, whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplished, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and with whom
they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted.-- and to be
better acquainted therefore, elinor soon found was their inevitable
lot, for as sir john was entirely on the side of the miss steeles,
their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of
inti
 
 ___________________________
 
r a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified, forgiveness.  tell her of my misery and my
penitence--tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her, and if
you will, that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever."

"i will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively be
called, your justification.  but you have not explained to me the
particular reason of your coming now, nor how you heard of her illness."

"last night, in drury lane lobby, i ran against sir john middleton, and
when he saw who i was--for the first time these two months--he spoke to
me.--that he had cut me ever since my marriage, i had seen without
surprise or resentment.  now, however, his good-natured, honest, stupid
soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for your sister,
could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought
to--though probably he did not think it would--vex me horridly.  as
bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that marianne
dashwood was dyin