tly entreated by their mother to stay
behind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room
had not known for many hours.

"poor little creatures!" said miss steele, as soon as they were gone.
"it might have been a very sad accident."

"yet i hardly know how," cried marianne, "unless it had been under
totally different circumstances.  but this is the usual way of
heightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality."

"what a sweet woman lady middleton is!" said lucy steele.

marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon elinor therefore the whole
task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.  she did
her best when thus called on, by speaking of lady middleton with more
warmth than she felt, though with far less than miss lucy.

"and sir john too," cried the elder sister, "what a charming man he is!"

here too, miss dashwood's commendation, being only simple and just,
came in wi
 
 ___________________________
 
able, in remaining at
norland after he first felt her influence over him to be more than it
ought to be.  in that, he could not be defended; but if he had injured
her, how much more had he injured himself; if her case were pitiable,
his was hopeless.  his imprudence had made her miserable for a while;
but it seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever being
otherwise.  she might in time regain tranquillity; but he, what had he
to look forward to?  could he ever be tolerably happy with lucy steele;
could he, were his affection for herself out of the question, with his
integrity, his delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a
wife like her--illiterate, artful, and selfish?

the youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to every
thing but her beauty and good nature; but the four succeeding
years--years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to the
understanding, must have opened his eyes to her defects of education,
while the same period of time, spen
 
 ___________________________
 
eremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument.

lady middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that she had never made
so rude a speech.

"marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma'am,"
said elinor, endeavouring to smooth away the offence; "and i do not
much wonder at it; for it is the very best toned piano-forte i ever
heard."

the remaining five were now to draw their cards.

"perhaps," continued elinor, "if i should happen to cut out, i may be
of some use to miss lucy steele, in rolling her papers for her; and
there is so much still to be done to the basket, that it must be
impossible i think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening.  i
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share in it."

"indeed i shall be very much obliged to you for your help," cried lucy,
"for i find there is more to be done to it than i thought there was;
and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear annamaria after
all."

"oh! that would be terrible, indeed,"
 
 ___________________________
 
nhappy."

she could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome, and hiding her
face on elinor's shoulder, she burst into tears.  every body's
attention was called, and almost every body was concerned.--colonel
brandon rose up and went to them without knowing what he did.--mrs.
jennings, with a very intelligent "ah! poor dear," immediately gave her
her salts; and sir john felt so desperately enraged against the author
of this nervous distress, that he instantly changed his seat to one
close by lucy steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account of
the whole shocking affair.

in a few minutes, however, marianne was recovered enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirits retained
the impression of what had passed, the whole evening.

"poor marianne!" said her brother to colonel brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention,-- "she has not such good
health as her sister,--she is very nervous,--she has not elinor's
constitution;--and one
 
 ___________________________
 
 cried excessively.  elinor was to be the
comforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs; and
all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure
of mind, and a very earnest vindication of edward from every charge but
of imprudence, was readily offered.

but marianne for some time would give credit to neither.  edward seemed
a second willoughby; and acknowledging as elinor did, that she had
loved him most sincerely, could she feel less than herself!  as for
lucy steele, she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutely
incapable of attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded
at first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
edward for her.  she would not even admit it to have been natural; and
elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that which only
could convince her, a better knowledge of mankind.

her first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact
of the engagement, and the length of time
 
 ___________________________
 
ontinued, "was urged in vain.  edward said
very little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner.
nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement.  he would
stand to it, cost him what it might."

"then," cried mrs. jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "he has acted like an honest man! i beg your pardon, mr.
dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, i should have thought him a
rascal.  i have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for lucy steele is my cousin, and i believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband."

john dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune.  he therefore replied, without any resentment,

"i would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam.  miss lucy steele is, i dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you
 
 ___________________________
 
r such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad.  whatever lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain."

"i never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, i assure you,"
said elinor.

"oh, did not you?  but it was said, i know, very well, and by more than
one; for miss godby told miss sparks, that nobody in their senses could
expect mr. ferrars to give up a woman like miss morton, with thirty
thousand pounds to her fortune, for lucy steele that had nothing at
all; and i had it from miss sparks myself.  and besides that, my cousin
richard said himself, that when it came to the point he was afraid mr.
ferrars would be off; and when edward did not come near us for three
days, i could not tell what to think myself; and i believe in my heart
lucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away from your brother's
wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not all thursday, friday, and
saturday, and did not know what was become of him.  once lucy 
 
 ___________________________
 
n an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though elinor could not speak,
even her eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder.  he
rose from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not
knowing what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to
pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,

"perhaps you do not know--you may not have heard that my brother is
lately married to--to the youngest--to miss lucy steele."

his words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but elinor,
who sat with her head leaning over her work, in a state of such
agitation as made her hardly know where she was.

"yes," said he, "they were married last week, and are now at dawlish."

elinor could sit it no longer.  she almost ran out of the room, and as
soon as the door was closed, burst into tears of joy, which at first
she thought would never cease.  edward, who had till then looked any
where, rather than at her, saw
 
 ___________________________
 
e neither of them quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year
would supply them with the comforts of life.

edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on that he rested for the residue of their
income.  but elinor had no such dependence; for since edward would
still be unable to marry miss morton, and his chusing herself had been
spoken of in mrs. ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evil
than his chusing lucy steele, she feared that robert's offence would
serve no other purpose than to enrich fanny.

about four days after edward's arrival colonel brandon appeared, to
complete mrs. dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at barton, more company
with her than her house would hold.  edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and colonel brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the park; from whence he usually return