e still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of mrs. dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at norland.

this circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of mrs. john dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there.

some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother.  but mrs. dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration.  it was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that elinor returned the partiality.
it was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were
 
 ___________________________
 
 attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

edward ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any
peculiar graces of person or address.  he was not handsome, and his
manners required intimacy to make them pleasing.  he was too diffident
to do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,
his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.
his understanding was good, and his education had given it solid
improvement.  but he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to
answer the wishes of his mother and s
 
 ___________________________
 
nvariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."

"had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised him
half so much.  confess, marianne, is not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

soon after this, upon elinor's leaving the room, "mama," said
marianne, "i have an alarm on the subject of illness which i cannot
conceal from you.  i am sure edward ferrars is not well.  we have now
been here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  nothing but
real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.  what else
can detain him at norland?"

"had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said mrs. dashwood.  "i had
none.  on the contrary, if i have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when i talked of his
coming to barton.  does e
 
 ___________________________
 
, to screen marianne from
particularity, as she felt almost certain of its not being willoughby,
quickened her pace and kept up with her.  they were soon within thirty
yards of the gentleman.  marianne looked again; her heart sunk within
her; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back, when the voices
of both her sisters were raised to detain her; a third, almost as well
known as willoughby's, joined them in begging her to stop, and she
turned round with surprise to see and welcome edward ferrars.

he was the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgiven for not being willoughby; the only one who could have gained a
smile from her; but she dispersed her tears to smile on him, and in her
sister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.

he dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant, walked back with
them to barton, whither he was purposely coming to visit them.

he was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially by
marianne, who showed more
 
 ___________________________
 
how can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?"

"because," replied he, smiling, "among the rest of the objects before
me, i see a very dirty lane."

"how strange!" said marianne to herself as she walked on.

"have you an agreeable neighbourhood here?  are the middletons pleasant
people?"

"no, not all," answered marianne; "we could not be more unfortunately
situated."

"marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so? how can you be so
unjust?  they are a very respectable family, mr. ferrars; and towards
us have behaved in the friendliest manner.  have you forgot, marianne,
how many pleasant days we have owed to them?"

"no," said marianne, in a low voice, "nor how many painful moments."

elinor took no notice of this; and directing her attention to their
visitor, endeavoured to support something like discourse with him, by
talking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. extorting
from him occasional questions and remarks.  his coldness and reserve
mortified her severely;
 
 ___________________________
 
or had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like
himself.  his affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and his
interest in their welfare again became perceptible.  he was not in
spirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, was
attentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits.  the whole family
perceived it, and mrs. dashwood, attributing it to some want of
liberality in his mother, sat down to table indignant against all
selfish parents.

"what are mrs. ferrars's views for you at present, edward?" said she,
when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; "are you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?"

"no. i hope my mother is now convinced that i have no more talents than
inclination for a public life!"

"but how is your fame to be established? for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, no
affection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may find
it a difficult matter."

"i 
 
 ___________________________
 
settled.  he was particularly grave the whole morning.
marianne severely censured herself for what she had said; but her own
forgiveness might have been more speedy, had she known how little
offence it had given her sister.

before the middle of the day, they were visited by sir john and mrs.
jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at the
cottage, came to take a survey of the guest.  with the assistance of
his mother-in-law, sir john was not long in discovering that the name
of ferrars began with an f. and this prepared a future mine of raillery
against the devoted elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with edward could have prevented from being immediately
sprung.  but, as it was, she only learned, from some very significant
looks, how far their penetration, founded on margaret's instructions,
extended.

sir john never came to the dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.
on the pres
 
 ___________________________
 
on the part of her son.  disappointed, however,
and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased with his uncertain
behaviour to herself, she was very well disposed on the whole to regard
his actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications,
which had been rather more painfully extorted from her, for
willoughby's service, by her mother.  his want of spirits, of openness,
and of consistency, were most usually attributed to his want of
independence, and his better knowledge of mrs. ferrars's disposition
and designs.  the shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination, the same
inevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother.  the old
well-established grievance of duty against will, parent against child,
was the cause of all.  she would have been glad to know when these
difficulties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,--when mrs.
ferrars would be reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy.  but
fr
 
 ___________________________
 
or.

the miss steeles, as she expected, had now all the benefit of these
jokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the
name of the gentleman alluded to, which, though often impertinently
expressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family.  but sir john did not sport long
with the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least as
much pleasure in telling the name, as miss steele had in hearing it.

"his name is ferrars," said he, in a very audible whisper; "but pray do
not tell it, for it's a great secret."

"ferrars!" repeated miss steele; "mr. ferrars is the happy man, is he?
what! your sister-in-law's brother, miss dashwood? a very agreeable
young man to be sure; i know him very well."

"how can you say so, anne?" cried lucy, who generally made an amendment
to all her sister's assertions.  "though we have seen him once or twice
at my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well."

elinor
 
 ___________________________
 
but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time in
her life, she thought mrs. jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it.  the manner
in which miss steele had spoken of edward, increased her curiosity; for
it struck her as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion
of that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know something to his
disadvantage.--but her curiosity was unavailing, for no farther notice
was taken of mr. ferrars's name by miss steele when alluded to, or even
openly mentioned by sir john.



chapter 22


marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference of
taste from herself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed, from
the state of her spirits, to be pleased with the miss steeles, or to
encourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of her
behaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy on
their s
 
 ___________________________
 
g satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity
with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting in
conversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward others made
every shew of attention and deference towards herself perfectly
valueless.

"you will think my question an odd one, i dare say," said lucy to her
one day, as they were walking together from the park to the
cottage--"but pray, are you personally acquainted with your
sister-in-law's mother, mrs. ferrars?"

elinor did think the question a very odd one, and her countenance
expressed it, as she answered that she had never seen mrs. ferrars.

"indeed!" replied lucy; "i wonder at that, for i thought you must have
seen her at norland sometimes.  then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what
sort of a woman she is?"

"no," returned elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion of edward's
mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent
curiosity-- "i know nothing of her."

"i am sure you t
 
 ___________________________
 
t again by
saying, with some hesitation,

"i cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious.  i am sure i
would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person
whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours.  and i am sure i
should not have the smallest fear of trusting you; indeed, i should be
very glad of your advice how to manage in such an uncomfortable
situation as i am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble you.
i am sorry you do not happen to know mrs. ferrars."

"i am sorry i do not," said elinor, in great astonishment, "if it could
be of any use to you to know my opinion of her.  but really i never
understood that you were at all connected with that family, and
therefore i am a little surprised, i confess, at so serious an inquiry
into her character."

"i dare say you are, and i am sure i do not at all wonder at it.  but
if i dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised.  mrs.
ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present--but the time ma
 
 ___________________________
 
y
come--how soon it will come must depend upon herself--when we may be
very intimately connected."

she looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at her companion to observe its effect on her.

"good heavens!" cried elinor, "what do you mean?  are you acquainted
with mr. robert ferrars?  can you be?" and she did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

"no," replied lucy, "not to mr. robert ferrars--i never saw him in my
life; but," fixing her eyes upon elinor, "to his eldest brother."

what felt elinor at that moment? astonishment, that would have been as
painful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attended it.  she turned towards lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though
her complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt in no
danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.

"you may well be surpr
 
 ___________________________
 
 "for to be sure you could
have had no idea of it before; for i dare say he never dropped the
smallest hint of it to you or any of your family; because it was always
meant to be a great secret, and i am sure has been faithfully kept so
by me to this hour.  not a soul of all my relations know of it but
anne, and i never should have mentioned it to you, if i had not felt
the greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and i really
thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about mrs. ferrars
must seem so odd, that it ought to be explained.  and i do not think
mr. ferrars can be displeased, when he knows i have trusted you,
because i know he has the highest opinion in the world of all your
family, and looks upon yourself and the other miss dashwoods quite as
his own sisters."--she paused.

elinor for a few moments remained silent.  her astonishment at what she
heard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing herself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, she said, with calm
 
 ___________________________
 
ave seen enough of him to be sensible
he is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him."

"certainly," answered elinor, without knowing what she said; but after
a moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"engaged to mr. edward
ferrars!--i confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really--i beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name.  we cannot mean the same mr. ferrars."

"we can mean no other," cried lucy, smiling.  "mr. edward ferrars, the
eldest son of mrs. ferrars, of park street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, mrs. john dashwood, is the person i mean; you must allow
that i am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depends."

"it is strange," replied elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that i
should never have heard him even mention your name."

"no; considering our situation, it was not strange.  our first care
 
 ___________________________
 
owness of spirits that i could not account for, or if he had talked
more of one lady than another, or seemed in any respect less happy at
longstaple than he used to be.  i do not mean to say that i am
particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
i am sure i could not be deceived."

"all this," thought elinor, "is very pretty; but it can impose upon
neither of us."

"but what," said she after a short silence, "are your views? or have
you none but that of waiting for mrs. ferrars's death, which is a
melancholy and shocking extremity?--is her son determined to submit to
this, and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in which
it may involve you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure for a
while by owning the truth?"

"if we could be certain that it would be only for a while!  but mrs.
ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of anger
upon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to robert, and
the idea of that, for edwar
 
 ___________________________
 
d's sake, frightens away all my inclination
for hasty measures."

"and for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestedness
beyond reason."

lucy looked at elinor again, and was silent.

"do you know mr. robert ferrars?" asked elinor.

"not at all--i never saw him; but i fancy he is very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"a great coxcomb!" repeated miss steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in marianne's music.-- "oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, i dare say."

"no sister," cried lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are not great coxcombs."

"i can answer for it that miss dashwood's is not," said mrs. jennings,
laughing heartily; "for he is one of
 
 ___________________________
 
, and then through your interest, which i am sure you would be kind
enough to use out of friendship for him, and i hope out of some regard
to me, your brother might be persuaded to give him norland living;
which i understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while.  that would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."

"i should always be happy," replied elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for mr. ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary?  he is
brother to mrs. john dashwood--that must be recommendation enough to
her husband."

"but mrs. john dashwood would not much approve of edward's going into
orders."

"then i rather suspect that my interest would do very little."

they were again silent for many minutes.  at length lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh,

"i believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by disso
 
 ___________________________
 
iss dashwood?"

"no," answered elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, "on such a subject i certainly will not.  you know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

"indeed you wrong me," replied lucy, with great solemnity; "i know
nobody of whose judgment i think so highly as i do of yours; and i do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, 'i advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with edward ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,' i should resolve upon doing it
immediately."

elinor blushed for the insincerity of edward's future wife, and
replied, "this compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any
opinion on the subject had i formed one.  it raises my influence much
too high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too
much for an indifferent person."

"'tis because you are an indifferent person," said lucy, with some
pique, and laying a par
 
 ___________________________
 
 of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty in
persuading marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would go
likewise, as she did not think it proper that marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that mrs. jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours.  to this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that edward ferrars, by lucy's account, was
not to be in town before february; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"i will have you both go," said mrs. dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical.  you will have much pleasure in being in london, and
especially in being together; and if elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with 
 
 ___________________________
 
her sister-in-law's family."

elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her
mother's dependence on the attachment of edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to begin
her design by saying, as calmly as she could, "i like edward ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether i am
ever known to them or not."

mrs. dashwood smiled, and said nothing.  marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

after very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted.  mrs. jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, an
 
 ___________________________
 
n him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
midsummer, they would not be married till michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all.  the good understanding
between the colonel and miss dashwood seemed rather to declare that the
honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be made over to her; and mrs. jennings had, for some time ceased to
think at all of mrs. ferrars.

early in february, within a fortnight from the receipt of willoughby's
letter, elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he
was married.  she had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she was
desirous that marianne should not receive the first notice of it from
the public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.

she received the news with resolute composure; made no observation on
it,
 
 ___________________________
 
enough to make a very
creditable appearance in mr. gray's shop.  john dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful and
attentive.

elinor found that he and fanny had been in town two days.

"i wished very much to call upon you yesterday," said he, "but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take harry to see the wild beasts at
exeter exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with mrs. ferrars.
harry was vastly pleased.  this morning i had fully intended to call on
you, if i could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has always so
much to do on first coming to town.  i am come here to bespeak fanny a
seal.  but tomorrow i think i shall certainly be able to call in
berkeley street, and be introduced to your friend mrs. jennings.  i
understand she is a woman of very good fortune.  and the middletons
too, you must introduce me to them.  as my mother-in-law's relations, i
shall be ha
 
 ___________________________
 
o civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with
you and your family.  it is a match that must give universal
satisfaction.  in short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering his
voice to an important whisper--"will be exceedingly welcome to all
parties." recollecting himself, however, he added, "that is, i mean to
say--your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled; fanny
particularly, for she has your interest very much at heart, i assure
you.  and her mother too, mrs. ferrars, a very good-natured woman, i am
sure it would give her great pleasure; she said as much the other day."

elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"it would be something remarkable, now," he continued, "something
droll, if fanny should have a brother and i a sister settling at the
same time.  and yet it is not very unlikely."

"is mr. edward ferrars," said elinor, with resolution, "going to be
married?"

"it is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation.
he has a most excellent
 
 ___________________________
 
 mother.  mrs. ferrars, with the utmost
liberality, will come forward, and settle on him a thousand a year, if
the match takes place.  the lady is the hon. miss morton, only daughter
of the late lord morton, with thirty thousand pounds.  a very desirable
connection on both sides, and i have not a doubt of its taking place in
time.  a thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, to
make over for ever; but mrs. ferrars has a noble spirit.  to give you
another instance of her liberality:--the other day, as soon as we came
to town, aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now,
she put bank-notes into fanny's hands to the amount of two hundred
pounds.  and extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a great
expense while we are here."

he paused for her assent and compassion; and she forced herself to say,

"your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable;
but your income 
 
 ___________________________
 
spected father, as you well know, bequeathed all the
stanhill effects that remained at norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother.  far be it from me to repine at his doing so; he had an
undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose, but, in
consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large purchases of
linen, china, &c. to supply the place of what was taken away.  you may
guess, after all these expenses, how very far we must be from being
rich, and how acceptable mrs. ferrars's kindness is."

"certainly," said elinor; "and assisted by her liberality, i hope you
may yet live to be in easy circumstances."

"another year or two may do much towards it," he gravely replied; "but
however there is still a great deal to be done.  there is not a stone
laid of fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden marked out."

"where is the green-house to be?"

"upon the knoll behind the house.  the old walnut trees are all come
down to make room for it.  it will
 
 ___________________________
 
," said he, as he
walked back with his sister.  "lady middleton is really a most elegant
woman!  such a woman as i am sure fanny will be glad to know.  and mrs.
jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter.  your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only knew that mrs. jennings was the widow of a
man who had got all his money in a low way; and fanny and mrs. ferrars
were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughters
were such kind of women as fanny would like to associate with.  but now
i can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."



chapter 34


mrs. john dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on mrs. jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy
her notice; an
 
 ___________________________
 
ns, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in harley street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months.  their sisters and mrs. jennings were invited
likewise, and john dashwood was careful to secure colonel brandon, who,
always glad to be where the miss dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  they were to
meet mrs. ferrars; but elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party.  the expectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect
indifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being in
company with mrs. ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, was
as lively as ever.

the i
 
 ___________________________
 
!--in a moment i shall see the person that all my
happiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"--

elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being miss morton's mother, rather than her own,
whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assured
her, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her--to the utter
amazement of lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hoped at
least to be an object of irrepressible envy to elinor.

mrs. ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright, even to formality, in
her figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her aspect.  her
complexion was sallow; and her features small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the strong characters of pride and ill nature.  she was not a woman of
many words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them to the
number of her ideas; and of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he few syllables that did escape her, not
one fell to the share of miss dashwood, whom she eyed with the spirited
determination of disliking her at all events.

elinor could not now be made unhappy by this behaviour.-- a few months
ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in mrs. ferrars'
power to distress her by it now;--and the difference of her manners to
the miss steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble
her more, only amused her.  she could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person-- for
lucy was particularly distinguished--whom of all others, had they known
as much as she did, they would have been most anxious to mortify; while
she herself, who had comparatively no power to wound them, sat
pointedly slighte
 
 ___________________________
 
t less partiality, but more sincerity,
were equally earnest in support of their own descendant.

lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,
thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age, and could not
conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world
between them; and miss steele, with yet greater address gave it, as
fast as she could, in favour of each.

elinor, having once delivered her opinion on william's side, by which
she offended mrs. ferrars and fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

before her removing from norland, elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of john dashwood on his following the other
 
 ___________________________
 
dest sister," said he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, i dare say, be pleased with them.  i do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

the colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done any thing painted by
miss dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspection.  mrs. ferrars,
not aware of their being elinor's work, particularly requested to look
at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of lady
middletons's approbation, fanny presented them to her mother,
considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done by
miss dashwood.

"hum"--said mrs. ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without regarding them at
all, returned them to her daughter.

perhaps fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude
enough,--for, colouring a little,
 
 ___________________________
 
 she immediately said,

"they are very pretty, ma'am--an't they?" but then again, the dread of
having been too civil, too encouraging herself, probably came over her,
for she presently added,

"do you not think they are something in miss morton's style of
painting, ma'am?--she does paint most delightfully!--how beautifully
her last landscape is done!"

"beautifully indeed!  but she does every thing well."

marianne could not bear this.--she was already greatly displeased with
mrs. ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of another, at elinor's
expense, though she had not any notion of what was principally meant by
it, provoked her immediately to say with warmth,

"this is admiration of a very particular kind!--what is miss morton to
us?--who knows, or who cares, for her?--it is elinor of whom we think
and speak."

and so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-law's hands,
to admire them herself as they ought to be admired.

mrs. ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawin
 
 ___________________________
 
andon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention,-- "she has not such good
health as her sister,--she is very nervous,--she has not elinor's
constitution;--and one must allow that there is something very trying
to a young woman who has been a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions.  you would not think it perhaps, but marianne was
remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as elinor.--
now you see it is all gone."



chapter 35


elinor's curiosity to see mrs. ferrars was satisfied.-- she had found
in her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between
the families undesirable.-- she had seen enough of her pride, her
meanness, and her determined prejudice against herself, to comprehend
all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage, of edward and herself, had he been otherwise
free;--and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her own sake,
that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering 
 
 ___________________________
 
under any other
of mrs. ferrars's creation, preserved her from all dependence upon her
caprice, or any solicitude for her good opinion.  or at least, if she
did not bring herself quite to rejoice in edward's being fettered to
lucy, she determined, that had lucy been more amiable, she ought to
have rejoiced.

she wondered that lucy's spirits could be so very much elevated by the
civility of mrs. ferrars;--that her interest and her vanity should so
very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid her
because she was not elinor, appear a compliment to herself--or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her, because
her real situation was unknown.  but that it was so, had not only been
declared by lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over again the
next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, lady middleton
set her down in berkeley stre
 
 ___________________________
 
et on the chance of seeing elinor alone,
to tell her how happy she was.

the chance proved a lucky one, for a message from mrs. palmer soon
after she arrived, carried mrs. jennings away.

"my dear friend," cried lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "i
come to talk to you of my happiness.  could anything be so flattering
as mrs. ferrars's way of treating me yesterday?  so exceeding affable
as she was!--you know how i dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--but
the very moment i was introduced, there was such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite took a fancy to
me.  now was not it so?-- you saw it all; and was not you quite struck
with it?"

"she was certainly very civil to you."

"civil!--did you see nothing but only civility?-- i saw a vast deal
more.  such kindness as fell to the share of n
 
 ___________________________
 
but me!--no pride,
no hauteur, and your sister just the same--all sweetness and
affability!"

elinor wished to talk of something else, but lucy still pressed her to
own that she had reason for her happiness; and elinor was obliged to go
on.--

"undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement," said she, "nothing
could be more flattering than their treatment of you;--but as that was
not the case"--

"i guessed you would say so,"--replied lucy quickly--"but there was no
reason in the world why mrs. ferrars should seem to like me, if she did
not, and her liking me is every thing.  you shan't talk me out of my
satisfaction.  i am sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulties at all, to what i used to think.  mrs. ferrars is a
charming woman, and so is your sister.  they are both delightful women,
indeed!--i wonder i should never hear you say how agreeable mrs.
dashwood was!"

to this elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any.

"are you ill, miss dashwood?--you seem low--y
 
 ___________________________
 
wer, though doubting her own success.
but it seemed to satisfy lucy, for she directly replied,

"indeed i am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to
edward's love, it is the greatest comfort i have.--poor edward!--but
now there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for lady middleton's delighted with mrs. dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in harley street, i dare say, and edward spends half his
time with his sister--besides, lady middleton and mrs. ferrars will
visit now;--and mrs. ferrars and your sister were both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me.-- they are such
charming women!--i am sure if ever you tell your sister what i think of
her, you cannot speak too high."

but elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she should
tell her sister.  lucy continued.

"i am sure i should have seen it in a moment, if mrs. ferrars had took
a dislike to me.  if she had only made me a formal courtesy, for
insta
 
 ___________________________
 
nce, without saying a word, and never after had took any notice of
me, and never looked at me in a pleasant way--you know what i mean--if
i had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, i should have gave
it all up in despair.  i could not have stood it.  for where she does
dislike, i know it is most violent."

elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph, by
the door's being thrown open, the servant's announcing mr. ferrars, and
edward's immediately walking in.

it was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each shewed that
it was so.  they all looked exceedingly foolish; and edward seemed to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
advance farther into it.  the very circumstance, in its unpleasantest
form, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallen
on them.--they were not only all three together, but were together
without the relief of any other person.  the 
 
 ___________________________
 
even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the
room.  in one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of
young men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases
at gray's.  she perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, and
speaking familiarly to her brother; and had just determined to find out
his name from the latter, when they both came towards her, and mr.
dashwood introduced him to her as mr. robert ferrars.

he addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head into a bow
which assured her as plainly as words could have done, that he was
exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by lucy.  happy
had it been for her, if her regard for edward had depended less on his
own merit, than on the merit of his nearest relations!  for then his
brother's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun.  but while she
wondered at the dif
 
 ___________________________
 
ee different plans of bonomi's.  i was to decide
on the best of them.  'my dear courtland,' said i, immediately throwing
them all into the fire, 'do not adopt either of them, but by all means
build a cottage.' and that i fancy, will be the end of it.

"some people imagine that there can be no accommodations, no space in a
cottage; but this is all a mistake.  i was last month at my friend
elliott's, near dartford.  lady elliott wished to give a dance.  'but
how can it be done?' said she; 'my dear ferrars, do tell me how it is
to be managed.  there is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten
couple, and where can the supper be?' i immediately saw that there
could be no difficulty in it, so i said, 'my dear lady elliott, do not
be uneasy.  the dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the library may be open
for tea and other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.'  lady elliott was delighted with the thought.  we 
 
 ___________________________
 
or other, and at last he said in a whisper, 'for fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, i think it advisable to say, that i
believe there is no great reason for alarm; i hope mrs. dashwood will
do very well.'"

"what! is fanny ill?"

"that is exactly what i said, my dear.  'lord!' says i, 'is mrs.
dashwood ill?' so then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all i can learn, seems to be this.  mr. edward ferrars,
the very young man i used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, i am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), mr.
edward ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
cousin lucy!--there's for you, my dear!--and not a creature knowing a
syllable of the matter, except nancy!--could you have believed such a
thing possible?-- there is no great wonder in their liking one another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobody
suspe
 
 ___________________________
 
ct it!--that is strange!--i never happened to see them together,
or i am sure i should have found it out directly.  well, and so this
was kept a great secret, for fear of mrs. ferrars, and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter;--till this very
morning, poor nancy, who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but no
conjurer, popt it all out.  'lord!' thinks she to herself, 'they are
all so fond of lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'
and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all alone at her
carpet-work, little suspecting what was to come--for she had just been
saying to your brother, only five minutes before, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 talk about it; and the best of all is, that he is
gone back again to harley street, that he may be within call when mrs.
ferrars is told of it, for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins
left the house, for your sister was sure she would be in hysterics too;
and so she may, for what i care.  i have no pity for either of them.  i
have no notion of people's making such a to-do about money and
greatness.  there is no reason on earth why mr. edward and lucy should
not marry; for i am sure mrs. ferrars may afford to do very well by her
son, and though lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows better than
any body how to make the most of every thing; i dare say, if mrs.
ferrars would only allow him five hundred a-year, she would make as
good an appearance with it as any body else would with eight.  lord!
how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours--or a little
bigger--with two maids, and two men; and i believe i could help them to
a housemaid, for my betty has a sister out of p
 
 ___________________________
 
agine her at all attached to edward; and happy
above all the rest, in the absence of marianne, she felt very well able
to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her judgment,
as she believed, with impartiality on the conduct of every one
concerned in it.

she could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event really
was; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its being
possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of edward and
lucy.  what mrs. ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear; and still more anxious to
know how edward would conduct himself.  for him she felt much
compassion;--for lucy very little--and it cost her some pains to
procure that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.

as mrs. jennings could talk on no other subject, elinor soon saw the
necessity of preparing marianne for its discussion.  no time was to be
lost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 to any thing herself.

the next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from their
brother, who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful
affair, and bring them news of his wife.

"you have heard, i suppose," said he with great solemnity, as soon as
he was seated, "of the very shocking discovery that took place under
our roof yesterday."

they all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a moment for speech.

"your sister," he continued, "has suffered dreadfully.  mrs. ferrars
too--in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress--but i
will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of us
quite overcome.  poor fanny! she was in hysterics all yesterday.  but i
would not alarm you too much.  donavan says there is nothing materially
to be apprehended; her constitution is a good one, and her resolution
equal to any thing.  she has borne it all, with the fortitude of an
angel!  she says she never shall think well of anybody again; and one
cannot 
 
 ___________________________
 
 merely because she
thought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behaved
girls, and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we both wished
very much to have invited you and marianne to be with us, while your
kind friend there, was attending her daughter.  and now to be so
rewarded!  'i wish, with all my heart,' says poor fanny in her
affectionate way, 'that we had asked your sisters instead of them.'"

here he stopped to be thanked; which being done, he went on.

"what poor mrs. ferrars suffered, when first fanny broke it to her, is
not to be described.  while she with the truest affection had been
planning a most eligible connection for him, was it to be supposed that
he could be all the time secretly engaged to another person!--such a
suspicion could never have entered her head!  if she suspected any
prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in that quarter.  'there, to
be sure,' said she, 'i might have thought myself safe.' she was quite
in an agony.  we consulted together, 
 
 ___________________________
 
however, as to what should be
done, and at last she determined to send for edward.  he came.  but i
am sorry to relate what ensued.  all that mrs. ferrars could say to
make him put an end to the engagement, assisted too as you may well
suppose by my arguments, and fanny's entreaties, was of no avail.
duty, affection, every thing was disregarded.  i never thought edward
so stubborn, so unfeeling before.  his mother explained to him her
liberal designs, in case of his marrying miss morton; told him she
would settle on him the norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax,
brings in a good thousand a-year; offered even, when matters grew
desperate, to ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n
to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune.  he therefore replied, without any resentment,

"i would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam.  miss lucy steele is, i dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
and to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle's care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as mrs. ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. in
short, i do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom
you have a regard for, mrs. jennings.  we all wish her extremely happy;
and mrs. ferrars's conduct throughout the whole, has been such as every
conscientious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt.  it has
been dignified and liberal.  edward has drawn his own lot, and i fear
it will be a bad one."

marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and elinor's heart wru
 
 ___________________________
 
nger brother in possession of an estate which might
have been his own?  poor edward!  i feel for him sincerely."

a few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded his
visit; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he really
believed there was no material danger in fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regarded mrs. ferrars's conduct, the
dashwoods', and edward's.

marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room; and
as her vehemence made reserve impossible in elinor, and unnecessary in
mrs. jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
party.



chapter 38


mrs. jennings was very warm in her praise of edward's conduct, but only
elinor and marianne understood its true merit.  they only knew how
little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and how small was the
consolation, 
 
 ___________________________
 
's favourite colour.  i am sure, for my part, i should never
have known he did like it better than any other colour, if he had not
happened to say so.  my cousins have been so plaguing me!  i declare
sometimes i do not know which way to look before them."

she had wandered away to a subject on which elinor had nothing to say,
and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again to
the first.

"well, but miss dashwood," speaking triumphantly, "people may say what
they chuse about mr. ferrars's declaring he would not have lucy, for it
is no such thing i can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad.  whatever lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain."

"i never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, i assure you,"
said elinor.

"oh, did not you?  but it was said, i know, very well, and by more than
one; for miss godby told miss sparks, that nobody in their senses could
e
 
 ___________________________
 
xpect mr. ferrars to give up a woman like miss morton, with thirty
thousand pounds to her fortune, for lucy steele that had nothing at
all; and i had it from miss sparks myself.  and besides that, my cousin
richard said himself, that when it came to the point he was afraid mr.
ferrars would be off; and when edward did not come near us for three
days, i could not tell what to think myself; and i believe in my heart
lucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away from your brother's
wednesday, and we saw nothing of
 
 ___________________________
 
ink myself very much obliged to you."

mrs. jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only wondered that
after hearing such a sentence, the colonel should be able to take leave
of them, as he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go away
without making her any reply!--she had not thought her old friend could
have made so indifferent a suitor.

what had really passed between them was to this effect.

"i have heard," said he, with great compassion, "of the injustice your
friend mr. ferrars has suffered from his family; for if i understand
the matter right, he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering
in his engagement with a very deserving young woman.-- have i been
rightly informed?--is it so?--"

elinor told him that it was.

"the cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he replied, with great
feeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people long
attached to each other, is terrible.-- mrs. ferrars does not know what
she may be doing--what she may drive her so
 
 ___________________________
 
ize.

"the smallness of the house," said she, "i cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income."

by which the colonel was surprised to find that she was considering mr.
ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation; for
he did not suppose it possible that delaford living could supply such
an income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle
on--and he said so.

"this little rectory can do no more than make mr. ferrars comfortable
as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry.  i am sorry to say that
my patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly more extensive.
if, however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve
him farther, i must think very differently of him from what i now do,
if i am not as ready to be useful to him then as i sincerely wish i
could be at present.  what i am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,
since it can advance him so little towards what must be his princ
 
 ___________________________
 
any; and besides, you must
long to tell your sister all about it."

marianne had left the room before the conversation began.

"certainly, ma'am, i shall tell marianne of it; but i shall not mention
it at present to any body else."

"oh! very well," said mrs. jennings rather disappointed.  "then you
would not have me tell it to lucy, for i think of going as far as
holborn to-day."

"no, ma'am, not even lucy if you please.  one day's delay will not be
very material; and till i have written to mr. ferrars, i think it ought
not to be mentioned to any body else.  i shall do that directly.  it is
of importance that no time should be lost with him, for he will of
course have much to do relative to his ordination."

this speech at first puzzled mrs. jennings exceedingly.  why mr.
ferrars was to have been written to about it in such a hurry, she could
not immediately comprehend.  a few moments' reflection, however,
produced a very happy idea, and she exclaimed;--

"oh, ho!--i understand you.  mr. ferr
 
 ___________________________
 
 be sure, he must be ordained in
readiness; and i am very glad to find things are so forward between
you.  but, my dear, is not this rather out of character?  should not
the colonel write himself?--sure, he is the proper person."

elinor did not quite understand the beginning of mrs. jennings's
speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion.

"colonel brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one to
announce his intentions to mr. ferrars than himself."

"and so you are forced to do it.  well that is an odd kind of delicacy!
however, i will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to write.)  you
know your own concerns best.  so goodby, my dear.  i have not heard of
any thing to please me so well since charlotte was brought to bed."

and away she went; but returning again in a moment,

"i have just been thinking of betty's sister, my dear.  i should be
very glad to get her so good a mistress.  but whether she would do for
a lady's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 all to depend upon
that."

"really," said elinor, "i know so little of these kind of forms, that i
can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but i suppose two or three months will complete his
ordination."

"two or three months!" cried mrs. jennings; "lord! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the colonel wait two or three months! lord
bless me!--i am sure it would put me quite out of patience!--and though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor mr. ferrars, i do think
it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.  sure
somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is in
orders already."

"my dear ma'am," said elinor, "what can you be thinking of?-- why,
colonel brandon's only object is to be of use to mr. ferrars."

"lord bless you, my dear!--sure you do not mean to persuade me that the
colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to mr.
ferrars!"

the deception could not continue after this; and an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the presentation, is old enough to
take it.--aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by relating that
she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from colonel
brandon to edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on which
it was given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

"it is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after hearing what she
said--"what could be the colonel's motive?"

"a very simple one--to be of use to mr. ferrars."

"well, well; whatever colonel brandon may be, edward is a very lucky
man.--you will not mention the matter to fanny, however, for though i
have broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well,--she will not like
to hear it much talked of."

elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that she
thought fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of wealth
to her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be possibly
impoverished.

"mrs. ferrars," added he, lowerin
 
 ___________________________
 
g his voice to the tone becoming so
important a subject, "knows nothing about it at present, and i believe
it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may
be.-- when the marriage takes place, i fear she must hear of it all."

"but why should such precaution be used?--though it is not to be
supposed that mrs. ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in
knowing that her son has money enough to live upon,--for that must be
quite out of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour, is she
supposed to feel at all?--she has done with her son, she cast him off
for ever, and has made all those over whom she had any influence, cast
him off likewise.  surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagined
liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--she cannot
be interested in any thing that befalls him.
 
 ___________________________
 
-- she would not be so weak
as to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the anxiety of
a parent!"

"ah! elinor," said john, "your reasoning is very good, but it is
founded on ignorance of human nature.  when edward's unhappy match
takes place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had
never discarded him; and, therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much as
possible.  mrs. ferrars can never forget that edward is her son."

"you surprise me; i should think it must nearly have escaped her memory
by this time."

"you wrong her exceedingly.  mrs. ferrars is one of the most
affectionate mothers in the world."

elinor was silent.

"we think now,"--said mr. dashwood, after a short pause, "of robert's
marrying miss morton."

elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother's
tone, calmly replied,

"the lady, i suppose, has no choice in the affair."

"choice!--
 
 ___________________________
 
inor said no more, and john was also for a short time silent.--his
reflections ended thus.

"of one thing, my dear sister," kindly taking her hand, and speaking in
an awful whisper,--"i may assure you;--and i will do it, because i know
it must gratify you.  i have good reason to think--indeed i have it
from the best authority, or i should not repeat it, for otherwise it
would be very wrong to say any thing about it--but i have it from the
very best authority--not that i ever precisely heard mrs. ferrars say
it herself--but her daughter did, and i have it from her--that in
short, whatever objections there might be against a certain--a certain
connection--you understand me--it would have been far preferable to
her, it would not have given her half the vexation that this does.  i
was exceedingly pleased to hear that mrs. ferrars considered it in that
light--a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all.  'it would
have been beyond comparison,' she said, 'the least evil of the two, and
she wou
 
 ___________________________
 
eason to
regret, my dear elinor.  there is no doubt of your doing exceedingly
well--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  has
colonel brandon been with you lately?"

elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of mr. robert ferrars.  after a few moments'
chat, john dashwood, recollecting that fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course of
life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her most
u
 
 ___________________________
 
ter than she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that she
could like him no more;--not sorry to be driven by the observation of
his epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of edward's generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feelings.

of edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now received
intelligence from colonel brandon, who had been into dorsetshire
lately; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend of
mr. ferrars, and the kind confidante of himself, talked to her a
great deal of the parsonage at delaford, described its deficiencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them.--his
behaviour to her in this, as well as in every other particular, his
open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify mrs. jennings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have been enough, perhaps
 
 ___________________________
 
him to be still at oxford;" which
was all the intelligence of edward afforded her by the correspondence,
for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.
she was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of his measures.

their man-servant had been sent one morning to exeter on business; and
when, as he waited at table, he had satisfied the inquiries of his
mistress as to the event of his errand, this was his voluntary
communication--

"i suppose you know, ma'am, that mr. ferrars is married."

marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon elinor, saw her
turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.  mrs. dashwood,
whose eyes, as she answered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively
taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by elinor's
countenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by marianne's situation, knew not on which child to
bestow her principal attention.

the servant, who saw only that miss marianne was 
 
 ___________________________
 
upported her into the other room.  by that time, marianne was rather
better, and her mother leaving her to the care of margaret and the
maid, returned to elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so far
recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an
inquiry of thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.  mrs. dashwood
immediately took all that trouble on herself; and elinor had the
benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.

"who told you that mr. ferrars was married, thomas?"

"i see mr. ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in exeter, and his lady
too, miss steele as was.  they was stopping in a chaise at the door of
the new london inn, as i went there with a message from sally at the
park to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. i happened to look up
as i went by the chaise, and so i see directly it was the youngest miss
steele; so i took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me, and
inquired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies, espe
 
 ___________________________
 
cially miss
marianne, and bid me i should give her compliments and mr. ferrars's,
their best compliments and service, and how sorry they was they had not
time to come on and see you, but they was in a great hurry to go
forwards, for they was going further down for a little while, but
howsever, when they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you."

"but did she tell you she was married, thomas?"

"yes, ma'am. she smiled, and said how she had changed her name since
she was in these parts.  she was always a very affable and free-spoken
young lady, and very civil behave
 
 ___________________________
 
d.  so, i made free to wish her joy."

"was mr. ferrars in the carriage with her?"

"yes, ma'am, i just see him leaning back in it, but he did not look
up;--he never was a gentleman much for talking."

elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting himself
forward; and mrs. dashwood probably found the same explanation.

"was there no one else in the carriage?"

"no, ma'am, only they two."

"do you know where they came from?"

"they come straight from town, as miss lucy--mrs. ferrars told me."

"and are they going farther westward?"

"yes, ma'am--but not to bide long.  they will soon be back again, and
then they'd be sure and call here."

mrs. dashwood now looked at her daughter; but elinor knew better than
to expect them.  she recognised the whole of lucy in the message, and
was very confident that edward would never come near them.  she
observed in a low voice, to her mother, that they were probably going
down to mr. pratt's, near plymouth.

thomas's intelligence seemed o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver.  elinor looked as if she wished to
hear more.

"did you see them off, before you came away?"

"no, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but i could not bide any
longer; i was afraid of being late."

"did mrs. ferrars look well?"

"yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she was
always a very handsome young lady--and she seemed vastly contented."

mrs. dashwood could think of no other question, and thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed.
marianne had already sent to say, that she should eat nothing more.
mrs. dashwood's and elinor's appetites were equally lost, and margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both
her si
 
 ___________________________
 
ain and
talked of the weather.

marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal her
distress; and margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole of
the case, thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and therefore
took a seat as far from him as she could, and maintained a strict
silence.

when elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause took place.  it was put an end to by mrs. dashwood, who
felt obliged to hope that he had left mrs. ferrars very well.  in a
hurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.

another pause.

elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said,

"is mrs. ferrars at longstaple?"

"at longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise.-- "no, my mother
is in town."

"i meant," said elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to inquire
for mrs. edward ferrars."

she dared not look up;--but her mother and marianne both turned their
eyes on him.  he coloured, seemed perplex
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,--

"perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean mrs.--mrs. robert ferrars."

"mrs. robert ferrars!"--was repeated by marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though elinor could not speak,
even her eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder.  he
rose from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not
knowing what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to
pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,

"perhaps you do not know--you may not have heard that my brother is
 
 ___________________________
 
e too generous to do us any
     ill offices.  your brother has gained my affections
     entirely, and as we could not live without one
     another, we are just returned from the altar, and
     are now on our way to dawlish for a few weeks, which
     place your dear brother has great curiosity to see,
     but thought i would first trouble you with these
     few lines, and shall always remain,

     "your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
                                        "lucy ferrars.

     "i have burnt all your letters, and will return
     your picture the first opportunity.  please to destroy
     my scrawls--but the ring with my hair you are very
     welcome to keep."

elinor read and returned it without any comment.

"i will not ask your opinion of it as a composition," said
edward.--"for worlds would not i have had a letter of hers seen by you
in former days.--in a sister it is bad enough, but in a wife!--how i
have blushed over the pages of her writing!--and i beli
 
 ___________________________
 
as impossible that mrs.
dashwood should advance anything; and they were neither of them quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year
would supply them with the comforts of life.

edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on that he rested for the residue of their
income.  but elinor had no such dependence; for since edward would
still be unable to marry miss morton, and his chusing herself had been
spoken of in mrs. ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evil
than his chusing lucy steele, she feared that robert's offence would
serve no other purpose than to enrich fanny.

about four days after edward's arrival colonel brandon appeared, to
complete mrs. dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at barton, more company
with her than her house would hold.  edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and colonel brandon therefore walked e
 
 ___________________________
 
ll the improvement in marianne's looks, all the kindness
of her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's language, to
make it cheerful.  among such friends, however, and such flattery, he
did revive.  no rumour of lucy's marriage had yet reached him:--he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering.  every thing was
explained to him by mrs. dashwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoice
in what he had done for mr. ferrars, since eventually it promoted the
interest of elinor.

it would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced in the good
opinion of each other, as they advanced in each other's acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise.  their resemblance in good principles
and good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably
have been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and two sisters
fond of each other, made tha
 
 ___________________________
 
n against the jilting
girl, and pour forth her compassion towards poor mr. edward, who, she
was sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by all
accounts, almost broken-hearted, at oxford.-- "i do think," she
continued, "nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two days
before lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me.  not a soul
suspected anything of the matter, not even nancy, who, poor soul!  came
crying to me the day after, in a great fright for fear of mrs. ferrars,
as well as not knowing how to get to plymouth; for lucy it seems
borrowed all her money before she went off to be married, on purpose we
suppose to make a show with, and poor nancy had not seven shillings in
the world;--so i was very glad to give her five guineas to take her
down to exeter, where she thinks of staying three or four weeks with
mrs. burgess, in hopes, as i tell her, to fall in with the doctor
again.  and i must say that lucy's crossness not to take them along
with them in the ch
 
 ___________________________
 
aise is worse than all.  poor mr. edward! i cannot
get him out of my head, but you must send for him to barton, and miss
marianne must try to comfort him."

mr. dashwood's strains were more solemn.  mrs. ferrars was the most
unfortunate of women--poor fanny had suffered agonies of
sensibility--and he considered the existence of each, under such a
blow, with grateful wonder.  robert's offence was unpardonable, but
lucy's was infinitely worse.  neither of them were ever again to be
mentioned to mrs. ferrars; and even, if she might hereafter be induced
to forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledged as her
daughter, nor be permitted to appear in her presence.  the secrecy with
which everything h
 
 ___________________________
 
ad been carried on between them, was rationally
treated as enormously heightening the crime, because, had any suspicion
of it occurred to the others, proper measures would have been taken to
prevent the marriage; and he called on elinor to join with him in
regretting that lucy's engagement with edward had not rather been
fulfilled, than that she should thus be the means of spreading misery
farther in the family.-- he thus continued:

"mrs. ferrars has never yet mentioned edward's name, which does not
surprise us; but, to our great astonishment, not a line has been
received from him on the occasion.  perhaps, however, he is kept silent
by his fear of offending, and i shall, therefore, give him a hint, by a
line to oxford, that his sister and i both think a letter of proper
submission from him, addressed perhaps to fanny, and by her shewn to
her mother, might not be taken amiss; for we all know the tenderness of
mrs. ferrars's heart, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
are not entirely
without merit."

after a visit on colonel brandon's side of only three or four days, the
two gentlemen quitted barton together.-- they were to go immediately to
delaford, that edward might have some personal knowledge of his future
home, and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvements
were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple of
nights, he was to proceed on his journey to town.



chapter 50


after a proper resistance on the part of mrs. ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve her from that reproach which she always
seemed fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, edward
was admitted to her presence, and pronounced to be again her son.

her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating.  for many years of
her life she had had two sons; but the crime and annihilation of edward
a few weeks ago, had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation of
robert had left her for a fortnight without any; and now, by th
 
 ___________________________
 
ppeared, that though edward was now
her only son, he was by no means her eldest; for while robert was
inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year, not the smallest
objection was made against edward's taking orders for the sake of two
hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was anything promised either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had
been given with fanny.

it was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected, by
edward and elinor; and mrs. ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,
seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more.

with an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,
they had nothing to wait for after edward was in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which colonel brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of elinor, was making
considerable improvements; and after waiting some time for their
completion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments
and d
 
 ___________________________
 
ep.  mrs. jennings's
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; for
she was able to visit edward and his wife in their parsonage by
michaelmas, and she found in elinor and her husband, as she really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world.  they had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of colonel brandon and marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows.

they were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends.  mrs. ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the dashwoods were at the
expense of a journey from sussex to do them honour.

"i will not say that i am disappointed, my dear sister," said john, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of delaford
house, "that would be saying too much, for certainly you have been one
of the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is.  but, i
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call colon
 
 ___________________________
 
-and though, perhaps, marianne may not seem exactly
the person to attract him--yet i think it would altogether be advisable
for you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as colonel
brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may
happen--for, when people are much thrown together, and see little of
anybody else--and it will always be in your power to set her off to
advantage, and so forth;--in short, you may as well give her a
chance--you understand me."--

but though mrs. ferrars did come to see them, and always treated them
with the make-believe of decent affection, they were never insulted by
her real favour and preference.  that was due to the folly of robert,
and the cunning of his wife; and it was earned by them before many
months had passed away.  the selfish sagacity of the latter, which had
at first drawn robert into the scrape, was the principal instrument of
his deliverance from it; for her respectful humility, assiduous
attentions, and endless flatteries, as 
 
 ___________________________
 
soon as the smallest opening was
given for their exercise, reconciled mrs. ferrars to his choice, and
re-established him completely in her favour.

the whole of lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity which
crowned it, therefore, may be held forth as a most encouraging instance
of what an earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest, however
its progress may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time and
conscience.  when robert first sought her acquaintance, and privately
visited her in b
 
 ___________________________
 
o his own; and in short, it became speedily
evident to both, that he had entirely supplanted his brother.  he was
proud of his conquest, proud of tricking edward, and very proud of
marrying privately without his mother's consent.  what immediately
followed is known.  they passed some months in great happiness at
dawlish; for she had many relations and old acquaintances to cut--and
he drew several plans for magnificent cottages;--and from thence
returning to town, procured the forgiveness of mrs. ferrars, by the
simple expedient of asking it, which, at lucy's instigation, was
adopted.  the forgiveness, at first, indeed, as was reasonable,
comprehended only robert; and lucy, who had owed his mother no duty and
therefore could have transgressed none, still remained some weeks
longer unpardoned.  but perseverance in humility of conduct and
messages, in self-condemnation for robert's offence, and gratitude for
the unkindness she was treated with, procured her in time the haughty
notice which overca
 
 ___________________________
 
me her by its graciousness, and led soon afterwards,
by rapid degrees, to the highest state of affection and influence.
lucy became as necessary to mrs. ferrars, as either robert or fanny;
and while edward was never cordially forgiven for having once intended
to marry her, and elinor, though superior to her in fortune and birth,
was spoken of as an intruder, she was in every thing considered, and
always openly acknowledged, to be a favourite child.  they settled in
town, received very liberal assistance from mrs. ferrars, were on the
best terms imaginable with the dashwoods; and setting aside the
jealousies and ill-will continually subsisting between f