 an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement.  but the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was
his only one twelvemonth.  he survived his uncle no longer; and ten
thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained for
his widow and daughters.

his son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him mr.
dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.

mr. john dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the
family; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to make
them comfortable.  his father was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and mr. john dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in his power to do for them.

he was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in gen
 
 ___________________________
 
eral, well
respected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties.  had he married a more amiable woman, he might
have been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even have
been made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, and
very fond of his wife.  but mrs. john dashwood was a strong caricature
of himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.

when he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself to
increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand
pounds a-piece.  he then really thought himself equal to it.  the
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed his
heart, and made him feel capable of generosity.-- "yes, he would give
them three thousand 
 
 ___________________________
 
pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! it would
be enough to make them completely easy.  three thousand pounds! he
could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- he
thought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he did
not repent.

no sooner was his father's funeral over, than mrs. john dashwood,
without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,
arrived with her child and their attendants.  no one could dispute her
right to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of his
father's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater, and to a woman in mrs. dashwood's situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in her mind there was
a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of
the kind, by 
 
 ___________________________
 
whomsoever given or received, was to her a source of
immovable disgust.  mrs. john dashwood had never been a favourite with
any of her husband's family; but she had had no opportunity, till the
present, of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of
other people she could act when occasion required it.

so acutely did mrs. dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, had
not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on 
 
 ___________________________
 
he could consult with her brother,
could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her with
proper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar
exertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.

margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; but
as she had already imbibed a good deal of marianne's romance, without
having much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sisters at a more advanced period of life.



chapter 2


mrs. john dashwood now installed herself mistress of norland; and her
mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.
as such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and by
her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody
beyond himself, his wife, and their child.  he really pressed them,
with some earnestness, to consider norland as their home; and, as no
plan appeared so eligible to mrs. dashwood as remaining there till she
could accommodate herself with a
 
 ___________________________
 
 house in the neighbourhood, his
invitation was accepted.

a continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former
delight, was exactly what suited her mind.  in seasons of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness
itself.  but in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.

mrs. john dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended
to do for his sisters.  to take three thousand pounds from the fortune
of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree.  she begged him to think again on the subject.  how
could he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,
of so large a sum?  and what possible claim could the miss dashwoods,
who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as no
relationship at all, have on h
 
 ___________________________
 
pon my word," said mr. dashwood, "i believe you are perfectly right.
my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than
what you say.  i clearly understand it now, and i will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you
have described.  when my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as i can.  some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then."

"certainly," returned mrs. john dashwood.  "but, however, one thing
must be considered.  when your father and mother moved to norland,
though the furniture of stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother.  her house will
therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it."

"that is a material consideration undoubtedly.  a valuable legacy
indeed! and yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant
addition to our own stock here."

"yes; and the set of breakfast china 
 
 ___________________________
 
ter, which half a year's residence in her family afforded;
and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found it
impossible to have lived together so long, had not a particular
circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of mrs. dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at norland.

this circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of mrs. john dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there.

some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother.  but mrs. d
 
 ___________________________
 
h brought any charm
to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of norland
beyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from
sending a letter of acquiescence.



chapter 5


no sooner was her answer dispatched, than mrs. dashwood indulged herself
in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that she
was provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer than till
every thing were ready for her inhabiting it. they heard her with
surprise. mrs. john dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly hoped
that she would not be settled far from norland. she had great
satisfaction in replying that she was going into devonshire.--edward
turned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surprise
and concern, which required no explanation to her, repeated,
"devonshire! are you, indeed, going there? so far from hence! and to
what part of it?" she explained the situation. it was within four miles
northward of exeter.

"it is but a cottage," she 
 
 ___________________________
 
continued, "but i hope to see many of my
friends in it.  a room or two can easily be added; and if my friends
find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, i am sure i will
find none in accommodating them."

she concluded with a very kind invitation to mr. and mrs. john dashwood
to visit her at barton; and to edward she gave one with still greater
affection.  though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had
made her resolve on remaining at norland no longer than was
unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that
point to which it principally tended.  to separate edward and elinor
was as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show mrs.
john dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totally
she disregarded her di
 
 ___________________________
 
sapprobation of the match.

mr. john dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry
he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from norland as to
prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture.  he
really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very
exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his
father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.-- the furniture
was all sent around by water.  it chiefly consisted of household linen,
plate, china, and books,
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a handsome pianoforte of marianne's.
mrs. john dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could not
help feeling it hard that as mrs. dashwood's income would be so
trifling in comparison with their own, she should have any handsome
article of furniture.

mrs. dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,
and she might have immediate possession.  no difficulty arose on either
side in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of her
effects at norland, and to determine her future household, before she
set off for 
 
 ___________________________
 
t after
a moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"engaged to mr. edward
ferrars!--i confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really--i beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name.  we cannot mean the same mr. ferrars."

"we can mean no other," cried lucy, smiling.  "mr. edward ferrars, the
eldest son of mrs. ferrars, of park street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, mrs. john dashwood, is the person i mean; you must allow
that i am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depends."

"it is strange," replied elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that i
should never have heard him even mention your name."

"no; considering our situation, it was not strange.  our first care has
been to keep the matter secret.-- you knew nothing of me, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no occasion for ever mentioning my name
to you; and, as he was a
 
 ___________________________
 
 some regard
to me, your brother might be persuaded to give him norland living;
which i understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while.  that would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."

"i should always be happy," replied elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for mr. ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary?  he is
brother to mrs. john dashwood--that must be recommendation enough to
her husband."

"but mrs. john dashwood would not much approve of edward's going into
orders."

"then i rather suspect that my interest would do very little."

they were again silent for many minutes.  at length lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh,

"i believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolving the engagement.  we seem so beset with difficulties
on every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, we
shou
 
 ___________________________
 
s dashwoods, but such a one as
seemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with a
happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.

elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, was on the point
of concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her side.
she turned her eyes towards his face, and found him with some surprise
to be her brother.

their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in mr. gray's shop.  john dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful and
attentive.

elinor found that he and fanny had been in town two days.

"i wished very much to call upon you yesterday," said he, "but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take harry to see the wild beasts at
exeter exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with mrs. ferrars.
harry was vastly pleased.  this morning i had fully intended to call
 
 ___________________________
 
ennings
at the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being able to
call on them the next day, took leave.

his visit was duly paid.  he came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but she was so much engaged
with her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where."
mrs. jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on mrs. john dashwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her.  his manners to them, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to mrs. jennings, most attentively civil; and on colonel
brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to him.

after staying with them half an hour, he asked elinor to walk with him
to conduit street, and introduce him to sir john and lady middleton.
the weather was remarkably fine, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
elegant
as her daughter.  your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only knew that mrs. jennings was the widow of a
man who had got all his money in a low way; and fanny and mrs. ferrars
were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughters
were such kind of women as fanny would like to associate with.  but now
i can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."



chapter 34


mrs. john dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on mrs. jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy
her notice; and as for lady middleton, she found her one of the most
charming women in the world!

lady middleton was equally pleased with mrs. dashwood.  there was a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually
attracted the
 
 ___________________________
 
m; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

the same manners, however, which recommended mrs. john dashwood to the
good opinion of lady middleton did not suit the fancy of mrs. jennings,
and to her she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking woman
of uncordial address, who met her husband's sisters without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on berkeley street, she sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence.

elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,
whether edward was then in town; but nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
when they returned from their morning's engagements.  elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

the dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in harley street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months.  their sisters and mrs. jennings were invited
likewise, and john dashwood was careful to secure colonel brandon, who,
always glad to be where the miss dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  they were to
meet mrs. ferrars; but elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party.  the expectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

so well had they recommended themselves to lady middleton, so agreeable
had their assiduities made them to her, that though lucy was certainly
not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as ready as
sir john to ask them to spend a week or two in conduit street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the miss steeles, as soon as
the dashwoods' invitation was known, that their visit should begin a
few days before the party took place.

their claims to the notice of mrs. john dashwood, as the nieces of the
gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother, might not
have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her table; but
as lady middleton's guests they must be welcome; and lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view of
their characters and her own difficulties, and to have an opportunity
of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in her life,
than she was on receiving mrs. john dashwood's card.
 
 ___________________________
 
nts were numerous, and every thing
bespoke the mistress's inclination for show, and the master's ability
to support it.  in spite of the improvements and additions which were
making to the norland estate, and in spite of its owner having once
been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a
loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to
infer from it;--no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appeared--but there, the deficiency was considerable.  john dashwood
had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing, and his wife
had still less.  but there was no peculiar disgrace in this; for it was
very much the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost all
laboured under one or other of these disqualifications for being
agreeable--want of sense, either natural or improved--want of
elegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.

when the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was particularly evident, for the gentlemen 
 
 ___________________________
 
side, by which
she offended mrs. ferrars and fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

before her removing from norland, elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of john dashwood on his following the other gentlemen
into the room, were officiously handed by him to colonel brandon for
his admiration.

"these are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, i dare say, be pleased with them.  i do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

the colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done 
 
 ___________________________
 
l infants being alike; and though she could plainly perceive, at
different times, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing his
father of it; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world.

i come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell mrs. john dashwood.  it so happened that while her two sisters
with mrs. jennings were first calling on her in harley street, another
of her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to her.  but while the imaginations
of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.  in the present
instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her
 
 ___________________________
 
 fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the miss
dashwoods, and understanding them to be mr. dashwood's sisters, she
immediately concluded them to be staying in harley street; and this
misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards of
invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister, to a small
musical party at her house.  the consequence of which was, that mrs.
john dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great
inconvenience of sending her carriage for the miss dashwoods, but, what
was still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing
to treat them with attention: and who could tell that they might not
expect to go out with her a second time?  the power of disappointing
them, it was true, must always be hers.  but that was not enough; for
when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be
wrong, they feel inju
 
 ___________________________
 
er refreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.'  lady elliott was delighted with the thought.  we measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair was arranged precisely after my plan.  so that, in fact, you
see, if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be as
well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."

elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved the
compliment of rational opposition.

as john dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,
his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
struck him during the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her approbation, when they got home.  the consideration of mrs.
dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while mrs. jennings's engagements kept her from home.  the expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not
 
 ___________________________
 
l on him to give up his engagement.  he would
stand to it, cost him what it might."

"then," cried mrs. jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "he has acted like an honest man! i beg your pardon, mr.
dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, i should have thought him a
rascal.  i have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for lucy steele is my cousin, and i believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband."

john dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune.  he therefore replied, without any resentment,

"i would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam.  miss lucy steele is, i dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
and to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle's care, the son
 
 ___________________________
 
for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him."

"poor young man!" cried mrs. jennings, "i am sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so i would tell him if i
could see him.  it is not fit that he should be living about at his own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns."

elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards edward, though she
could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"if he would only have done as well by himself," said john dashwood,
"as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have been
in his proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing.  but as it
is, it must be out of anybody's power to assist him.  and there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than all--his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
that estate upon robert immediately, which might have been edward's, on
proper conditions.  i left her this morning with her lawyer, talking
over th
 
 ___________________________
 
ver surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing in
the world for those she really valued.  as for colonel brandon, she was
not only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover truly
anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and scarcely
resolved to avail herself, at delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.

it was now above a week since john dashwood had called in berkeley
street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visit.--this was an obligation, however,
which not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companions.  marianne, not
contented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to
prevent her sister's going at all; and mrs. jennings, though her

 
 ___________________________
 
carriage was always at elinor's service, so very much disliked mrs.
john dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after
the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by taking
edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again.  the consequence was, that elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to run
the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman, whom neither of the others had
so much reason to dislike.

mrs. dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from t
 
 ___________________________
 
e is no doubt of your doing exceedingly
well--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  has
colonel brandon been with you lately?"

elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of mr. robert ferrars.  after a few moments'
chat, john dashwood, recollecting that fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course of
life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her most
unfavourable opinion of his head and heart.

 
 ___________________________
 
  i certainly should have represented it to edward in a very
strong light.  'my dear fellow,' i should have said, 'consider what you
are doing.  you are making a most disgraceful connection, and such a
one as your family are unanimous in disapproving.' i cannot help
thinking, in short, that means might have been found.  but now it is
all too late.  he must be starved, you know;--that is certain;
absolutely starved."

he had just settled this point with great composure, when the entrance
of mrs. john dashwood put an end to the subject.  but though she never
spoke of it out of her own family, elinor could see its influence on
her mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which she
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself.  she
even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that elinor and her
sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see more of
them;--an exertion in which her husband, who attended her into the
room, and hung enamoured over her 