
  prince humphrey of gloucester
  thomas, duke of clarence
    sons of henry iv

  earl of northumberland
  scroop, archbishop of york
  lord mowbray
  lord hastings
  lord bardolph
  sir john colville
  travers and morton, retainers of northumberland
    opposites against king henry iv

  earl of warwick
  earl of westmoreland
  earl of surrey
  earl of kent
  gower
  harcourt
  blunt
    of the king's party

  lord chief justice
  servant, to lord chief justice

  sir john falstaff
  edward poins
  bardolph
  pistol
  peto
    irregular humourists

  page, to falstaff

  robert shallow and silence, country justices
  davy, servant to shallow

  fang and snare, sheriff's officers

  ralph mouldy
  simon shadow
  thomas wart
  francis feeble
  peter bullcalf
    country soldiers

  francis, a drawer

  lady northumberland
  lady percy, percy's widow
  hostess quickly, of the boar's head, eastcheap
  doll tearsheet

  lords, attendants, porter, dr
 
 ___________________________
 
he doth bestride a bleeding land,
    gasping for life under great bolingbroke;
    and more and less do flock to follow him.
  northumberland. i knew of this before; but, to speak truth,
    this present grief had wip'd it from my mind.
    go in with me; and counsel every man
    the aptest way for safety and revenge.
    get posts and letters, and make friends with speed-
    never so few, and never yet more need.                exeunt




scene ii.
london. a street

enter sir john falstaff, with his page bearing his sword and
buckler

  falstaff. sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
  page. he said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water;
but
    for the party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than
he
    knew for.
  falstaff. men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. the
brain of
    this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent
anything
    that intends to laughter, more than i invent or is invented
on
    me. i am not
 
 ___________________________
 
eman that committed the
    prince for striking him about bardolph.
  falstaff. wait close; i will not see him.
  chief justice. what's he that goes there?
  servant. falstaff, an't please your lordship.
  chief justice. he that was in question for the robb'ry?
  servant. he, my lord; but he hath since done good service at
    shrewsbury, and, as i hear, is now going with some charge to
the
    lord john of lancaster.
  chief justice. what, to york? call him back again.
  servant. sir john falstaff!
  falstaff. boy, tell him i am deaf.
  page. you must speak louder; my master is deaf.
  chief justice. i am sure he is, to the hearing of anything
good.
    go, pluck him by the elbow; i must speak with him.
  servant. sir john!
  falstaff. what! a young knave, and begging! is there not wars?
is
    there not employment? doth not the king lack subjects? do not
the
    rebels need soldiers? though it be a shame to be on any side
but
    one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on 
 
 ___________________________
 
f i
    had said so.
  servant. i pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and your
    soldiership aside; and give me leave to tell you you in your
    throat, if you say i am any other than an honest man.
  falstaff. i give thee leave to tell me so! i lay aside that
which
    grows to me! if thou get'st any leave of me, hang me; if thou
    tak'st leave, thou wert better be hang'd. you hunt counter.
    hence! avaunt!
  servant. sir, my lord would speak with you.
  chief justice. sir john falstaff, a word with you.
  falstaff. my good lord! god give your lordship good time of
day. i
    am glad to see your lordship abroad. i heard say your
lordship
    was sick; i hope your lordship goes abroad by advice. your
    lordship, though not clean past your youth, hath yet some
smack
    of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time; and i
most
    humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your
    health.
  chief justice. sir john, i sent for you before your expe
 
 ___________________________
 
y.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
london. a street

enter hostess with two officers, fang and snare

  hostess. master fang, have you ent'red the action?
  fang. it is ent'red.
  hostess. where's your yeoman? is't a lusty yeoman? will 'a
stand
    to't?
  fang. sirrah, where's snare?
  hostess. o lord, ay! good master snare.
  snare. here, here.
  fang. snare, we must arrest sir john falstaff.
  hostess. yea, good master snare; i have ent'red him and all.
  snare. it may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.
  hostess. alas the day! take heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine
own
    house, and that most beastly. in good faith, 'a cares not
what
    mischief he does, if his weapon be out; he will foin like any
    devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
  fang. if i can close with him, i care not for his thrust.
  hostess. no, nor i neither; i'll be at y
 
 ___________________________
 
 exion is
    ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
    brought in to his answer. a hundred mark is a long one for a
poor
    lone woman to bear; and i have borne, and borne, and borne;
and
    have been fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, from
this
    day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. there
is no
    honesty in such dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass
and
    a beast, to bear every knave's wrong.

            enter sir john falstaff, page, and bardolph

    yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,
bardolph,
    with him. do your offices, do your offices, master fang and
    master snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.
  falstaff. how now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
  fang. sir john, i arrest you at the suit of mistress quickly.
  falstaff. away, varlets! draw, bardolph. cut me off the
villian's
    head. throw the quean in the channel.
  hostess. throw me in the channel! i'll throw thee
 
 ___________________________
 
alstaff, knight'- every man must know
that
    as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those
that
    are kin to the king; for they never prick their finger but
they
    say 'there's some of the king's blood spilt.' 'how comes
that?'
    says he that takes upon him not to conceive. the answer is as
    ready as a borrower's cap: 'i am the king's poor cousin,
sir.'
  prince. nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from
    japhet. but the letter:  [reads]  'sir john falstaff, knight,
to
    the son of the king nearest his father, harry prince of
wales,
    greeting.'
  poins. why, this is a certificate.
  prince. peace!  [reads]  'i will imitate the honourable romans
in
    brevity.'-
  poins. he sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.
  prince.  [reads]  'i commend me to thee, i commend thee, and i
    leave thee. be not too familiar with poins; for he misuses
thy
    favours so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister
nell.
    repent a
 
 ___________________________
 

                                               [knocking within]
  hostess. who knocks so loud at door? look to th' door there,
    francis.

                              enter peto

  prince. peto, how now! what news?
  peto. the king your father is at westminster;
    and there are twenty weak and wearied posts
    come from the north; and as i came along
    i met and overtook a dozen captains,
    bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
    and asking every one for sir john falstaff.
  prince. by heaven, poins, i feel me much to blame
    so idly to profane the precious time,
    when tempest of commotion, like the south,
    borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt
    and drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
    give me my sword and cloak. falstaff, good night.

                        exeunt prince, poins, peto, and bardolph

  falstaff. now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we

    must hence, and leave it unpick'd.  [knocking within]  more
  
 
 ___________________________
 
n a gaunt loved him well, and betted much
money on
    his head. dead! 'a would have clapp'd i' th' clout at twelve
    score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and
fourteen
    and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to
see.
    how a score of ewes now?
  silence. thereafter as they be- a score of good ewes may be
worth
    ten pounds.
  shallow. and is old double dead?

                    enter bardolph, and one with him

  silence. here come two of sir john falstaffs men, as i think.
  shallow. good morrow, honest gentlemen.
  bardolph. i beseech you, which is justice shallow?
  shallow. i am robert shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this
county,
    and one of the king's justices of the peace. what is your
good
    pleasure with me?
  bardolph. my captain, sir, commends him to you; my captain, sir
    john falstaff- a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most
gallant
    leader.
  shallow. he greets me well, sir; i knew him a good back-sword
man.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
s. enter falstaff and colville, meeting

  falstaff. what's your name, sir? of what condition are you, and
of
    what place, i pray?
  colville. i am a knight sir; and my name is colville of the
dale.
  falstaff. well then, colville is your name, a knight is your
    degree, and your place the dale. colville shall still be your
    name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place- a
place
    deep enough; so shall you be still colville of the dale.
  colville. are not you sir john falstaff?
  falstaff. as good a man as he, sir, whoe'er i am. do you yield,
    sir, or shall i sweat for you? if i do sweat, they are the
drops
    of thy lovers, and they weep for thy death; therefore rouse
up
    fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.
  colville. i think you are sir john falstaff, and in that
thought
    yield me.
  falstaff. i have a whole school of tongues in this belly of
mine;
    and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my
name.
    an i h
 
 ___________________________
 
too heavy to admit much talk.
  prince john. well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy!
  chief justice. peace be with us, lest we be heavier!
  prince humphrey. o, good my lord, you have lost a friend
indeed;
    and i dare swear you borrow not that face
    of seeming sorrow- it is sure your own.
  prince john. though no man be assur'd what grace to find,
    you stand in coldest expectation.
    i am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.
  clarence. well, you must now speak sir john falstaff fair;
    which swims against your stream of quality.
  chief justice. sweet princes, what i did, i did in honour,
    led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
    and never shall you see that i will beg
    a ragged and forestall'd remission.
    if truth and upright innocency fail me,
    i'll to the king my master that is dead,
    and tell him who hath sent me after him.
  warwick. here comes the prince.

            enter king henry the fifth, attended

  chief justice. good m
 
 ___________________________
 
i beseech you, good sir john,
let me
    have five hundred of my thousand.
  falstaff. sir, i will be as good as my word. this that you
heard
    was but a colour.
  shallow. a colour that i fear you will die in, sir john.
  falstaff. fear no colours; go with me to dinner. come,
lieutenant
    pistol; come, bardolph. i shall be sent for soon at night.

            re-enter prince john, the lord chief justice,
                            with officers

  chief justice. go, carry sir john falstaff to the fleet;
    take all his company along with him.
  falstaff. my lord, my lord-
  chief justice. i cannot now speak. i will hear you soon.
    take them away.
  pistol. si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.
           exeunt all but prince john and the lord chief justice
  prince john. i like this fair proceeding of the king's.
    he hath intent his wonted followers
    shall all be very well provided for;
    but all are banish'd till their conversations
    appear more w