 of northumberland
  scroop, archbishop of york
  lord mowbray
  lord hastings
  lord bardolph
  sir john colville
  travers and morton, retainers of northumberland
    opposites against king henry iv

  earl of warwick
  earl of westmoreland
  earl of surrey
  earl of kent
  gower
  harcourt
  blunt
    of the king's party

  lord chief justice
  servant, to lord chief justice

  sir john falstaff
  edward poins
  bardolph
  pistol
  peto
    irregular humourists

  page, to falstaff

  robert shallow and silence, country justices
  davy, servant to shallow

  fang and snare, sheriff's officers

  ralph mouldy
  simon shadow
  thomas wart
  francis feeble
  peter bullcalf
    country soldiers

  francis, a drawer

  lady northumberland
  lady percy, percy's widow
  hostess quickly, of the boar's head, eastcheap
  doll tearsheet

  lords, attendants, porter, drawers, beadles, grooms, servants,
    speaker of the epilogue

                
 
 ___________________________
 
ng land,
    gasping for life under great bolingbroke;
    and more and less do flock to follow him.
  northumberland. i knew of this before; but, to speak truth,
    this present grief had wip'd it from my mind.
    go in with me; and counsel every man
    the aptest way for safety and revenge.
    get posts and letters, and make friends with speed-
    never so few, and never yet more need.                exeunt




scene ii.
london. a street

enter sir john falstaff, with his page bearing his sword and
buckler

  falstaff. sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
  page. he said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water;
but
    for the party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than
he
    knew for.
  falstaff. men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. the
brain of
    this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent
anything
    that intends to laughter, more than i invent or is invented
on
    me. i am not only witty in 
 
 ___________________________
 
off his cheek; and yet
he
    will not stick to say his face is a face-royal. god may
finish it
    when he will, 'tis not a hair amiss yet. he may keep it still
at
    a face-royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of
it;
    and yet he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his
    father was a bachelor. he may keep his own grace, but he's
almost
    out of mine, i can assure him. what said master dommelton
about
    the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
  page. he said, sir, you should procure him better assurance
than
    bardolph. he would not take his band and yours; he liked not
the
    security.
  falstaff. let him be damn'd, like the glutton; pray god his
tongue
    be hotter! a whoreson achitophel! a rascal-yea-forsooth
knave, to
    bear a gentleman in hand, and then stand upon security! the
    whoreson smooth-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes, and
    bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is through
with
    the
 
 ___________________________
 
n honest taking-up, then they must stand upon security.
i
    had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to
stop
    it with security. i look'd 'a should have sent me two and
twenty
    yards of satin, as i am a true knight, and he sends me
security.
    well, he may sleep in security; for he hath the horn of
    abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it;
and
    yet cannot he see, though he have his own lanthorn to light
him.
    where's bardolph?
  page. he's gone into smithfield to buy your worship horse.
  falstaff. i bought him in paul's, and he'll buy me a horse in
    smithfield. an i could get me but a wife in the stews, i were
    mann'd, hors'd, and wiv'd.

              enter the lord chief justice and servant

  page. sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the
    prince for striking him about bardolph.
  falstaff. wait close; i will not see him.
  chief justice. what's he that goes there?
  servant. falstaff, an't pl
 
 ___________________________
 
ease your lordship.
  chief justice. he that was in question for the robb'ry?
  servant. he, my lord; but he hath since done good service at
    shrewsbury, and, as i hear, is now going with some charge to
the
    lord john of lancaster.
  chief justice. what, to york? call him back again.
  servant. sir john falstaff!
  falstaff. boy, tell him i am deaf.
  page. you must speak louder; my master is deaf.
  chief justice. i am sure he is, to the hearing of anything
good.
    go, pluck him by the elbow; i must speak with him.
  servant. sir john!
  falstaff. what! a young knave, and begging! is there not wars?
is
    there not employment? doth not the king lack subjects? do not
the
    rebels need soldiers? though it be a shame to be on any side
but
    one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side,
were
    it worse than the na
 
 ___________________________
 

    forth?
  chief justice. not a penny, not a penny; you are too impatient
to
    bear crosses. fare you well. commend me to my cousin
    westmoreland.
                                exeunt chief justice and servant
  falstaff. if i do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. a man can
no
    more separate age and covetousness than 'a can part young
limbs
    and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches
the
    other; and so both the degrees prevent my curses. boy!
  page. sir?
  falstaff. what money is in my purse?
  page. seven groats and two pence.
  falstaff. i can get no remedy against this consumption of the
    purse; borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the
disease
    is incurable. go bear this letter to my lord of lancaster;
this
    to the prince; this to the earl of westmoreland; and this to
old
    mistress ursula, whom i have weekly sworn to marry since i
    perceiv'd the first white hair of my chin. about it; you know

    
 
 ___________________________
 
where to find me.  [exit page]  a pox of this gout! or, a
gout of
    this pox! for the one or the other plays the rogue with my
great
    toe. 'tis no matter if i do halt; i have the wars for my
colour,
    and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. a good wit
will
    make use of anything. i will turn diseases to commodity.
 exit




scene iii.
york. the archbishop's palace

enter the archbishop, thomas mowbray the earl marshal, lord
hastings,
and lord bardolph

  archbishop. thus have you heard o
 
 ___________________________
 
nt'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
    brought in to his answer. a hundred mark is a long one for a
poor
    lone woman to bear; and i have borne, and borne, and borne;
and
    have been fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, from
this
    day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. there
is no
    honesty in such dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass
and
    a beast, to bear every knave's wrong.

            enter sir john falstaff, page, and bardolph

    yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,
bardolph,
    with him. do your offices, do your offices, master fang and
    master snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.
  falstaff. how now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
  fang. sir john, i arrest you at the suit of mistress quickly.
  falstaff. away, varlets! draw, bardolph. cut me off the
villian's
    head. throw the quean in the channel.
  hostess. throw me in the channel! i'll throw thee in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
channel.
    wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue! murder, murder!
ah,
    thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill god's officers and
the
    king's? ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a honey-seed; a
    man-queller and a woman-queller.
  falstaff. keep them off, bardolph.
  fang. a rescue! a rescue!
  hostess. good people, bring a rescue or two. thou wot, wot
thou!
    thou wot, wot ta? do, do, thou rogue! do, thou hemp-seed!
  page. away, you scullion! you rampallian! you fustilarian!
    i'll tickle your catastrophe.

              enter the lord chief justice and his men

  chief justice. what is the matter? keep the peace here, ho!
  hostess. good my lord, be good to me. i beseech you, stand to
me.
  chief justice. how now, sir john! what, are you brawling here?

    doth this become your place, your time, and business?
    you should have been well on your way to york.
    stand from him, fellow; wherefore
 
 ___________________________
 
ites your most worshipful
    thought to think so?
  poins. why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed
to
    falstaff.
  prince. and to thee.
  poins. by this light, i am well spoke on; i can hear it with
mine
    own ears. the worst that they can say of me is that i am a
second
    brother and that i am a proper fellow of my hands; and those
two
    things, i confess, i cannot help. by the mass, here comes
    bardolph.

                         enter bardolph and page

  prince. and the boy that i gave falstaff. 'a had him from me
    christian; and look if the fat villain have not transform'd
him
    ape.
  bardolph. god save your grace!
  prince. and yours, most noble bardolph!
  poins. come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be
    blushing? wherefore blush you now? what a maidenly
man-at-arms
    are you become! is't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's
    maidenhead?
  page. 'a calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red lattice, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
i
    could discern no part of his face from the window. at last i
    spied his eyes; and methought he had made two holes in the
    alewife's new petticoat, and so peep'd through.
  prince. has not the boy profited?
  bardolph. away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!
  page. away, you rascally althaea's dream, away!
  prince. instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?
  page. marry, my lord, althaea dreamt she was delivered of a
    firebrand; and therefore i call him her dream.
  prince. a crown's worth of good interpretation. there 'tis,
boy.
                                                [giving a crown]
  poins. o that this blossom could be kept from cankers!
    well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
  bardolph. an you do not make him be hang'd among you, the
gallows
    shall have wrong.
  prince. and how doth thy master, bardolph?
  bardolph. 
 
 ___________________________
 
to make him eat twenty of his words. but do you
use
    me thus, ned? must i marry your sister?
  poins. god send the wench no worse fortune! but i never said
so.
  prince. well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the
spirits
    of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. is your master
here in
    london?
  bardolph. yea, my lord.
  prince. where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
  bardolph. at the old place, my lord, in eastcheap.
  prince. what company?
  page. ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
  prince. sup any women with him?
  page. none, my lord, but old mistress quickly and mistress doll
    tearsheet.
  prince. what pagan may that be?
  page. a proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my
master's.
  prince. even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town
bull.
    shall we steal upon them, ned, at supper?
  poins. i am your shadow, my lord; i'll follow you.
  prince. sirrah, you boy, and bardolph, no word to your master

 
 ___________________________
 
that
    i am yet come to town. there's for your silence.
  bardolph. i have no tongue, sir.
  page. and for mine, sir, i will govern it.
  prince. fare you well; go.            exeunt bardolph and page
    this doll tearsheet should be some road.
  poins. i warrant you, as common as the way between saint albans
and
    london.
  prince. how might we see falstaff bestow himself to-night in
his
    true colours, and not ourselves be seen?
  poins. put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon
him at
    his table as drawers.
  prince. from a god to a bull? a heavy descension! it was jove's
    case. from a prince to a prentice? a low transformation! that
    shall be mine; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 up, drawer.
                                                    exit francis
  hostess. cheater, call you him? i will bar no honest man my
house,
    nor no cheater; but i do not love swaggering, by my troth. i
am
    the worse when one says 'swagger.' feel, masters, how i
shake;
    look you, i warrant you.
  doll. so you do, hostess.
  hostess. do i? yea, in very truth, do i, an 'twere an aspen
leaf. i
    cannot abide swagg'rers.

                   enter pistol, bardolph, and page

  pistol. god save you, sir john!
  falstaff. welcome, ancient pistol. here, pistol, i charge you
with
    a cup of sack; do you discharge upon mine hostess.
  pistol. i will discharge upon her, sir john, with two bullets.
  falstaff. she is pistol-proof, sir; you shall not hardly offend
    her.
  hostess. come, i'll drink no proofs nor no bullets. i'll drink
no
    more than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, i.
  pistol. then to you, mistress dorothy; i will charge you.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
ouse? he a captain! hang him,
    rogue! he lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes. a

    captain! god's light, these villains will make the word as
odious
    as the word 'occupy'; which was an excellent good word before
it
    was ill sorted. therefore captains had need look to't.
  bardolph. pray thee go down, good ancient.
  falstaff. hark thee hither, mistress doll.
  pistol. not i! i tell thee what, corporal bardolph, i could
tear
    her; i'll be reveng'd of her.
  page. pray thee go down.
  pistol. i'll see her damn'd first; to pluto's damn'd lake, by
this
    hand, to th' infernal deep, with erebus and tortures vile
also.
    hold hook and line, say i. down, down, dogs! down, faitors!
have
    we not hiren here?
  hostess. good captain peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i'
faith; i
    beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
  pistol. these be good humours, indeed! shall packhorses,
    and hollow pamper'd jades of asia,
    which cannot go but th
 
 ___________________________
 
 you! alas, poor ape, how thou
    sweat'st! come, let me wipe thy face. come on, you whoreson
    chops. ah, rogue! i' faith, i love thee. thou art as valorous
as
    hector of troy, worth five of agamemnon, and ten times better
    than the nine worthies. ah, villain!
  falstaff. a rascally slave! i will toss the rogue in a blanket.
  doll. do, an thou dar'st for thy heart. an thou dost, i'll
canvass
    thee between a pair of sheets.

                          enter musicians

  page. the music is come, sir.
  falstaff. let them play. play, sirs. sit on my knee, don. a
rascal
    bragging slave! the rogue fled from me like quick-silver.
  doll. i' faith, and thou follow'dst him like a church. thou
    whoreson little tidy bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou
leave
    fighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to patch up
thine
    old body for heaven?

       enter, behind, prince henry and poins disguised as drawers

  falstaff. peace, good doll! do not 
 
 ___________________________
 
e unarmed heads.
    give me my sword and cloak. falstaff, good night.

                        exeunt prince, poins, peto, and bardolph

  falstaff. now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we

    must hence, and leave it unpick'd.  [knocking within]  more
    knocking at the door!

                      re-enter bardolph

    how now! what's the matter?
  bardolph. you must away to court, sir, presently;
    a dozen captains stay at door for you.
  falstaff.  [to the page]. pay the musicians, sirrah.- farewell,
    hostess; farewell, doll. you see, my good wenches, how men of
    merit are sought after; the undeserver may sleep, when the
man of
    action is call'd on. farewell, good wenches. if i be not sent
    away post, i will see you again ere i go.
  doll. i cannot speak. if my heart be not ready to burst!
    well, sweet jack, have a care of thyself.
  falstaff. farewell, farewell.
                                    exeunt falstaff and bardolph
 
 ___________________________
 
world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
westminster. the palace

enter the king in his nightgown, with a page

  king. go call the earls of surrey and of warwick;
    but, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters
    and well consider of them. make good speed.        exit page
    how many thousands of my poorest subjects
    are at this hour asleep! o sleep, o gentle sleep,
    nature's soft nurse, how have i frightened thee,
    that thou no more will weigh my eyelids down,
    and steep my senses in forgetfulness?
    why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
    upon uneasy pa
 
 ___________________________
 
n.
  shallow. by the mass, i was call'd anything; and i would have
done
    anything indeed too, and roundly too. there was i, and little
    john doit of staffordshire, and black george barnes, and
francis
    pickbone, and will squele a cotsole man- you had not four
such
    swinge-bucklers in all the inns of court again. and i may say
to
    you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of
them
    all at commandment. then was jack falstaff, now sir john,
boy,
    and page to thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk.
  silence. this sir john, cousin, that comes hither anon about
    soldiers?
  shallow. the same sir john, the very same. i see him break
    scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not
thus
    high; and the very same day did i fight with one sampson
    stockfish, a fruiterer, behind gray's inn. jesu, jesu, the
mad
    days that i have spent! and to see how many of my old
    acquaintance are dead!
  silence. we shall all follow, co
 
 ___________________________
 
library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
gloucestershire. shallow's house

enter shallow, falstaff, bardolph, and page

  shallow. by cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night.
    what, davy, i say!
  falstaff. you must excuse me, master robert shallow.
  shallow. i will not excuse you; you shall not be excus'd;
excuses
    shall not be admitted; there is no excuse shall serve; you
shall
    not be excus'd. why, davy!

                            enter davy

  davy. here, sir.
  shallow. davy, davy, davy, davy; let me see, davy; let me see,
    davy; let me see- yea, marry, william cook, bi
 
 ___________________________
 
out a knave against an honest man, i have but a very
little
    credit with your worship. the knave is mine honest friend,
sir;
    therefore, i beseech you, let him be countenanc'd.
  shallow. go to; i say he shall have no wrong. look about,
  davy.  [exit davy]  where are you, sir john? come, come, come,
off
    with your boots. give me your hand, master bardolph.
  bardolph. i am glad to see your worship.
  shallow. i thank thee with all my heart, kind master bardolph.
    [to the page]  and welcome, my tall fellow. come, sir john.
  falstaff. i'll follow you, good master robert shallow.
    [exit shallow]  bardolph, look to our horses.  [exeunt
bardolph
    and page]  if i were sawed into quantities, i should make
four
    dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as master shallow. it
is a
    wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's
    spirits and his. they, by observing of him, do bear
themselves
    like foolish justices: he, by conversing with
 
 ___________________________
 
hat war, or peace, or both at once, may be
    as things acquainted and familiar to us;
    in which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
    our coronation done, we will accite,
    as i before rememb'red, all our state;
    and- god consigning to my good intents-
    no prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
    god shorten harry's happy life one day.               exeunt




scene iii.
gloucestershire. shallow's orchard

enter falstaff, shallow, silence, bardolph, the page, and davy

  shallow. nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we
    will eat a last year's pippin of mine own graffing, with a
dish
    of caraways, and so forth. come, cousin silence. and then to
bed.
  falstaff. fore god, you have here a goodly dwelling and rich.
  shallow. barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, sir
john
    -marry, good air. spread, davy, spread, davy; well said,
davy.
  falstaff. this davy serves you for good uses; he is your
    serving
 
 ___________________________
 
othing but eat and make good cheer,
              and praise god for the merry year;
              when flesh is cheap and females dear,
              and lusty lads roam here and there,
                  so merrily,
                and ever among so merrily.

  falstaff. there's a merry heart! good master silence, i'll give
you
    a health for that anon.
  shallow. give master bardolph some wine, davy.
  davy. sweet sir, sit; i'll be with you anon; most sweet sir,
sit.
    master page, good master page, sit. proface! what you want in
    meat, we'll have in drink. but you must bear; the heart's
all.
 exit
  shallow. be merry, master bardolph; and, my little soldier
there,
    be merry.
  silence.  [singing]

         be merry, be merry, my wife has all;
         for women are shrews, both short and tall;
         'tis merry in hall when beards wag an;
           and welcome merry shrove-tide.
         be merry, be merry.

  falstaff. i did not think master sil
 
 ___________________________
 
                                exeunt




scene v.
westminster. near the abbey

enter grooms, strewing rushes

  first groom. more rushes, more rushes!
  second groom. the trumpets have sounded twice.
  third groom. 'twill be two o'clock ere they come from the
    coronation. dispatch, dispatch.                       exeunt

        trumpets sound, and the king and his train pass
       over the stage. after them enter falstaff, shallow,
                  pistol, bardolph, and page

  falstaff. stand here by me, master robert shallow; i will make
the
    king do you grace. i will leer upon him, as 'a comes by; and
do
    but mark the countenance that he will give me.
  pistol. god bless thy lungs, good knight!
  falstaff. come here, pistol; stand behind me.  [to shallow]  o,
if
    i had had to have made new liveries, i would have bestowed
the
    thousand pound i borrowed of you. but 'tis no matter; this
poor
    show doth better; this doth infer the zeal i