f the king's party

  lord chief justice
  servant, to lord chief justice

  sir john falstaff
  edward poins
  bardolph
  pistol
  peto
    irregular humourists

  page, to falstaff

  robert shallow and silence, country justices
  davy, servant to shallow

  fang and snare, sheriff's officers

  ralph mouldy
  simon shadow
  thomas wart
  francis feeble
  peter bullcalf
    country soldiers

  francis, a drawer

  lady northumberland
  lady percy, percy's widow
  hostess quickly, of the boar's head, eastcheap
  doll tearsheet

  lords, attendants, porter, drawers, beadles, grooms, servants,
    speaker of the epilogue

                       scene: england

induction
                         induction.
           warkworth. before northumberland's castle

            enter rumour, painted full of tongues

  rumour. open your ears; for which of you will stop
    the vent of hearing when loud rumour speaks?
    i, from the orient to the drooping w
 
 ___________________________
 
am
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
london. a street

enter hostess with two officers, fang and snare

  hostess. master fang, have you ent'red the action?
  fang. it is ent'red.
  hostess. where's your yeoman? is't a lusty yeoman? will 'a
stand
    to't?
  fang. sirrah, where's snare?
  hostess. o lord, ay! good master snare.
  snare. here, here.
  fang. snare, we must arrest sir john falstaff.
  hostess. yea, good master snare; i have ent'red him and all.
  snare. it may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.
  hostess. alas the day! ta
 
 ___________________________
 
ke heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine
own
    house, and that most beastly. in good faith, 'a cares not
what
    mischief he does, if his weapon be out; he will foin like any
    devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
  fang. if i can close with him, i care not for his thrust.
  hostess. no, nor i neither; i'll be at your elbow.
  fang. an i but fist him once; an 'a come but within my vice!
  hostess. i am undone by his going; i warrant you, he's an
    infinitive thing upon my score. good master fang, hold him
sure.
    good master snare, let him not scape. 'a comes continuantly
to
    pie-corner- saving your manhoods- to buy a saddle; and he is
    indited to dinner to the lubber's head in lumbert street, to
    master smooth's the silkman. i pray you, since my exion is
    ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
    brought in to his answer. a hundred mark 
 
 ___________________________
 
e's wrong.

            enter sir john falstaff, page, and bardolph

    yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,
bardolph,
    with him. do your offices, do your offices, master fang and
    master snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.
  falstaff. how now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
  fang. sir john, i arrest you at the suit of mistress quickly.
  falstaff. away, varlets! draw, bardolph. cut me off the
villian's
    head. throw the quean in the channel.
  hostess. throw me in the channel! i'll throw thee in the
channel.
    wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue! murder, murder!
ah,
    thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill god's officers and
the
    king's? ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a honey-seed; a
    man-queller and a woman-queller.
  falstaff. keep them off, bardolph.
  fang. a rescue! a rescue!
  hostess. good people, bring a rescue or two. thou wot, wot
thou!
    thou wot, wot ta? do, do, thou rogue! do, thou hemp-seed
 
 ___________________________
 
!
  page. away, you scullion! you rampallian! you fustilarian!
    i'll tickle your catastrophe.

              enter the lord chief justice and his men

  chief justice. what is the matter? keep the peace here, ho!
  hostess. good my lord, be good to me. i beseech you, stand to
me.
  chief justice. how now, sir john! what, are you brawling here?

    doth this become your place, your time, and business?
    you should have been well on your way to york.
    stand from him, fellow; wherefore hang'st thou upon him?
  hostess. o my most worshipful lord, an't please your grace, i
am a
    poor widow of eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
  chief justice. for what sum?
  hostess. it is more than for som
 
 ___________________________
 

    substance into that fat belly of his. but i will have some of
it
    out again, or i will ride thee a nights like a mare.
  falstaff. i think i am as like to ride the mare, if i have any
    vantage of ground to get up.
  chief justice. how comes this, sir john? fie! what man of good
    temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? are you not
    ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come
by
    her own?
  falstaff. what is the gross sum that i owe thee?
  hostess. marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the
money
    too. thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet,
sitting in
    my dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire,
upon
    wednesday in wheeson week, when the prince broke thy head for
    liking his father to singing-man of windsor- thou didst swear
to
    me then, as i was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me
my
    lady thy wife. canst thou deny it? did not goodwife keech,
the
    butcher's wife,
 
 ___________________________
 
ch you i may have redress
    against them.
  chief justice. sir john, sir john, i am well acquainted with
your
    manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. it is not a

    confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such
more
    than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level
    consideration. you have, as it appears to me, practis'd upon
the
    easy yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your
uses
    both in purse and in person.
  hostess. yea, in truth, my lord.
  chief justice. pray thee, peace. pay her the debt you owe her,
and
    unpay the villainy you have done with her; the one you may do
    with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.
  falstaff. my lord, i will not undergo this sneap without reply.
you
    call honourable boldness impudent sauciness; if a man will
make
    curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. no, my lord, my
humble
    duty rememb'red, i will not be your suitor. i say to yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u i do
    desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty
    employment in the king's affairs.
  chief justice. you speak as having power to do wrong; but
answer in
    th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
  falstaff. come hither, hostess.

                               enter gower

  chief justice. now, master gower, what news?
  gower. the king, my lord, and harry prince of wales
    are near at hand. the rest the paper tells. [gives a letter]
  falstaff. as i am a gentleman!
  hostess. faith, you said so before.
  falstaff. as i am a gentleman! come, no more words of it.
  hostess. by this heavenly ground i tread on, i must be fain to
pawn
    both my plate and the tapestry of my dining-chambers.
  falstaff. gla
 
 ___________________________
 
nking; and for thy
    walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the
prodigal, or
    the german hunting, in water-work, is worth a thousand of
these
    bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries. let it be ten
pound,
    if thou canst. come, and 'twere not for thy humours, there's
not
    a better wench in england. go, wash thy face, and draw the
    action. come, thou must not be in this humour with me; dost
not
    know me? come, come, i know thou wast set on to this.
  hostess. pray thee, sir john, let it be but twenty nobles;
    i' faith, i am loath to pawn my plate, so god save me, la!
  falstaff. let it alone; i'll make other shift. you'll be a fool

    still.
  hostess. well, you shall have it, though i pawn my gown.
    i hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?
  falstaff. will i live?  [to bardolph]  go, with her, with her;
hook
    on, hook on.
  hostess. will you have doll tearsheet meet you at supper?
  falstaff. no more words; l
 
 ___________________________
 
et's have her.
                          exeunt hostess, bardolph, and officers
  chief justice. i have heard better news.
  falstaff. what's the news, my lord?
  chief justice. where lay the king to-night?
  gower. at basingstoke, my lord.
  falstaff. i hope, my lord, all's well. what is the news, my
lord?
  chief justice. come all his forces back?
  gower. no; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,
    are march'd up to my lord of lancaster,
    against northumberland and the archbishop.
  falstaff. comes the king back from wales, my
 
 ___________________________
 
send the wench no worse fortune! but i never said
so.
  prince. well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the
spirits
    of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. is your master
here in
    london?
  bardolph. yea, my lord.
  prince. where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
  bardolph. at the old place, my lord, in eastcheap.
  prince. what company?
  page. ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
  prince. sup any women with him?
  page. none, my lord, but old mistress quickly and mistress doll
    tearsheet.
  prince. what pagan may that be?
  page. a proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my
master's.
  prince. even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town
bull.
    shall we steal upon them, ned, at supper?
  poins. i am your shadow, my lord; i'll follow you.
  prince. sirrah, you boy, and bardolph, no word to your master
that
    i am yet come to town. there's for your silence.
  bardolph. i have no tongue, sir.
  page. and for mine, sir, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
! the room where they supp'd is too hot;
    they'll come in straight.
  francis. sirrah, here will be the prince and master poins anon;
and
    they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons; and sir john
must
    not know of it. bardolph hath brought word.
  third drawer. by the mass, here will be old uds; it will be an
    excellent stratagem.
  second drawer. i'll see if i can find out sneak.
                                 exeunt second and third drawers

                enter hostess and doll tearsheet

  hostess. i' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an
excellent
    good temperality. your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as
heart
    would desire; and your colour, i warrant you, is as red as
any
    rose, in good truth, la! but, i' faith, you have drunk too
much
    canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it
perfumes
    the blood ere one can say 'what's this?' how do you now?
  doll. better than i was- hem.
  hostess. why, that's well
 
 ___________________________
 
 said; a good heart's worth gold.
    lo, here comes sir john.

                          enter falstaff

  falstaff.  [singing]  'when arthur first in court'- empty the
    jordan.  [exit francis]- [singing]  'and was a worthy king'-
how
    now, mistress doll!
  hostess. sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
  falstaff. so is all her sect; and they be once in a calm, they
are
    sick.
  doll. a pox damn you, you muddy rascal! is that all the comfort
you
    give me?
  falstaff. you make fat rascals, mistress doll.
  doll. i make them! gluttony and diseases make them: i make them
    not.
  falstaff. if the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to
make
    the diseases, doll. we catch of you, doll, we catch of you;
grant
    that, my poor virtue, g
 
 ___________________________
 
rant that.
  doll. yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
  falstaff. 'your brooches, pearls, and ouches.' for to serve
bravely
    is to come halting off; you know, to come off the breach with
his
    pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely; to venture upon
the
    charg'd chambers bravely-
  doll. hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
  hostess. by my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never
meet
    but you fall to some discord. you are both, i' good truth, as
    rheumatic as two dry toasts; you cannot one bear with
another's
    confirmities. what the good-year! one must bear, and that
must be
    you. you are the weaker vessel, as as they say, the emptier
    vessel.
  doll. can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogs-head?
    there's a whole merchant's venture of bourdeaux stuff in him;
you
    have not s
 
 ___________________________
 
een a hulk better stuff'd in the hold. come, i'll
be
    friends with thee, jack. thou art going to the wars; and
whether
    i shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.

                            re-enter francis

  francis. sir, ancient pistol's below and would speak with you.
  doll. hang him, swaggering rascal! let him not come hither; it
is
    the foul-mouth'dst rogue in england.
  hostess. if he swagger, let him not come here. no, by my faith!
i
    must live among my neighbours; i'll no swaggerers. i am in
good
    name and fame with the very best. shut the door. there comes
no
    swaggerers here; i have not liv'd all this while to have
    swaggering now. shut the door, i pray you.
  falstaff. dost thou hear, hostess?
  hostess. pray ye, pacify yourself, sir john; there comes no
    swaggerers here.
  falstaff. dost thou hear? it is mine ancient.
  hostess. tilly-
 
 ___________________________
 

says
    he- master dumbe, our minister, was by then- 'neighbour
quickly,'
    says he 'receive those that are civil, for' said he 'you are
in
    an ill name.' now 'a said so, i can tell whereupon. 'for'
says he
    'you are an honest woman and well thought on, therefore take
heed
    what guests you receive. receive' says he 'no swaggering
    companions.' there comes none here. you would bless you to
hear
    what he said. no, i'll no swagg'rers.
  falstaff. he's no swagg'rer, hostess; a tame cheater, i' faith;
you
    may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound. he'll not
swagger
    with a barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of

    resistance. call him up, drawer.
                                                    exit francis
  hostess. cheater, call you him? i will bar no honest man my
house,
    nor no cheater; but i do not love swaggering, by my troth. i
am
    the worse when one says 'swagger.' feel, masters, how i
shake;
    look you,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i warrant you.
  doll. so you do, hostess.
  hostess. do i? yea, in very truth, do i, an 'twere an aspen
leaf. i
    cannot abide swagg'rers.

                   enter pistol, bardolph, and page

  pistol. god save you, sir john!
  falstaff. welcome, ancient pistol. here, pistol, i charge you
with
    a cup of sack; do you discharge upon mine hostess.
  pistol. i will discharge upon her, sir john, with two bullets.
  falstaff. she is pistol-proof, sir; you shall not hardly offend
    her.
  hostess. come, i'll drink no proofs nor no bullets. i'll drink
no
    more than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, i.
  pistol. then to you, mistress dorothy; i will charge you.
  doll. charge me! i scorn you, scurvy companion. what! you poor,
    base, rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate! away, you mouldy
    rogue, away! i am meat for yo
 
 ___________________________
 
away, you cut-purse rascal! you filthy bung, away! by
this
    wine, i'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps, an you play
the
    saucy cuttle with me. away, you bottle-ale rascal! you
    basket-hilt stale juggler, you! since when, i pray you, sir?
    god's light, with two points on your shoulder? much!
  pistol. god let me not live but i will murder your ruff for
this.
  falstaff. no more, pistol; i would not have you go off here.
    discharge yourself of our company, pistol.
  hostess. no, good captain pistol; not here, sweet captain.
  doll. captain! thou abominable damn'd cheater, art thou not
ashamed
    to be called captain? an captains were of my mind, they would
    truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you before you
    have earn'd them. you a captain! you slave, for what? for
tearing
    a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy-house? he a captain! hang him,
    rogue! he lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes. a

    captain! god's light, these vi
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore captains had need look to't.
  bardolph. pray thee go down, good ancient.
  falstaff. hark thee hither, mistress doll.
  pistol. not i! i tell thee what, corporal bardolph, i could
tear
    her; i'll be reveng'd of her.
  page. pray thee go down.
  pistol. i'll see her damn'd first; to pluto's damn'd lake, by
this
    hand, to th' infernal deep, with erebus and tortures vile
also.
    hold hook and line, say i. down, down, dogs! down, faitors!
have
    we not hiren here?
  hostess. good captain peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i'
faith; i
    beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
  pistol. these be good humours, indeed! shall packhorses,
    and hollow pamper'd jades of asia,
    which cannot go but thirty mile a day,
    compare with caesars, and with cannibals,
    and troiant greeks? nay, rather damn them with
    king cerberus; and let the welkin roar.
    shall we fall foul for toys?
  hostess. by my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.
  bardol
 
 ___________________________
 
ph. be gone, good ancient; this will grow to a brawl
anon.
  pistol. die men like dogs! give crowns like pins! have we not
hiren
    here?
  hostess. o' my word, captain, there's none such here. what the
    good-year! do you think i would deny her? for god's sake, be
    quiet.
  pistol. then feed and be fat, my fair calipolis.
    come, give's some sack.
    'si fortune me tormente sperato me contento.'
    fear we broadsides? no, let the fiend give fire.
    give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.
                                         [laying down his sword]
    come we to full points here, and are etceteras nothi
 
 ___________________________
 
 we not galloway nags?
  falstaff. quoit him down, bardolph, like a shove-groat
shilling.
    nay, an 'a do nothing but speak nothing, 'a shall be nothing
    here.
  bardolph. come, get you down stairs.
  pistol. what! shall we have incision? shall we imbrue?
                                        [snatching up his sword]
    then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!
    why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
    untwine the sisters three! come, atropos, i say!
  hostess. here's goodly stuff toward!
  falstaff. give me my rapier, boy.
  doll. i pray thee, jack, i pray thee, do not draw.
  falstaff. get you down stairs.
                                [drawing and driving pistol out]
  hostess. here's a goodly tumult! i'll forswear keeping house
afore
    i'll be in these tirrits and frights. so; murder, i warrant
now.
    alas, alas! put up your naked weapons, put up your naked
weapons.
                                      exeunt pistol and bardolph
 
 ___________________________
 

  doll. i pray thee, jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone. ah, you
    whoreson little valiant villain, you!
  hostess. are you not hurt i' th' groin? methought 'a made a
shrewd
    thrust at your belly.

                        re-enter bardolph

  falstaff. have you turn'd him out a doors?
  bardolph. yea, sir. the rascal's drunk. you have hurt him, sir,
i'
    th' shoulder.
  falstaff. a rascal! to brave me!
  doll. ah, you sweet little rogue, you! alas, poor ape, how thou
    sweat'st! come, let me wipe thy face. come on, you whoreson
    chops. ah, rogue! i' faith, i love thee. thou art as val
 
 ___________________________
 
prove that ever i dress myself handsome till thy return.
well,
    hearken a' th' end.
  falstaff. some sack, francis.
  prince & poins. anon, anon, sir.                   [advancing]
  falstaff. ha! a bastard son of the king's? and art thou not
poins
    his brother?
  prince. why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost
thou
    lead!
  falstaff. a better than thou. i am a gentleman: thou art a
drawer.
  prince. very true, sir, and i come to draw you out by the ears.
  hostess. o, the lord preserve thy grace! by my troth, welcome
to
    london. now the lord bless that sweet face of thine. o jesu,
are
    you come from wales?
  falstaff. thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by this light
    flesh and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.
                                    [leaning his band upon doll]
  doll. how, you fat fool! i scorn you.
  poins. my lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn
all
    to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
  pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ince. you whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you speak
of
    me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!
  hostess. god's blessing of your good heart! and so she is, by
my
    troth.
  falstaff. didst thou hear me?
  prince. yea; and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by
    gadshill. you knew i was at your back, and spoke it on
purpose to
    try my patience.
  falstaff. no, no, no; not so; i did not think thou wast within
    hearing.
  prince. i shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and
    then i know how to handle you.
  falstaff. no abuse, hal, o' mine honour; no abuse.
 
 ___________________________
 
, ned, i' th' world; honest ned, none. i
    disprais'd him before the wicked- that the wicked might not
fall
    in love with thee; in which doing, i have done the part of a
    careful friend and a true subject; and thy father is to give
me
    thanks for it. no abuse, hal; none, ned, none; no, faith,
boys,
    none.
  prince. see now, whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth
not
    make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us?
is
    she of the wicked? is thine hostess here of the wicked? or is
thy
    boy of the wicked? or honest bardolph, whose zeal burns in
his
    nose, of the wicked?
  poins. answer, thou dead elm, answer.
  falstaff. the fiend hath prick'd down bardolph irrecoverable;
and
    his face is lucifer's privy-kitchen, where he doth nothing
but
    roast malt-worms. for the boy- there is a good angel about
him;
    but the devil outbids him too.
  prince. for the women?
  falstaff. for one of them- she's in hell already, and burn
 
 ___________________________
 
s
poor
    souls. for th' other- i owe her money; and whether she be
damn'd
    for that, i know not.
  hostess. no, i warrant you.
  falstaff. no, i think thou art not; i think thou art quit for
that.
    marry, there is another indictment upon thee for suffering
flesh
    to be eaten in thy house, contrary to the law; for the which
i
    think thou wilt howl.
  hostess. all vict'lers do so. what's a joint of mutton or two
in a
    whole lent?
  prince. you, gentlewoman-
  doll. what says your grace?
  falstaff. his grace says that which his flesh rebels against.
                                               [knocking within]
  hostess. who knocks so loud at door? look to th' door there,
    francis.

                              enter peto

  prince. peto, how now! what news?
  peto. the king your father is at westminster;
    and there are tw
 
 ___________________________
 
falstaff, good night.

                        exeunt prince, poins, peto, and bardolph

  falstaff. now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we

    must hence, and leave it unpick'd.  [knocking within]  more
    knocking at the door!

                      re-enter bardolph

    how now! what's the matter?
  bardolph. you must away to court, sir, presently;
    a dozen captains stay at door for you.
  falstaff.  [to the page]. pay the musicians, sirrah.- farewell,
    hostess; farewell, doll. you see, my good wenches, how men of
    merit are sought after; the undeserver may sleep, when the
man of
    action is call'd on. farewell, good wenches. if i be not sent
    away post, i will see you again ere i go.
  doll. i cannot speak. if my heart be not ready to burst!
    well, sweet jack, have a care of thyself.
  falstaff. farewell, farewell.
                                    exeunt falstaff and bardolph
  hostess. well, fare thee well. i have known thee t
 
 ___________________________
 
hese
twenty-nine
    years, come peascod-time; but an honester and truer-hearted
man
    -well fare thee well.
  bardolph.  [ within]  mistress tearsheet!
  hostess. what's the matter?
  bardolph.  [ within]  bid mistress tearsheet come to my master.
  hostess. o, run doll, run, run, good come.  [to bardolph]  she
    comes blubber'd.- yea, will you come, doll?           exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed 
 
 ___________________________
 
thing to do thyself good. boot, boot, master
shallow!
    i know the young king is sick for me. let us take any man's
    horses: the laws of england are at my commandment. blessed
are
    they that have been my friends; and woe to my lord chief
justice!
  pistol. let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
    'where is the life that late i led?' say they.
    why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!         exeunt




scene iv.
london. a street

enter beadles, dragging in hostess quickly and doll tearsheet

  hostess. no, thou arrant knave; i would to god that i might
die,
    that i might have thee hang'd. thou hast drawn my shoulder
out of
    joint.
  first beadle. the constables have delivered her over to me; and
she
    shall have whipping-cheer enough, i warrant her. there hath
been
    a man or two lately kill'd about her.
  doll. nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. come on; i'll tell thee
what,
    thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child i now go w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith
do
    miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou
    paper-fac'd villain.
  hostess. o the lord, that sir john were come! he would make
this a
    bloody day to somebody. but i pray god the fruit of her womb
    miscarry!
  first beadle. if it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions
again;
    you have but eleven now. come, i charge you both go with me;
for
    the man is dead that you and pistol beat amongst you.
  doll. i'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, i will have
you
    as soundly swing'd for this- you blue-bottle rogue, you
filthy
    famish'd cor
 
 ___________________________
 
rectioner, if you be not swing'd, i'll forswear
    half-kirtles.
  first beadle. come, come, you she knight-errant, come.
  hostess. o god, that right should thus overcome might!
    well, of sufferance comes ease.
  doll. come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.
  hostess. ay, come, you starv'd bloodhound.
  doll. goodman death, goodman bones!
  hostess. thou atomy, thou!
  doll. come, you thin thing! come, you rascal!
  first beadle. very well.                                exeunt




scene v.
westminster. near the abbey

enter grooms, strewing rushes

  first groom. more rushes, more rushes!
  second groom. the trumpets have sounded twice.
  third groom. 'twill be two o'clock ere they come from the
    coronation. dispatch, dispatch.                       exeunt

        trumpets sound, and the king and his train pass
    