d hastings
  lord bardolph
  sir john colville
  travers and morton, retainers of northumberland
    opposites against king henry iv

  earl of warwick
  earl of westmoreland
  earl of surrey
  earl of kent
  gower
  harcourt
  blunt
    of the king's party

  lord chief justice
  servant, to lord chief justice

  sir john falstaff
  edward poins
  bardolph
  pistol
  peto
    irregular humourists

  page, to falstaff

  robert shallow and silence, country justices
  davy, servant to shallow

  fang and snare, sheriff's officers

  ralph mouldy
  simon shadow
  thomas wart
  francis feeble
  peter bullcalf
    country soldiers

  francis, a drawer

  lady northumberland
  lady percy, percy's widow
  hostess quickly, of the boar's head, eastcheap
  doll tearsheet

  lords, attendants, porter, drawers, beadles, grooms, servants,
    speaker of the epilogue

                       scene: england

induction
                         induction.
 
 ___________________________
 
versity
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
gloucestershire. shallow's house

enter shallow, falstaff, bardolph, and page

  shallow. by cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night.
    what, davy, i say!
  falstaff. you must excuse me, master robert shallow.
  shallow. i will not excuse you; you shall not be excus'd;
excuses
    shall not be admitted; there is no excuse shall serve; you
shall
    not be excus'd. why, davy!

                            enter davy

  davy. here, sir.
  shallow. davy, davy, davy, davy; let me see, davy; let me see,
    davy; let me see- yea, marry, william cook, bid him come
hither.
    sir john, you shall not be excus'd.
  davy. marry, sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
 thus: those precepts cannot be served; and,
    again, sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat?
  shallow. with red wheat, davy. but for william cook- are there
no
    young pigeons?
  davy. yes, sir. here is now the smith's note for shoeing and
    plough-irons.
  shallow. let it be cast, and paid. sir john, you shall not be
    excused.
  davy. now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had;
and,
    sir, do you mean to stop any of william's wages about the
sack he
    lost the other day at hinckley fair?
  shallow. 'a shall answer it. some pigeons, davy, a couple of
    short-legg'd hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little
tiny
    kickshaws, tell william cook.
  davy. doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
  shallow. yea, davy; i will use him well. a friend i' th' court
is
    better than a penny in purse.
 
 ___________________________
 
 use his men well, davy; for
they
    are arrant knaves and will backbite.
  davy. no worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they have
    marvellous foul linen.
  shallow. well conceited, davy- about thy business, davy.
  davy. i beseech you, sir, to countenance william visor of
woncot
    against clement perkes o' th' hill.
  shallow. there, is many complaints, davy, against that visor.
that
    visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.
  davy. i grant your worship that he is a knave, sir; but yet god
    forbid, sir, but a knave should have some countenance at his
    friend's request. an honest man, sir, is able to speak for
    himself, when a knave is not. i have serv'd your worship
truly,
    sir, this eight years; an i cannot once or twice in a quarter
    bear out a knave against an honest man, i have but a very
little
    credit with your worship. the knave is mine honest friend,
sir;
    therefore, i beseech you, l
 
 ___________________________
 
et him be countenanc'd.
  shallow. go to; i say he shall have no wrong. look about,
  davy.  [exit davy]  where are you, sir john? come, come, come,
off
    with your boots. give me your hand, master bardolph.
  bardolph. i am glad to see your worship.
  shallow. i thank thee with all my heart, kind master bardolph.
    [to the page]  and welcome, my tall fellow. come, sir john.
  falstaff. i'll follow you, good master robert shallow.
    [exit shallow]  bardolph, look to our horses.  [exeunt
bardolph
    and page]  if i were sawed into quantities, i should make
four
    dozen of such 
 
 ___________________________
 
r peace, or both at once, may be
    as things acquainted and familiar to us;
    in which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
    our coronation done, we will accite,
    as i before rememb'red, all our state;
    and- god consigning to my good intents-
    no prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
    god shorten harry's happy life one day.               exeunt




scene iii.
gloucestershire. shallow's orchard

enter falstaff, shallow, silence, bardolph, the page, and davy

  shallow. nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we
    will eat a last year's pippin of mine own graffing, with a
dish
    of caraways, and so forth. come, cousin silence. and then to
bed.
  falstaff. fore god, you have here a goodly dwelling and rich.
  shallow. barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, sir
john
    -marry, good air. spread, davy, spread, davy; well said,
davy.
  falstaff. this davy serves you for good uses; he is your
    serving-man and y
 
 ___________________________
 

  silence. ah, sirrah! quoth-a- we shall               [singing]

              do nothing but eat and make good cheer,
              and praise god for the merry year;
              when flesh is cheap and females dear,
              and lusty lads roam here and there,
                  so merrily,
                and ever among so merrily.

  falstaff. there's a merry heart! good master silence, i'll give
you
    a health for that anon.
  shallow. give master bardolph some wine, davy.
  davy. sweet sir, sit; i'll be with you anon; most sweet sir,
sit.
    master page, good master page, sit. proface! what you want in
    meat, we'll have in drink. but you must bear; the heart's
all.
 exit
  shallow. be merry, master bardolph; and, my little soldier
there,
    be merry.
  silence.  [singing]

         be merry, be merry, my wife has all;
         for women are shrews, both short and tall;
         'tis merry in hall when beards wag an;
           and welcome me
 
 ___________________________
 
rry shrove-tide.
         be merry, be merry.

  falstaff. i did not think master silence had been a man of this
    mettle.
  silence. who, i? i have been merry twice and once ere now.

                          re-enter davy

  davy.  [to bardolph]  there's a dish of leather-coats for you.
  shallow. davy!
  davy. your worship! i'll be with you straight.  [to bardolph]
    a cup of wine, sir?
  silence.  [singing]

         a cup of wine that's brisk and fine,
         and drink unto the leman mine;
           and a merry heart lives long-a.

  falstaff. well said, master silence.
  silence. an we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o' th'
night.
  falstaff. health and long life to you, master silence!
  silence.  [singing]

         fill the cup, and let it come,
         i'll pledge 
 
 ___________________________
 
you a mile to th' bottom.

  shallow. honest bardolph, welcome; if thou want'st anything and
    wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. welcome, my little tiny
thief
    and welcome indeed too. i'll drink to master bardolph, and to
all
    the cabileros about london.
  davy. i hope to see london once ere i die.
  bardolph. an i might see you there, davy!
  shallow. by the mass, you'r crack a quart together- ha! will
you
    not, master bardolph?
  bardolph. yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.
  shallow. by god's liggens, i thank thee. the knave will stick
by
    thee, i can assure thee that. 'a will not out, 'a; 'tis true
    bred.
  bardolph. and i'll stick by him, sir.
  shallow. why, there spoke a king. lack nothing; be merry.
    [one knocks at door]  look who's at door there, ho! who
knocks?
                                           
 
 ___________________________
 
            exit davy
  falstaff.  [to silence, who has drunk a bumper]  why, now you
have
    done me right.
  silence.  [singing]

         do me right,
         and dub me knight.
           samingo.

    is't not so?
  falstaff. 'tis so.
  silence. is't so? why then, say an old man can do somewhat.

                        re-enter davy

  davy. an't please your worship, there's one pistol come from
the
    court with news.
  falstaff. from the court? let him come in.

                        enter pistol

    how now, pistol?
  pistol. sir john, god save you!
  falstaff. what wind blew you hither, pistol?
  pistol. not the ill wind which blows no man to good. sweet
knight,
    thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.
  silence. by'r lady, i think 'a be, but goodman puff of barson.
  pistol. puff!
    puff in