ant, to lord chief justice

  sir john falstaff
  edward poins
  bardolph
  pistol
  peto
    irregular humourists

  page, to falstaff

  robert shallow and silence, country justices
  davy, servant to shallow

  fang and snare, sheriff's officers

  ralph mouldy
  simon shadow
  thomas wart
  francis feeble
  peter bullcalf
    country soldiers

  francis, a drawer

  lady northumberland
  lady percy, percy's widow
  hostess quickly, of the boar's head, eastcheap
  doll tearsheet

  lords, attendants, porter, drawers, beadles, grooms, servants,
    speaker of the epilogue

                       scene: england

induction
                         induction.
           warkworth. before northumberland's castle

            enter rumour, painted full of tongues

  rumour. open your ears; for which of you will stop
    the vent of hearing when loud rumour speaks?
    i, from the orient to the drooping west,
    making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
  
 
 ___________________________
 
know me? come, come, i know thou wast set on to this.
  hostess. pray thee, sir john, let it be but twenty nobles;
    i' faith, i am loath to pawn my plate, so god save me, la!
  falstaff. let it alone; i'll make other shift. you'll be a fool

    still.
  hostess. well, you shall have it, though i pawn my gown.
    i hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?
  falstaff. will i live?  [to bardolph]  go, with her, with her;
hook
    on, hook on.
  hostess. will you have doll tearsheet meet you at supper?
  falstaff. no more words; let's have her.
                          exeunt hostess, bardolph, and officers
  chief justice. i have heard better news.
  falstaff. what's the news, my lord?
  chief justice. where lay the king to-night?
  gower. at basingstoke, my lord.
  falstaff. i hope, my lord, all's well. what is the news, my
lord?
  chief justice. come all his forces back?
  gower. no; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,
    are march'd up to my lord of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my
master's.
  prince. even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town
bull.
    shall we steal upon them, ned, at supper?
  poins. i am your shadow, my lord; i'll follow you.
  prince. sirrah, you boy, and bardolph, no word to your master
that
    i am yet come to town. there's for your silence.
  bardolph. i have no tongue, sir.
  page. and for mine, sir, i will govern it.
  prince. fare you well; go.            exeunt bardolph and page
    this doll tearsheet should be some road.
  poins. i warrant you, as common as the way between saint albans
and
    london.
  prince. how might we see falstaff bestow himself to-night in
his
    true colours, and not ourselves be seen?
  poins. put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon
him at
    his table as drawers.
  prince. from a god to a bull? a heavy descension! it was jove's
    case. from a prince to a prentice? a low transformation! that
    shall be mine; for in everything the pur
 
 ___________________________
 
here they supp'd is too hot;
    they'll come in straight.
  francis. sirrah, here will be the prince and master poins anon;
and
    they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons; and sir john
must
    not know of it. bardolph hath brought word.
  third drawer. by the mass, here will be old uds; it will be an
    excellent stratagem.
  second drawer. i'll see if i can find out sneak.
                                 exeunt second and third drawers

                enter hostess and doll tearsheet

  hostess. i' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an
excellent
    good temperality. your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as
heart
    would desire; and your colour, i warrant you, is as red as
any
    rose, in good truth, la! but, i' faith, you have drunk too
much
    canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it
perfumes
    the blood ere one can say 'what's this?' how do you now?
  doll. better than i was- hem.
  hostess. why, that's well said; a good heart
 
 ___________________________
 
good. boot, boot, master
shallow!
    i know the young king is sick for me. let us take any man's
    horses: the laws of england are at my commandment. blessed
are
    they that have been my friends; and woe to my lord chief
justice!
  pistol. let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
    'where is the life that late i led?' say they.
    why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!         exeunt




scene iv.
london. a street

enter beadles, dragging in hostess quickly and doll tearsheet

  hostess. no, thou arrant knave; i would to god that i might
die,
    that i might have thee hang'd. thou hast drawn my shoulder
out of
    joint.
  first beadle. the constables have delivered her over to me; and
she
    shall have whipping-cheer enough, i warrant her. there hath
been
    a man or two lately kill'd about her.
  doll. nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. come on; i'll tell thee
what,
    thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child i now go with
do
    miscarry, thou