e promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was
he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there
proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece
of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented
him.

many an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned
man, and a graduate of siguenza) as to which had been the better knight,
palmerin of england or amadis of gaul. master nicholas, the village
barber, however, used to say that neither of them came up to the knight
of phoebus, and that if there was any that could compare with him it was
don galaor, the brother of amadis of gaul, because he had a spirit that
was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight, nor lachrymose
like his brother, while in the matter of valour he was not a whit behind
him. in short, he became so absorbed in his books that he spent his
nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring

 
 ___________________________
 
lived and by the oath he had sworn
(though he had not sworn any) it was not so much; for there were to be
taken into account and deducted three pairs of shoes he had given him,
and a real for two blood-lettings when he was sick.

"all that is very well," said don quixote; "but let the shoes and the
blood-lettings stand as a setoff against the blows you have given him
without any cause; for if he spoiled the leather of the shoes you paid
for, you have damaged that of his body, and if the barber took blood from
him when he was sick, you have drawn it when he was sound; so on that
score he owes you nothing."

"the difficulty is, sir knight, that i have no money here; let andres
come home with me, and i will pay him all, real by real."

"i go with him!" said the youth. "nay, god forbid! no, senor, not for the
world; for once alone with me, he would ray me like a saint bartholomew."

"he will do nothing of the kind," said don quixote; "i have only to
command, and he will obey m
 
 ___________________________
 
ss all that they have done
all together and each of them on his own account."

with this talk and more of the same kind they reached the village just as
night was beginning to fall, but the peasant waited until it was a little
later that the belaboured gentleman might not be seen riding in such a
miserable trim. when it was what seemed to him the proper time he entered
the village and went to don quixote's house, which he found all in
confusion, and there were the curate and the village barber, who were
great friends of don quixote, and his housekeeper was saying to them in a
loud voice, "what does your worship think can have befallen my master,
senor licentiate pero perez?" for so the curate was called; "it is three
days now since anything has been seen of him, or the hack, or the
buckler, lance, or armour. miserable me! i am certain of it, and it is as
true as that i was born to die, that these accursed books of chivalry he
has, and has got into the way of reading so constan
 
 ___________________________
 
tly, have upset his
reason; for now i remember having often heard him saying to himself that
he would turn knight-errant and go all over the world in quest of
adventures. to the devil and barabbas with such books, that have brought
to ruin in this way the finest understanding there was in all la mancha!"

the niece said the same, and, more: "you must know, master nicholas"--for
that was the name of the barber--"it was often my uncle's way to stay two
days and nights together poring over these unholy books of misventures,
after which he would fling the book away and snatch up his sword and fall
to slashing the walls; and when he was tired out he would say he had
killed four giants like four towers; and the sweat that flowed from him
when he was weary he said was the blood of the wounds he had received in
battle; and then he would drink a great jug of cold water and become calm
and quiet, sayin
 
 ___________________________
 
 them to-morrow before the day over."

they put a host of questions to don quixote, but his only answer to all
was--give him something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what
he needed most. they did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at
great length as to how he had found don quixote. he told him, and the
nonsense he had talked when found and on the way home, all which made the
licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next day, which was to
summon his friend the barber, master nicholas, and go with him to don
quixote's house.




chapter vi.

of the diverting and important scrutiny which the curate and the barber
made in the library of our ingenious gentleman


he was still sleeping; so the curate asked the niece for the keys of the
room where the books, the authors of all the mischief, were, and right
willingly she gave them. they all went in, the housekeeper with them, and
found more than a hundred volumes of big books very well bound, and so
 
 ___________________________
 
me
other small ones. the moment the housekeeper saw them she turned about
and ran out of the room, and came back immediately with a saucer of holy
water and a sprinkler, saying, "here, your worship, senor licentiate,
sprinkle this room; don't leave any magician of the many there are in
these books to bewitch us in revenge for our design of banishing them
from the world."

the simplicity of the housekeeper made the licentiate laugh, and he
directed the barber to give him the books one by one to see what they
were about, as there might be some to be found among them that did not
deserve the penalty of fire.

"no," said the niece, "there is no reason for showing mercy to any of
them; they have every one of them done mischief; better fling them out of
the window into the court and make a pile of them and set fire to them;
or else carry them into the yard, and there a bonfire can be made without
the smoke giving any annoyance." the housekeeper s
 
 ___________________________
 
t the curate would
not agree to it without first reading at any rate the titles.

the first that master nicholas put into his hand was "the four books of
amadis of gaul." "this seems a mysterious thing," said the curate, "for,
as i have heard say, this was the first book of chivalry printed in
spain, and from this all the others derive their birth and origin; so it
seems to me that we ought inexorably to condemn it to the flames as the
founder of so vile a sect."

"nay, sir," said the barber, "i too, have heard say that this is the best
of all the books of this kind that have been written, and so, as
something singular in its line, it ought to be pardoned."

"true," said the curate; "and for that reason let its life be spared for
the present. let us see that other which is next to it."

"it is," said the barber, "the 'sergas de esplandian,' the lawful son of
amadis of gaul."

"then verily," said the curate, "the merit of the father must not be put
down to the account of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the son. take it, mistress housekeeper; open the
window and fling it into the yard and lay the foundation of the pile for
the bonfire we are to make."

the housekeeper obeyed with great satisfaction, and the worthy
"esplandian" went flying into the yard to await with all patience the
fire that was in store for him.

"proceed," said the curate.

"this that comes next," said the barber, "is 'amadis of greece,' and,
indeed, i believe all those on this side are of the same amadis lineage."

"then to the yard with the whole of them," said the curate; "for to have
the burning of queen pintiquiniestra, and the shepherd darinel and his
eclogues, and the bedevilled and involved discourses of his author, i
would burn with them the father who begot me if he were going about in
the guise of a knight-errant."

"i am of the same mind," said the barber.

"and so am i," added th
 
 ___________________________
 
e niece.

"in that case," said the housekeeper, "here, into the yard with them!"

they were handed to her, and as there were many of them, she spared
herself the staircase, and flung them down out of the window.

"who is that tub there?" said the curate.

"this," said the barber, "is 'don olivante de laura.'"

"the author of that book," said the curate, "was the same that wrote 'the
garden of flowers,' and truly there is no deciding which of the two books
is the more truthful, or, to put it better, the less lying; all i can say
is, send this one into the yard for a swaggering fool."

"this that follows is 'florismarte of hircania,'" said the barber.

"senor florismarte here?" said the curate; "then by my faith he must take
up his quarters in the yard, in spit
 
 ___________________________
 
e of his marvellous birth and
visionary adventures, for the stiffness and dryness of his style deserve
nothing else; into the yard with him and the other, mistress
housekeeper."

"with all my heart, senor," said she, and executed the order with great
delight.

"this," said the barber, "is the knight platir.'"

"an old book that," said the curate, "but i find no reason for clemency
in it; send it after the others without appeal;" which was done.

another book was opened, and they saw it was entitled, "the knight of the
cross."

"for the sake of the holy name this book has," said the curate, "its
ignorance might be excused; but then, they say, 'behind the cross there's
the devil; to the fire with it."

taking down another book, the barber said, "this is 'the mirro
 
 ___________________________
 
he twelve peers of france with the veracious historian
turpin; however, i am not for condemning them to more than perpetual
banishment, because, at any rate, they have some share in the invention
of the famous matteo boiardo, whence too the christian poet ludovico
ariosto wove his web, to whom, if i find him here, and speaking any
language but his own, i shall show no respect whatever; but if he speaks
his own tongue i will put him upon my head."

"well, i have him in italian," said the barber, "but i do not understand
him."

"nor would it be well that you should understand him," said the curate,
"and on that score we might have excused the captain if he had not
brought him into spain and turned him into castilian. he robbed him of a
great deal of his natural force, and so do all those who try to turn
books written in verse into another language, for, with all the pains
they take and all the cleverness they show, they never can reach the
level of the originals as they were f
 
 ___________________________
 
irst produced. in short, i say that
this book, and all that may be found treating of those french affairs,
should be thrown into or deposited in some dry well, until after more
consideration it is settled what is to be done with them; excepting
always one 'bernardo del carpio' that is going about, and another called
'roncesvalles;' for these, if they come into my hands, shall pass at once
into those of the housekeeper, and from hers into the fire without any
reprieve."

to all this the barber gave his assent, and looked upon it as right and
proper, being persuaded that the curate was so staunch to the faith and
loyal to the truth that he would not for the world say anything opposed
to them. opening another book he saw it was "palmerin de oliva," and
beside it was another called "palmerin of england," seeing which the
licentiate said, "let the olive be made firewood of at once and burned
until no ashes even are left; and let that palm of england be kept and
preserved as a thin
 
 ___________________________
 
n written by a wise and witty
king of portugal. all the adventures at the castle of miraguarda are
excellent and of admirable contrivance, and the language is polished and
clear, studying and observing the style befitting the speaker with
propriety and judgment. so then, provided it seems good to you, master
nicholas, i say let this and 'amadis of gaul' be remitted the penalty of
fire, and as for all the rest, let them perish without further question
or query."

"nay, gossip," said the barber, "for this that i have here is the famous
'don belianis.'"

"well," said the curate, "that and the second, third, and fourth parts
all stand in need of a little rhubarb to purge their excess of bile, and
they must be cleared of all that stuff about the castle of fame and other
greater affectations, to which end let them be allowed the over-seas
term, and, according as they mend, so shall mercy or justice be meted out
to them; and in the mean time, gossip, do you keep them in your house 
 
 ___________________________
 
and
let no one read them."

"with all my heart," said the barber; and not caring to tire himself with
reading more books of chivalry, he told the housekeeper to take all the
big ones and throw them into the yard. it was not said to one dull or
deaf, but to one who enjoyed burning them more than weaving the broadest
and finest web that could be; and seizing about eight at a time, she
flung them out of the window.

in carrying so many together she let one fall at the feet of the barber,
who took it up, curious to know whose it was, and found it said, "history
of the famous knight, tirante el blanco."

"god bless me!" said the curate with a shout, "'tirante el blanco' here!
hand it over, gossip, for in it i reckon i have found a treasury of
enjoyment and a mine of recreation. here is don kyrieleison of montalvan,
a valiant knight, and his brother thomas of montalvan, and the knight
fonseca, with the battle the bold tirante fought with the mastiff, and
the witticisms o
 
 ___________________________
 
ith the squire hipolito--in
truth, gossip, by right of its style it is the best book in the world.
here knights eat and sleep, and die in their beds, and make their wills
before dying, and a great deal more of which there is nothing in all the
other books. nevertheless, i say he who wrote it, for deliberately
composing such fooleries, deserves to be sent to the galleys for life.
take it home with you and read it, and you will see that what i have said
is true."

"as you will," said the barber; "but what are we to do with these little
books that are left?"

"these must be, not chivalry, but poetry," said the curate; and opening
one he saw it was the "diana" of jorge de montemayor, and, supposing all
the others to be of the same sort, "these," he said, "do not deserve to
be burned like the others, for they neither do nor can do the mischief
the books of chivalry have done, being books of entertainment that can
hurt no one."

"ah, senor!" said the niece, "your worship had bet
 
 ___________________________
 
us malady."

"the damsel is right," said the curate, "and it will be well to put this
stumbling-block and temptation out of our friend's way. to begin, then,
with the 'diana' of montemayor. i am of opinion it should not be burned,
but that it should be cleared of all that about the sage felicia and the
magic water, and of almost all the longer pieces of verse: let it keep,
and welcome, its prose and the honour of being the first of books of the
kind."

"this that comes next," said the barber, "is the 'diana,' entitled the
'second part, by the salamancan,' and this other has the same title, and
its author is gil polo."

"as for that of the salamancan," replied the curate, "let it go to swell
the number of the condemned in the yard, and let gil polo's be preserved
as if it came from apollo himself: but get on, gossip, and make haste,
for it is growing late."

"this book," said the barber, opening another, "is the ten books of the
'fortune of love,' written by antonio de lof
 
 ___________________________
 
pollo has been
apollo, and the muses have been muses, and poets have been poets, so
droll and absurd a book as this has never been written, and in its way it
is the best and the most singular of all of this species that have as yet
appeared, and he who has not read it may be sure he has never read what
is delightful. give it here, gossip, for i make more account of having
found it than if they had given me a cassock of florence stuff."

he put it aside with extreme satisfaction, and the barber went on, "these
that come next are 'the shepherd of iberia,' 'nymphs of henares,' and
'the enlightenment of jealousy.'"

"then all we have to do," said the curate, "is to hand them over to the
secular arm of the housekeeper, and ask me not why, or we shall never
have done."

"this next is the 'pastor de filida.'"

"no pastor that," said the curate, "but a highly polished courtier; let
it be preserved as a precious jewel."

"this large one here," said the barber, "is called 'the tre
 
 ___________________________
 
asury of
various poems.'"

"if there were not so many of them," said the curate, "they would be more
relished: this book must be weeded and cleansed of certain vulgarities
which it has with its excellences; let it be preserved because the author
is a friend of mine, and out of respect for other more heroic and loftier
works that he has written."

"this," continued the barber, "is the 'cancionero' of lopez de
maldonado."

"the author of that book, too," said the curate, "is a great friend of
mine, and his verses from his own mouth are the admiration of all who
hear them, for such is the sweetness of his voice that he enchants when
he chants them: it gives rather too much of its eclogues, but what is
good was never yet plentiful: let it be kept with those that have been
set apart. but what book is that next it?"

"the 'galatea' of miguel de cervantes," said
 
 ___________________________
 
 the barber.

"that cervantes has been for many years a great friend of mine, and to my
knowledge he has had more experience in reverses than in verses. his book
has some good invention in it, it presents us with something but brings
nothing to a conclusion: we must wait for the second part it promises:
perhaps with amendment it may succeed in winning the full measure of
grace that is now denied it; and in the mean time do you, senor gossip,
keep it shut up in your own quarters."

"very good," sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id the barber; "and here come three together, the
'araucana' of don alonso de ercilla, the 'austriada' of juan rufo,
justice of cordova, and the 'montserrate' of christobal de virues, the
valencian poet."

"these three books," said the curate, "are the best that have been
written in castilian in heroic verse, and they may compare with the most
famous of italy; let them be preserved as the richest treasures of poetry
that spain possesses."

the curate was tired and would not look into any more books
 
 ___________________________
 
, and so he
decided that, "contents uncertified," all the rest should be burned; but
just then the barber held open one, called "the tears of angelica."

"i should have shed tears myself," said the curate when he heard the
title, "had i ordered that book to be burned, for its author was one of
the famous poets of the world, not to say of spain, and was very happy in
the translation of some of ovid's fables."




chapter vii.

of the second sally of our worthy knight don quixote of la mancha


at this instant don quixote began shouting out, "here, here, valiant
knights! here is need 
 
 ___________________________
 
shed; they gave him something to eat, and once more he
fell asleep, leaving them marvelling at his madness.

that night the housekeeper burned to ashes all the books that were in the
yard and in the whole house; and some must have been consumed that
deserved preservation in everlasting archives, but their fate and the
laziness of the examiner did not permit it, and so in them was verified
the proverb that the innocent suffer for the guilty.

one of the remedies which the curate and the barber immediately applied
to their friend's disorder was to wall up and plaster the room where the
books were, so that when he got up he should not find them (possibly the
cause being removed the effect might cease), and they might say that a
magician had carried them off, room and all; and this was done with all
despatch. two days later don quixote got up, and the first thing he did
was to go and look at his books, and not finding the room where he had
left it, he wandered from side to side l
 
 ___________________________
 
much astray art thou in
thy reckoning: ere they shear me i shall have plucked away and stripped
off the beards of all who dare to touch only the tip of a hair of mine."

the two were unwilling to make any further answer, as they saw that his
anger was kindling.

in short, then, he remained at home fifteen days very quietly without
showing any signs of a desire to take up with his former delusions, and
during this time he held lively discussions with his two gossips, the
curate and the barber, on the point he maintained, that knights-errant
were what the world stood most in need of, and that in him was to be
accomplished the revival of knight-errantry. the curate sometimes
contradicted him, sometimes agreed with him, for if he had not observed
this precaution he would have been unable to bring him to reason.

meanwhile don quixote worked upon a farm labourer, a neighbour of his, an
honest man (if indeed that title can be given to him who is poor), but
with very little wit in
 
 ___________________________
 
mills."

"i have told thee, brother, on no account to mention those fulling mills
to me again," said don quixote, "or i vow--and i say no more-i'll full
the soul out of you."

sancho held his peace in dread lest his master should carry out the vow
he had hurled like a bowl at him.

the fact of the matter as regards the helmet, steed, and knight that don
quixote saw, was this. in that neighbourhood there were two villages, one
of them so small that it had neither apothecary's shop nor barber, which
the other that was close to it had, so the barber of the larger served
the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who required to be bled and
another man who wanted to be shaved, and on this errand the barber was
going, carrying with him a brass basin; but as luck would have it, as he
was on the way it began to rain, and not to spoil his hat, which probably
was a new one, he put the basin on his head, and being clean it glittered
at half a league's distance. he rode upon a grey a
 
 ___________________________
 
; for everything he saw he made to fall in with
his crazy chivalry and ill-errant notions; and when he saw the poor
knight draw near, without entering into any parley with him, at
rocinante's top speed he bore down upon him with the pike pointed low,
fully determined to run him through and through, and as he reached him,
without checking the fury of his charge, he cried to him:

"defend thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine own accord that
which is so reasonably my due."

the barber, who without any expectation or apprehension of it saw this
apparition coming down upon him, had no other way of saving himself from
the stroke of the lance but to let himself fall off his ass; and no
sooner had he touched the ground than he sprang up more nimbly than a
deer and sped away across the plain faster than the wind.

he left the basin on the ground, with which don quixote contented
himself, saying that the pagan had shown his discretion and imitated the
beaver, which finding 
 
 ___________________________
 
se measure this famous
head-piece was first forged must have had a very large head; but the
worst of it is half of it is wanting."

when sancho heard him call the basin a headpiece he was unable to
restrain his laughter, but remembering his master's wrath he checked
himself in the midst of it.

"what art thou laughing at, sancho?" said don quixote.

"i am laughing," said he, "to think of the great head the pagan must have
had who owned this helmet, for it looks exactly like a regular barber's
basin."

"dost thou know what i suspect, sancho?" said don quixote; "that this
wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must by some strange accident
have come into the hands of some one who was unable to recognise or
realise its value, and who, not knowing what he did, and seeing it to be
of the purest gold, must have melted down one half for the sake of what
it might be worth, and of the other made this which is like a barber's
basin as thou sayest; but be it as it may, to me who r
 
 ___________________________
 
of the same
brotherhood. what will it be, then, when i put a duke's robe on my back,
or dress myself in gold and pearls like a count? i believe they'll come a
hundred leagues to see me."

"thou wilt look well," said don quixote, "but thou must shave thy beard
often, for thou hast it so thick and rough and unkempt, that if thou dost
not shave it every second day at least, they will see what thou art at
the distance of a musket shot."

"what more will it be," said sancho, "than having a barber, and keeping
him at wages in the house? and even if it be necessary, i will make him
go behind me like a nobleman's equerry."

"why, how dost thou know that noblemen have equerries behind them?" asked
don quixote.

"i will tell you," answered sancho. "years ago i was for a month at the
capital and there i saw taking the air a very small gentleman who they
said was a very great man, and a man following him on horseback in every
turn he took, just as if he was his tail. i asked why this
 
 ___________________________
 
 man did not
join the other man, instead of always going behind him; they answered me
that he was his equerry, and that it was the custom with nobles to have
such persons behind them, and ever since then i know it, for i have never
forgotten it."

"thou art right," said don quixote, "and in the same way thou mayest
carry thy barber with thee, for customs did not come into use all
together, nor were they all invented at once, and thou mayest be the
first count to have a barber to follow him; and, indeed, shaving one's
beard is a greater trust than saddling one's horse."

"let the barber business be my look-out," said sancho; "and your
worship's be it to strive to become a king, and make me a count."

"so it shall be," answered don quixote, and raising his eyes he saw what
will be told in the following chapter.




chapter xxii.

of the freedom don quixote conferred on several unfortunates who against
their will were being carried where they had no wish
 
 ___________________________
 
living god, sir knight of the rueful
countenance, i cannot endure or bear with patience some of the things
that your worship says; and from them i begin to suspect that all you
tell me about chivalry, and winning kingdoms and empires, and giving
islands, and bestowing other rewards and dignities after the custom of
knights-errant, must be all made up of wind and lies, and all pigments or
figments, or whatever we may call them; for what would anyone think that
heard your worship calling a barber's basin mambrino's helmet without
ever seeing the mistake all this time, but that one who says and
maintains such things must have his brains addled? i have the basin in my
sack all dinted, and i am taking it home to have it mended, to trim my
beard in it, if, by god's grace, i am allowed to see my wife and children
some day or other."

"look here, sancho," said don quixote, "by him thou didst swear by just
now i swear thou hast the most limited understanding that any squire in
the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
or ever had. is it possible that all this time thou hast
been going about with me thou hast never found out that all things
belonging to knights-errant seem to be illusions and nonsense and
ravings, and to go always by contraries? and not because it really is so,
but because there is always a swarm of enchanters in attendance upon us
that change and alter everything with us, and turn things as they please,
and according as they are disposed to aid or destroy us; thus what seems
to thee a barber's basin seems to me mambrino's helmet, and to another it
will seem something else; and rare foresight it was in the sage who is on
my side to make what is really and truly mambrine's helmet seem a basin
to everybody, for, being held in such estimation as it is, all the world
would pursue me to rob me of it; but when they see it is only a barber's
basin they do not take the trouble to obtain it; as was plainly shown by
him who tried to break it, and left it on the ground without taking it,
 
 ___________________________
 
ant with him he knows as much and more
philosophy than aristotle.' in the same way, sancho, for all i want with
dulcinea del toboso she is just as good as the most exalted princess on
earth. it is not to be supposed that all those poets who sang the praises
of ladies under the fancy names they give them, had any such mistresses.
thinkest thou that the amarillises, the phillises, the sylvias, the
dianas, the galateas, the filidas, and all the rest of them, that the
books, the ballads, the barber's shops, the theatres are full of, were
really and truly ladies of flesh and blood, and mistresses of those that
glorify and have glorified them? nothing of the kind; they only invent
them for the most part to furnish a subject for their verses, and that
they may pass for lovers, or for men valiant enough to be so; and so it
suffices me to think and believe that the good aldonza lorenzo is fair
and virtuous; and as to her pedigree it is very little matter, for no one
will examine into it
 
 ___________________________
 
his craving drove him to draw near to the inn, still
undecided whether to go in or not, and as he was hesitating there came
out two persons who at once recognised him, and said one to the other:

"senor licentiate, is not he on the horse there sancho panza who, our
adventurer's housekeeper told us, went off with her master as esquire?"

"so it is," said the licentiate, "and that is our friend don quixote's
horse;" and if they knew him so well it was because they were the curate
and the barber of his own village, the same who had carried out the
scrutiny and sentence upon the books; and as soon as they recognised
sancho panza and rocinante, being anxious to hear of don quixote, they
approached, and calling him by his name the curate said, "friend sancho
panza, where is your master?"

sancho recognised them at once, and determined to keep secret the place
and circumstances where and under which he had left his master, so he
replied that his master was engaged in a certain quar
 
 ___________________________
 
ter on a certain
matter of great importance to him which he could not disclose for the
eyes in his head.

"nay, nay," said the barber, "if you don't tell us where he is, sancho
panza, we will suspect as we suspect already, that you have murdered and
robbed him, for here you are mounted on his horse; in fact, you must
produce the master of the hack, or else take the consequences."

"there is no need of threats with me," said sancho, "for i am not a man
to rob or murder anybody; let his own fate, or god who made him, kill
each one; my master is engaged very much to his taste doing penance in
the midst of these mountains
 
 ___________________________
 
ver given it to
him, nor had he himself thought of asking for it. when sancho discovered
he could not find the book his face grew deadly pale, and in great haste
he again felt his body all over, and seeing plainly it was not to be
found, without more ado he seized his beard with both hands and plucked
away half of it, and then, as quick as he could and without stopping,
gave himself half a dozen cuffs on the face and nose till they were
bathed in blood.

seeing this, the curate and the barber asked him what had happened him
that he gave himself such rough treatment.

"what should happen me?" replied sancho, "but to have lost from one hand
to the other, in a moment, three ass-colts, each of them like a castle?"

"how is that?" said the barber.

"i have lost the note-book," said sancho, "that contained the letter to
dulcinea, and an order signed by my master in which he directed his niece
to give me three ass-colts out of four or five he had at home;" and he
then told them 
 
 ___________________________
 
ple.

the curate consoled him, telling him that when his master was found he
would get him to renew the order, and make a fresh draft on paper, as was
usual and customary; for those made in notebooks were never accepted or
honoured.

sancho comforted himself with this, and said if that were so the loss of
dulcinea's letter did not trouble him much, for he had it almost by
heart, and it could be taken down from him wherever and whenever they
liked.

"repeat it then, sancho," said the barber, "and we will write it down
afterwards."

sancho panza stopped to scratch his head to bring back the letter to his
memory, and balanced himself now on one foot, now the other, one moment
staring at the ground, the next at the sky, and after having half gnawed
off the end of a finger and kept them in suspense waiting for him to
begin, he said, after a long pause, "by god, senor licentiate, devil a
thing can i recollect of the letter; but it said at the beginning,
'exalted and scrubbing 
 
 ___________________________
 
lady.'"

"it cannot have said 'scrubbing,'" said the barber, "but 'superhuman' or
'sovereign.'"

"that is it," said sancho; "then, as well as i remember, it went on, 'the
wounded, and wanting of sleep, and the pierced, kisses your worship's
hands, ungrateful and very unrecognised fair one; and it said something
or other about health and sickness that he was sending her; and from that
it went tailing off until it ended with 'yours till death, the knight of
the rueful countenance."

it gave them no little amusement, both of them, to see what a g
 
 ___________________________
 
gs them a good fixed income, not
counting the altar fees, which may be reckoned at as much more."

"but for that," said sancho, "the squire must be unmarried, and must
know, at any rate, how to help at mass, and if that be so, woe is me, for
i am married already and i don't know the first letter of the a b c. what
will become of me if my master takes a fancy to be an archbishop and not
an emperor, as is usual and customary with knights-errant?"

"be not uneasy, friend sancho," said the barber, "for we will entreat
your master, and advise him, even urging it upon him as a case of
conscience, to become an emperor and not an archbishop, because it will
be easier for him as he is more valiant than lettered."

"so i have thought," said sancho; "though i can tell you he is fit for
anything: what i mean to do for my part is to pray to our lord to place
him where it may be best for him, and where he may be able to bestow most
favours upon me."

"you speak like a man of sense," sai
 
 ___________________________
 
 useless penance you say he is performing; and we
had best turn into this inn to consider what plan to adopt, and also to
dine, for it is now time."

sancho said they might go in, but that he would wait there outside, and
that he would tell them afterwards the reason why he was unwilling, and
why it did not suit him to enter it; but he begged them to bring him out
something to eat, and to let it be hot, and also to bring barley for
rocinante. they left him and went in, and presently the barber brought
him out something to eat. by-and-by, after they had between them
carefully thought over what they should do to carry out their object, the
curate hit upon an idea very well adapted to humour don quixote, and
effect their purpose; and his notion, which he explained to the barber,
was that he himself should assume the disguise of a wandering damsel,
while the other should try as best he could to pass for a squire, and
that they should thus proceed to where don quixote was, and he,
 
 ___________________________
 
the same time she should entreat him not to
require her to remove her mask, nor ask her any question touching her
circumstances until he had righted her with the wicked knight. and he had
no doubt that don quixote would comply with any request made in these
terms, and that in this way they might remove him and take him to his own
village, where they would endeavour to find out if his extraordinary
madness admitted of any kind of remedy.




chapter xxvii.

of how the curate and the barber proceeded with their scheme; together
with other matters worthy of record in this great history


the curate's plan did not seem a bad one to the barber, but on the
contrary so good that they immediately set about putting it in execution.
they begged a petticoat and hood of the landlady, leaving her in pledge a
new cassock of the curate's; and the barber made a beard out of a
grey-brown or red ox-tail in which the landlord used to stick his comb.
the landlady asked them what they wante
 
 ___________________________
 
s well as the petticoat must have been
made in the time of king wamba. the curate would not let them hood him,
but put on his head a little quilted linen cap which he used for a
night-cap, and bound his forehead with a strip of black silk, while with
another he made a mask with which he concealed his beard and face very
well. he then put on his hat, which was broad enough to serve him for an
umbrella, and enveloping himself in his cloak seated himself
woman-fashion on his mule, while the barber mounted his with a beard down
to the waist of mingled red and white, for it was, as has been said, the
tail of a clay-red ox.

they took leave of all, and of the good maritornes, who, sinner as she
was, promised to pray a rosary of prayers that god might grant them
success in such an arduous and christian undertaking as that they had in
hand. but hardly had he sallied forth from the inn when it struck the
curate that he was doing wrong in rigging himself out in that fashion, as
it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
an indecorous thing for a priest to dress himself that way even
though much might depend upon it; and saying so to the barber he begged
him to change dresses, as it was fitter he should be the distressed
damsel, while he himself would play the squire's part, which would be
less derogatory to his dignity; otherwise he was resolved to have nothing
more to do with the matter, and let the devil take don quixote. just at
this moment sancho came up, and on seeing the pair in such a costume he
was unable to restrain his laughter; the barber, however, agreed to do as
the curate wished, and, altering their plan, the cur
 
 ___________________________
 
ate went on to
instruct him how to play his part and what to say to don quixote to
induce and compel him to come with them and give up his fancy for the
place he had chosen for his idle penance. the barber told him he could
manage it properly without any instruction, and as he did not care to
dress himself up until they were near where don quixote was, he folded up
the garments, and the curate adjusted his beard, and they set out under
the guidance of sancho panza, who went along telling them of the
encounter with the madman they met in the sierra, saying nothing,
however, about the finding of the valise and its contents; for with all
his simplicity the lad was a trifle covetous.

the ne
 
 ___________________________
 
long discourse and story, as full of
misfortune as it was of love; but just as the curate was going to address
some words of comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that reached his
ear, saying in melancholy tones what will be told in the fourth part of
this narrative; for at this point the sage and sagacious historian, cide
hamete benengeli, brought the third to a conclusion.




chapter xxviii.

which treats of the strange and delightful adventure that befell the
curate and the barber in the same sierra


happy and fortunate were the times when that most daring knight don
quixote of la mancha was sent into the world; for by reason of his having
formed a resolution so honourable as that of seeking to revive and
restore to the world the long-lost and almost defunct order of
knight-errantry, we now enjoy in this age of ours, so poor in light
entertainment, not only the charm of his veracious history, but also of
the tales and episodes contained in it which are, in a me
 
 ___________________________
 
usehold, and so
thickly veiled and so shy, that my eyes scarcely saw more ground than i
trod on), in spite of all this, the eyes of love, or idleness, more
properly speaking, that the lynx's cannot rival, discovered me, with the
help of the assiduity of don fernando; for that is the name of the
younger son of the duke i told of."

the moment the speaker mentioned the name of don fernando, cardenio
changed colour and broke into a sweat, with such signs of emotion that
the curate and the barber, who observed it, feared that one of the mad
fits which they heard attacked him sometimes was coming upon him; but
cardenio showed no further agitation and remained quiet, regarding the
peasant girl with fixed attention, for he began to suspect who she was.
she, however, without noticing the excitement of cardenio, continuing her
story, went on to say:

"and they had hardly discovered me, when, as he owned afterwards, he was
smitten with a violent love for me, as the manner in which it 
 
 ___________________________
 
er, she attempted to kiss his feet;
but cardenio would not permit it, and the licentiate replied for both,
commended the sound reasoning of cardenio, and lastly, begged, advised,
and urged them to come with him to his village, where they might furnish
themselves with what they needed, and take measures to discover don
fernando, or restore dorothea to her parents, or do what seemed to them
most advisable. cardenio and dorothea thanked him, and accepted the kind
offer he made them; and the barber, who had been listening to all
attentively and in silence, on his part some kindly words also, and with
no less good-will than the curate offered his services in any way that
might be of use to them. he also explained to them in a few words the
object that had brought them there, and the strange nature of don
quixote's madness, and how they were waiting for his squire, who had gone
in search of him. like the recollection of a dream, the quarrel he had
had with don quixote came back to ca
 
 ___________________________
 
isk of not becoming an emperor as
in duty bound, or even an archbishop, which was the least he could be;
for which reason they ought to consider what was to be done to get him
away from there. the licentiate in reply told him not to be uneasy, for
they would fetch him away in spite of himself. he then told cardenio and
dorothea what they had proposed to do to cure don quixote, or at any rate
take him home; upon which dorothea said that she could play the
distressed damsel better than the barber; especially as she had there the
dress in which to do it to the life, and that they might trust to her
acting the part in every particular requisite for carrying out their
scheme, for she had read a great many books of chivalry, and knew exactly
the style in which afflicted damsels begged boons of knights-errant.

"in that case," said the curate, "there is nothing more required than to
set about it at once, for beyond a doubt fortune is declaring itself in
our favour, since it has so un
 
 ___________________________
 
n guinea queens have the same way of taking
the names of their kingdoms."

"so it may," said the curate; "and as for your master's marrying, i will
do all in my power towards it:" with which sancho was as much pleased as
the curate was amazed at his simplicity and at seeing what a hold the
absurdities of his master had taken of his fancy, for he had evidently
persuaded himself that he was going to be an emperor.

by this time dorothea had seated herself upon the curate's mule, and the
barber had fitted the ox-tail beard to his face, and they now told sancho
to conduct them to where don quixote was, warning him not to say that he
knew either the licentiate or the barber, as his master's becoming an
emperor entirely depended on his not recognising them; neither the curate
nor cardenio, however, thought fit to go with them; cardenio lest he
should remind don quixote of the quarrel he had with him, and the curate
as there was no necessity for his presence just yet, so they allowe
 
 ___________________________
 
ollowed slowly on
foot. the curate did not forget to instruct dorothea how to act, but she
said they might make their minds easy, as everything would be done
exactly as the books of chivalry required and described.

they had gone about three-quarters of a league when they discovered don
quixote in a wilderness of rocks, by this time clothed, but without his
armour; and as soon as dorothea saw him and was told by sancho that that
was don quixote, she whipped her palfrey, the well-bearded barber
following her, and on coming up to him her squire sprang from his mule
and came forward to receive her in his arms, and she dismounting with
great ease of manner advanced to kneel before the feet of don quixote;
and though he strove to raise her up, she without rising addressed him in
this fashion:

"from this spot i will not rise, valiant and doughty knight, until your
goodness and courtesy grant me a boon, which will redound to the honour
and renown of your person and render a servic
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs a polished and courteous knight, would
by no means allow it, but made her rise and embraced her with great
courtesy and politeness, and ordered sancho to look to rocinante's
girths, and to arm him without a moment's delay. sancho took down the
armour, which was hung up on a tree like a trophy, and having seen to the
girths armed his master in a trice, who as soon as he found himself in
his armour exclaimed:

"let us be gone in the name of god to bring aid to this great lady."

the barber was all this time on his knees at great pains to hide his
laughter and not let his beard fall, for had it fallen maybe their fine
scheme would have come to nothing; but now seeing the boon granted, and
the promptitude with which don quixote prepared to set out in compliance
with it, he rose and took his lady's hand, and between them they placed
her upon the mule. don quixote then mounted rocinante, and the barber
settled himself on his beast, sancho being left to go on foot, which made
h
 
 ___________________________
 
 will i consent to, senor licentiate," answered don
quixote, "and i know it will be the good pleasure of my lady the
princess, out of love for me, to order her squire to give up the saddle
of his mule to your worship, and he can sit behind if the beast will bear
it."

"it will, i am sure," said the princess, "and i am sure, too, that i need
not order my squire, for he is too courteous and considerate to allow a
churchman to go on foot when he might be mounted."

"that he is," said the barber, and at once alighting, he offered his
saddle to the curate, who accepted it without much entreaty; but
unfortunately as the barber was mounting behind, the mule, being as it
happened a hired one, which is the same thing as saying ill-conditioned,
lifted its hind hoofs and let fly a couple of kicks in the air, which
would have made master nicholas wish his expedition in quest of don
quixote at the devil had they caught him on the breast or head. as it
was, they so took him by surprise th
 
 ___________________________
 
 torn and lacerated, and when it could heal all that it
must be good for more than beards.

"and so it is," said the curate, and he promised to teach it to him on
the first opportunity. they then agreed that for the present the curate
should mount, and that the three should ride by turns until they reached
the inn, which might be about six leagues from where they were.

three then being mounted, that is to say, don quixote, the princess, and
the curate, and three on foot, cardenio, the barber, and sancho panza,
don quixote said to the damsel:

"let your highness, lady, lead on whithersoever is most pleasing to you;"
but before she could answer the licentiate said:

"towards what kingdom would your ladyship direct our course? is it
perchance towards that of micomicon? it must be, or else i know little
about kingdoms."

she, being ready on all points, understood that she was to answer "yes,"
so she said "yes, senor, my way lies towards that kingdom."

"in that case," said
 
 ___________________________
 
haste ears. i will only say, senora, that whether it has
might or not, that which it may or may not have shall be devoted to your
service even to death; and now, leaving this to its proper season, i
would ask the senor licentiate to tell me what it is that has brought him
into these parts, alone, unattended, and so lightly clad that i am filled
with amazement."

"i will answer that briefly," replied the curate; "you must know then,
senor don quixote, that master nicholas, our friend and barber, and i
were going to seville to receive some money that a relative of mine who
went to the indies many years ago had sent me, and not such a small sum
but that it was over sixty thousand pieces of eight, full weight, which
is something; and passing by this place yesterday we were attacked by
four footpads, who stripped us even to our beards, and them they stripped
off so that the barber found it necessary to put on a false one, and even
this young man here"-pointing to cardenio--"they co
 
 ___________________________
 
coundrel as they, or some man without heart or conscience to let
the wolf loose among the sheep, the fox among the hens, the fly among the
honey. he has defrauded justice, and opposed his king and lawful master,
for he opposed his just commands; he has, i say, robbed the galleys of
their feet, stirred up the holy brotherhood which for many years past has
been quiet, and, lastly, has done a deed by which his soul may be lost
without any gain to his body." sancho had told the curate and the barber
of the adventure of the galley slaves, which, so much to his glory, his
master had achieved, and hence the curate in alluding to it made the most
of it to see what would be said or done by don quixote; who changed
colour at every word, not daring to say that it was he who had been the
liberator of those worthy people. "these, then," said the curate, "were
they who robbed us; and god in his mercy pardon him who would not let
them go to the punishment they deserved."




chapter xxx.
 
 ___________________________
 
ered a chaplet
or string of miserable and unfortunate people, and did for them what my
sense of duty demands of me, and as for the rest be that as it may; and
whoever takes objection to it, saving the sacred dignity of the senor
licentiate and his honoured person, i say he knows little about chivalry
and lies like a whoreson villain, and this i will give him to know to the
fullest extent with my sword;" and so saying he settled himself in his
stirrups and pressed down his morion; for the barber's basin, which
according to him was mambrino's helmet, he carried hanging at the
saddle-bow until he could repair the damage done to it by the galley
slaves.

dorothea, who was shrewd and sprightly, and by this time thoroughly
understood don quixote's crazy turn, and that all except sancho panza
were making game of him, not to be behind the rest said to him, on
observing his irritation, "sir knight, remember the boon you have
promised me, and that in accordance with it you must not eng
 
 ___________________________
 
tion to do
so, what is the nature of your trouble, and how many, who, and what are
the persons of whom i am to require due satisfaction, and on whom i am to
take vengeance on your behalf?"

"that i will do with all my heart," replied dorothea, "if it will not be
wearisome to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes."

"it will not be wearisome, senora," said don quixote; to which dorothea
replied, "well, if that be so, give me your attention." as soon as she
said this, cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted dorothea would invent for herself;
and sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the saddle, and
with the help of coughing and other preliminaries taken time to think,
began with great sprightliness of manner in this fashion.

"first of all, i would have you know, sirs, that my name is-" and here
she stopped for a moment, for she forgot the
 
 ___________________________
 
f hearty satisfaction, which don
quixote received with dignity and gravity, and bade them make up a better
bed for him than the last time: to which the landlady replied that if he
paid better than he did the last time she would give him one fit for a
prince. don quixote said he would, so they made up a tolerable one for
him in the same garret as before; and he lay down at once, being sorely
shaken and in want of sleep.

no sooner was the door shut upon him than the landlady made at the
barber, and seizing him by the beard, said:

"by my faith you are not going to make a beard of my tail any longer; you
must give me back tail, for it is a shame the way that thing of my
husband's goes tossing about on the floor; i mean the comb that i used to
stick in my good tail."

but for all she tugged at it the barber would not give it up until the
licentiate told him to let her have it, as there was now no further
occasion for that stratagem, because he might declare himself and appear
 
 ___________________________
 

in his own character, and tell don quixote that he had fled to this inn
when those thieves the galley slaves robbed him; and should he ask for
the princess's squire, they could tell him that she had sent him on
before her to give notice to the people of her kingdom that she was
coming, and bringing with her the deliverer of them all. on this the
barber cheerfully restored the tail to the landlady, and at the same time
they returned all the accessories they had borrowed to effect don
quixote's deliverance. all the people of the inn were struck with
astonishment at the beauty of dorothea, and even at the comely figure of
the shepherd cardenio. the curate made them get ready such fare as there
was in the inn, and the landlord, in hope of better payment, served them
up a tolerably good dinner. all this time don quixote was asleep, and
they
 
 ___________________________
 
nd going into his own room he brought out
an old valise secured with a little chain, on opening which the curate
found in it three large books and some manuscripts written in a very good
hand. the first that he opened he found to be "don cirongilio of thrace,"
and the second "don felixmarte of hircania," and the other the "history
of the great captain gonzalo hernandez de cordova, with the life of diego
garcia de paredes."

when the curate read the two first titles he looked over at the barber
and said, "we want my friend's housekeeper and niece here now."

"nay," said the barber, "i can do just as well to carry them to the yard
or to the hearth, and there is a very good fire there."

"what! your worship would burn my books!" said the landlord.

"only these two," said the curate, "don cirongilio, and felixmarte."

"are my books, then, heretics or phlegmaties that you want to burn them?"
said the landlord.

"schismatics you mean, friend," said the barber, "not phlegmatics
 
 ___________________________
 
ingdom of micomicon, and was engaged in
combat with his enemy; and believing he was laying on the giant, he had
given so many sword cuts to the skins that the whole room was full of
wine. on seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on don
quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way,
that if cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have
brought the war of the giant to an end. but in spite of all the poor
gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold water
from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on which don
quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what was the
matter. dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was, would not
go in to witness the battle between her champion and her opponent. as for
sancho, he went searching all over the floor for the head of the giant,
and not finding it he said, "i see now that it's all enchantment in this
house; for the last time,
 
 ___________________________
 
se i gave you, since by the help of god on high
and by the favour of her by whom i live and breathe, i have fulfilled it
so successfully."

"did not i say so?" said sancho on hearing this. "you see i wasn't drunk;
there you see my master has already salted the giant; there's no doubt
about the bulls; my county is all right!"

who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master and
man? and laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed himself; but
at length the barber, cardenio, and the curate contrived with no small
trouble to get don quixote on the bed, and he fell asleep with every
appearance of excessive weariness. they left him to sleep, and came out
to the gate of the inn to console sancho panza on not having found the
head of the giant; but much more work had they to appease the landlord,
who was furious at the sudden death of his wine-skins; and said the
landlady half scolding, half crying, "at an evil moment and in an unlucky
hour he came int
 
 ___________________________
 
not what caused it. the
gentleman grasped her firmly by the shoulders, and being so fully
occupied with holding her back, he was unable to put a hand to his veil
which was falling off, as it did at length entirely, and dorothea, who
was holding the lady in her arms, raising her eyes saw that he who
likewise held her was her husband, don fernando. the instant she
recognised him, with a prolonged plaintive cry drawn from the depths of
her heart, she fell backwards fainting, and but for the barber being
close by to catch her in his arms, she would have fallen completely to
the ground. the curate at once hastened to uncover her face and throw
water on it, and as he did so don fernando, for he it was who held the
other in his arms, recognised her and stood as if death-stricken by the
sight; not, however, relaxing his grasp of luscinda, for it was she that
was struggling to release herself from his hold, having recognised
cardenio by his voice, as he had recognised her. cardenio also
 
 ___________________________
 

thou wilt prove the generosity of thy lofty noble spirit, and the world
shall see that with thee reason has more influence than passion."

all the time dorothea was speaking, cardenio, though he held luscinda in
his arms, never took his eyes off don fernando, determined, if he saw him
make any hostile movement, to try and defend himself and resist as best
he could all who might assail him, though it should cost him his life.
but now don fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the barber, who
had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy sancho panza,
ran forward and gathered round don fernando, entreating him to have
regard for the tears of dorothea, and not suffer her reasonable hopes to
be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed, what she said was but
the truth; and bidding him observe that it was not, as it might seem, by
accident, but by a special disposition of providence that they had all
met in a place where no one could have expected a meeting. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 took their seats at a long table like a refectory one, for round or
square table there was none in the inn, and the seat of honour at the
head of it, though he was for refusing it, they assigned to don quixote,
who desired the lady micomicona to place herself by his side, as he was
her protector. luscinda and zoraida took their places next her, opposite
to them were don fernando and cardenio, and next the captive and the
other gentlemen, and by the side of the ladies, the curate and the
barber. and so they supped in high enjoyment, which was increased when
they observed don quixote leave off eating, and, moved by an impulse like
that which made him deliver himself at such length when he supped with
the goatherds, begin to address them:

"verily, gentlemen, if we reflect upon it, great and marvellous are the
things they see, who make profession of the order of knight-errantry.
say, what being is there in this world, who entering the gate of this
castle at this moment, and seei
 
 ___________________________
 
iness in which his life, honour, and heart were
at stake. the servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would
not return without him, and that they would take him away whether he
liked it or not.

"you shall not do that," replied don luis, "unless you take me dead;
though however you take me, it will be without life."

by this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the dispute,
but particularly cardenio, don fernando, his companions, the judge, the
curate, the barber, and don quixote; for he now considered there was no
necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer. cardenio being
already acquainted with the young man's story, asked the men who wanted
to take him away, what object they had in seeking to carry off this youth
against his will.

"our object," said one of the four, "is to save the life of his father,
who is in danger of losing it through this gentleman's disappearance."

upon this don luis exclaimed, "there is no need to make 
 
 ___________________________
 
t possible, he would have
preferred that it should be brought about with the consent of the father
of don luis, who he knew looked for a title for his son.

the guests had by this time made peace with the landlord, for, by
persuasion and don quixote's fair words more than by threats, they had
paid him what he demanded, and the servants of don luis were waiting for
the end of the conversation with the judge and their master's decision,
when the devil, who never sleeps, contrived that the barber, from whom
don quixote had taken mambrino's helmet, and sancho panza the trappings
of his ass in exchange for those of his own, should at this instant enter
the inn; which said barber, as he led his ass to the stable, observed
sancho panza engaged in repairing something or other belonging to the
pack-saddle; and the moment he saw it he knew it, and made bold to attack
sancho, exclaiming, "ho, sir thief, i have caught you! hand over my basin
and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou robbed me of."

sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing the abuse
poured upon him, seized the pack-saddle with one hand, and with the other
gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood. the barber,
however, was not so ready to relinquish the prize he had made in the
pack-saddle; on the contrary, he raised such an outcry that everyone in
the inn came running to know what the noise and quarrel meant. "here, in
the name of the king and justice!" he cried, "this thief and highwayman
wants to kill me for trying to recover my property."

"you lie," said sancho, "i am no highwayman; it was in fair war my master
don quixote won these spoils."

don quixote was standing by at the time, h
 
 ___________________________
 
ighly pleased to see his
squire's stoutness, both offensive and defensive, and from that time
forth he reckoned him a man of mettle, and in his heart resolved to dub
him a knight on the first opportunity that presented itself, feeling sure
that the order of chivalry would be fittingly bestowed upon him.

in the course of the altercation, among other things the barber said,
"gentlemen, this pack-saddle is mine as surely as i owe god a death, and
i know it as well as if i had given birth to it, and here is my ass in
the stable who will not let me lie; only try it, and if it does not fit
him like a glove, call me a rascal; and what is more, the same day i was
robbed of this, they robbed me likewise of a new brass basin, never yet
handselled, that would fetch a crown any day."

at this don quixote could not keep himself from answering; and
interposing 
 
 ___________________________
 
rom the time my master
won it until now he has only fought one battle in it, when he let loose
those unlucky men in chains; and if had not been for this basin-helmet he
would not have come off over well that time, for there was plenty of
stone-throwing in that affair."




chapter xlv.

in which the doubtful question of mambrino's helmet and the pack-saddle
is finally settled, with other adventures that occurred in truth and
earnest


"what do you think now, gentlemen," said the barber, "of what these
gentles say, when they want to make out that this is a helmet?"

"and whoever says the contrary," said don quixote, "i will let him know
he lies if he is a knight, and if he is a squire that he lies again a
thousand times."

our own barber, who was present at all this, and understood don quixote's
humour so thoroughly, took it into his head to back up his delusion and
carry on the joke for the general amusement; so addressing the other
barber he said:

"senor barber,
 
 ___________________________
 
 or whatever you are, you must know that i belong to your
profession too, and have had a licence to practise for more than twenty
years, and i know the implements of the barber craft, every one of them,
perfectly well; and i was likewise a soldier for some time in the days of
my youth, and i know also what a helmet is, and a morion, and a headpiece
with a visor, and other things pertaining to soldiering, i meant to say
to soldiers' arms; and i say-saving better opinions and always with
submission to sounder judgments--that this piece we have now before us,
which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is no barber's
basin, but is as far from being one 
 
 ___________________________
 
as white is from black, and truth
from falsehood; i say, moreover, that this, although it is a helmet, is
not a complete helmet."

"certainly not," said don quixote, "for half of it is wanting, that is to
say the beaver."

"it is quite true," said the curate, who saw the object of his friend the
barber; and cardenio, don fernando and his companions agreed with him,
and even the judge, if his thoughts had not been so full of don luis's
affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so taken up
with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid little or no
attention to these facetious proceedings.

"god bless me!" exclaimed their butt the barber at this; "is it possible
that such an honourable company can say that this is not a basin but a
helmet? why, this is a thing
 
 ___________________________
 
the result clearly and
fully."

to those who were in the secret of don quixote's humour all this afforded
great amusement; but to those who knew nothing about it, it seemed the
greatest nonsense in the world, in particular to the four servants of don
luis, as well as to don luis himself, and to three other travellers who
had by chance come to the inn, and had the appearance of officers of the
holy brotherhood, as indeed they were; but the one who above all was at
his wits' end, was the barber whose basin, there before his very eyes, had been
turned into mambrino's helmet, and whose pack-saddle he had no doubt
whatever was about to become a rich caparison for a horse. all laughed to
see don fernando going from one to another collecting the votes, and
whispering to them to give him their private opinion whether the treasure
over which there had been so much fighting was a pack-saddle or a
caparison; but after he had taken the votes of those who knew don
quixote, he said aloud, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 fact is, my good fellow, that i am tired
collecting such a number of opinions, for i find that there is not one of
whom i ask what i desire to know, who does not tell me that it is absurd
to say that this is the pack-saddle of an ass, and not the caparison of a
horse, nay, of a thoroughbred horse; so you must submit, for, in spite of
you and your ass, this is a caparison and no pack-saddle, and you have
stated and proved your case very badly."

"may i never share heaven," said the poor barber, "if your worships are
not all mistaken; and may my soul appear before god as that appears to me
a pack-saddle and not a caparison; but, 'laws go,'-i say no more; and
indeed i am not drunk, for i am fasting, except it be from sin."

the simple talk of the barber did not afford less amusement than the
absurdities of don quixote, who now observed:

"there is no more to be done now than for each to take what belongs to
him, and to whom god has given it, may st. peter add his blessing."

 
 ___________________________
 
f to believe that men so intelligent as those
present are, or seem to be, can venture to declare and assert that this
is not a basin, and that not a pack-saddle; but as i perceive that they
do assert and declare it, i can only come to the conclusion that there is
some mystery in this persistence in what is so opposed to the evidence of
experience and truth itself; for i swear by"--and here he rapped out a
round oath-"all the people in the world will not make me believe that
this is not a barber's basin and that a jackass's pack-saddle."

"it might easily be a she-ass's," observed the curate.

"it is all the same," said the servant; "that is not the point; but
whether it is or is not a pack-saddle, as your worships say."

on hearing this one of the newly arrived officers of the brotherhood, who
had been listening to the dispute and controversy, unable to restrain his
anger and impatience, exclaimed, "it is a pack-saddle as sure as my
father is my father, and whoever has said 
 
 ___________________________
 
had not the officer dodged it, it would have stretched him
at full length. the pike was shivered in pieces against the ground, and
the rest of the officers, seeing their comrade assaulted, raised a shout,
calling for help for the holy brotherhood. the landlord, who was of the
fraternity, ran at once to fetch his staff of office and his sword, and
ranged himself on the side of his comrades; the servants of don luis
clustered round him, lest he should escape from them in the confusion;
the barber, seeing the house turned upside down, once more laid hold of
his pack-saddle and sancho did the same; don quixote drew his sword and
charged the officers; don luis cried out to his servants to leave him
alone and go and help don quixote, and cardenio and don fernando, who
were supporting him; the curate was shouting at the top of his voice, the
landlady was screaming, her daughter was wailing, maritornes was weeping,
dorothea was aghast, luscinda terror-stricken, and dona clara in a faint
 
 ___________________________
 
.
the barber cudgelled sancho, and sancho pommelled the barber; don luis
gave one of his servants, who ventured to catch him by the arm to keep
him from escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood; the judge took
his part; don fernando had got one of the officers down and was
belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised his voice again calling for
help for the holy brotherhood; so that the whole inn was nothing but
cries, shouts, shrieks, confusion, terror, dismay, mishaps, sword-cuts,
fisticuffs, cudgellings, kicks, and bloodshed; and in the m
 
 ___________________________
 
ing, and all at cross purposes. come then, you,
senor judge, and you, senor curate; let the one represent king agramante
and the other king sobrino, and make peace among us; for by god almighty
it is a sorry business that so many persons of quality as we are should
slay one another for such trifling cause." the officers, who did not
understand don quixote's mode of speaking, and found themselves roughly
handled by don fernando, cardenio, and their companions, were not to be
appeased; the barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle
were the worse for the struggle; sancho like a good servant obeyed the
slightest word of his master; while the four servants of don luis kept
quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so. the landlord
alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of this
madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at length
the uproar was stilled for the present; the pack-saddle remained a
caparison till th
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
once taken they might let him go three hundred times if they liked.

"for all that," said the curate, "you must not take him away this time,
nor will he, it is my opinion, let himself be taken away."

in short, the curate used such arguments, and don quixote did such mad
things, that the officers would have been more mad than he was if they
had not perceived his want of wits, and so they thought it best to allow
themselves to be pacified, and even to act as peacemakers between the
barber and sancho panza, who still continued their altercation with much
bitterness. in the end they, as officers of justice, settled the question
by arbitration in such a manner that both sides were, if not perfectly
contented, at least to some extent satisfied; for they changed the
pack-saddles, but not the girths or head-stalls; and as to mambrino's
helmet, the curate, under the rose and without don quixote's knowing it,
paid eight reals for the basin, and the barber executed a full receipt

 
 ___________________________
 
ng to a happy issue; for the
servants agreed to do as don luis wished; which gave dona clara such
happiness that no one could have looked into her face just then without
seeing the joy of her heart. zoraida, though she did not fully comprehend
all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she watched and
studied the various countenances, but particularly her spaniard's, whom
she followed with her eyes and clung to with her soul. the gift and
compensation which the curate gave the barber had not escaped the
landlord's notice, and he demanded don quixote's reckoning, together with
the amount of the damage to his wine-skins, and the loss of his wine,
swearing that neither rocinante nor sancho's ass should leave the inn
until he had been paid to the very last farthing. the curate settled all
amicably, and don fernando paid; though the judge had also very readily
offered to pay the score; and all became so peaceful and quiet that the
inn no longer reminded one of the discord
 
 ___________________________
 
nd simple truth,
without any deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by
beings of flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms,
as his master believed and protested.

the illustrious company had now been two days in the inn; and as it
seemed to them time to depart, they devised a plan so that, without
giving dorothea and don fernando the trouble of going back with don
quixote to his village under pretence of restoring queen micomicona, the
curate and the barber might carry him away with them as they proposed,
and the curate be able to take his madness in hand at home; and in
pursuance of their plan they arranged with the owner of an oxcart who
happened to be passing that way to carry him after this fashion. they
constructed a kind of cage with wooden bars, large enough to hold don
quixote comfortably; and then don fernando and his companions, the
servants of don luis, and the officers of the brotherhood, together with
the landlord, by the direc
 
 ___________________________
 
r's infirmity, did not fail to perceive who all these
disguised figures were; but he did not dare to open his lips until he saw
what came of this assault and capture of his master; nor did the latter
utter a word, waiting to the upshot of his mishap; which was that
bringing in the cage, they shut him up in it and nailed the bars so
firmly that they could not be easily burst open.

they then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of the room
an awful voice--as much so as the barber, not he of the pack-saddle but
the other, was able to make it--was heard to say, "o knight of the rueful
countenance, let not this captivity in which thou art placed afflict
thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy accomplishment of the
adventure in which thy great heart has engaged thee; the which shall be
accomplished when the raging manchegan lion and the white tobosan dove
shall be linked together, having first humbled their haughty necks to the
gentle yoke of matrimony. and
 
 ___________________________
 
ve in aught offended you;
for intentionally and wittingly i have never done so to any; and pray to
god that he deliver me from this captivity to which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should i find myself released therefrom,
the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle shall be held in
memory by me, that i may acknowledge, recognise, and requite them as they
deserve."

while this was passing between the ladies of the castle and don quixote,
the curate and the barber bade farewell to don fernando and his
companions, to the captain, his brother, and the ladies, now all made
happy, and in particular to dorothea and luscinda. they all embraced one
another, and promised to let each other know how things went with them,
and don fernando directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him
what became of don quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that
could give him more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his
part, would send him word
 
 ___________________________
 
had not since returned; for, as he could
not read, he did not want them himself. the curate thanked him, and
opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the words, "novel
of rinconete and cortadillo," by which he perceived that it was a novel,
and as that of "the ill-advised curiosity" had been good he concluded
this would be so too, as they were both probably by the same author; so
he kept it, intending to read it when he had an opportunity. he then
mounted and his friend the barber did the same, both masked, so as not to
be recognised by don quixote, and set out following in the rear of the
cart. the order of march was this: first went the cart with the owner
leading it; at each side of it marched the officers of the brotherhood,
as has been said, with their muskets; then followed sancho panza on his
ass, leading rocinante by the bridle; and behind all came the curate and
the barber on their mighty mules, with faces covered, as aforesaid, and a
grave and serious ai
 
 ___________________________
 
r, measuring their pace to suit the slow steps of the
oxen. don quixote was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his
feet stretched out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as
if he were a stone statue and not a man of flesh. thus slowly and
silently they made, it might be, two leagues, until they reached a valley
which the carter thought a convenient place for resting and feeding his
oxen, and he said so to the curate, but the barber was of opinion that
they ought to push on a little farther, as at the other side of a hill
which appeared close by he knew there was a valley that had more grass
and much better than the one where they proposed to halt; and his advice
was taken and they continued their journey.

just at that moment the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them
six or seven mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook
them, for they were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace o
 
 ___________________________
 
f
oxen, but like men who rode canons' mules, and in haste to take their
noontide rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a
league off. the quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in fact,
a canon of toledo and master of the others who accompanied him, observing
the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers, sancho,
rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all don quixote caged and
confined, could not help asking what was the meaning of carrying the man
in that fashion; though, from the badges of the officers, he already
concluded that he must be some desperate highwayman or other malefactor
whose punishment fell within the jurisdiction of the holy brotherhood.
one of the officers to whom he had put the question, replied, "let the
gentleman himself tell you the meaning of his going this way, senor, for
we do not know."

don qu
 
 ___________________________
 
ixote overheard the conversation and said, "haply, gentlemen, you
are versed and learned in matters of errant chivalry? because if you are
i will tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving
myself the trouble of relating them;" but here the curate and the barber,
seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with don quixote,
came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save their stratagem
from being discovered.

the canon, replying to don quixote, said, "in truth, brother, i know more
about books of chivalry than i do about villalpando's elements of logic;
so if that be all, you may safely tell me what you please."

"in god's name, then, senor," replied don quixote; "if that be so, i
would have you know that i am held ench
 
 ___________________________
 
rn to them a governor or viceroy of some island or
kingdom, they will see him come back a horse-boy. i have said all this,
senor curate, only to urge your paternity to lay to your conscience your
ill-treatment of my master; and have a care that god does not call you to
account in another life for making a prisoner of him in this way, and
charge against you all the succours and good deeds that my lord don
quixote leaves undone while he is shut up.

"trim those lamps there!" exclaimed the barber at this; "so you are of
the same fraternity as your master, too, sancho? by god, i begin to see
that you will have to keep him company in the cage, and be enchanted like
him for having caught some of his humour and chivalry. it was an evil
hour when you let yourself be got with child by his promises, and that
island you long so much for found its way into your head."

"i am not with child by anyone," returned sancho, "nor am i a man to let
myself be got with child, if it was by the king
 
 ___________________________
 
 himself. though i am poor
i am an old christian, and i owe nothing to nobody, and if i long for an
island, other people long for worse. each of us is the son of his own
works; and being a man i may come to be pope, not to say governor of an
island, especially as my master may win so many that he will not know
whom to give them to. mind how you talk, master barber; for shaving is
not everything, and there is some difference between peter and peter. i
say this because we all know one another, and it will not do to throw
false dice with me; and as to the enchantment of my master, god knows the
truth; leave it as it is; it only makes it worse to stir it."

the barber did not care to answer sancho lest by his plain speaking he
should disclose what the curate and he himself were trying so hard to
conceal; and under the same apprehension the curate had
 
 ___________________________
 
 would appear with all the perfections you have
described, enriching our language with the gracious and precious treasure
of eloquence, and driving the old books into obscurity before the light
of the new ones that would come out for the harmless entertainment, not
merely of the idle but of the very busiest; for the bow cannot be always
bent, nor can weak human nature exist without some lawful amusement."

the canon and the curate had proceeded thus far with their conversation,
when the barber, coming forward, joined them, and said to the curate,
"this is the spot, senor licentiate, that i said was a good one for fresh
and plentiful pasture for the oxen, while we take our noontide rest."

"and so it seems," returned the curate, and he told the canon what he
proposed to do, on which he too made up his mind to halt with them,
attracted by the aspect of the fair valley that lay before their eyes;
and to enjoy it as well as the conversation of the curate, to whom he had
begun to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ght be for the whole party, as he meant to rest for the afternoon where
he was; to which one of his servants replied that the sumpter mule, which
by this time ought to have reached the inn, carried provisions enough to
make it unnecessary to get anything from the inn except barley.

"in that case," said the canon, "take all the beasts there, and bring the
sumpter mule back."

while this was going on, sancho, perceiving that he could speak to his
master without having the curate and the barber, of whom he had his
suspicions, present all the time, approached the cage in which don
quixote was placed, and said, "senor, to ease my conscience i want to
tell you the state of the case as to your enchantment, and that is that
these two here, with their faces covered, are the curate of our village
and the barber; and i suspect they have hit upon this plan of carrying
you off in this fashion, out of pure envy because your worship surpasses
them in doing famous deeds; and if this be the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 follows that you
are not enchanted, but hoodwinked and made a fool of. and to prove this i
want to ask you one thing; and if you answer me as i believe you will
answer, you will be able to lay your finger on the trick, and you will
see that you are not enchanted but gone wrong in your wits."

"ask what thou wilt, sancho my son," returned don quixote, "for i will
satisfy thee and answer all thou requirest. as to what thou sayest, that
these who accompany us yonder are the curate and the barber, our
neighbours and acquaintances, it is very possible that they may seem to
be those same persons; but that they are so in reality and in fact,
believe it not on any account; what thou art to believe and think is
that, if they look like them, as thou sayest, it must be that those who
have enchanted me have taken this shape and likeness; for it is easy for
enchanters to take any form they please, and they may have taken those of
our friends in order to make thee think as thou dost, and l
 
 ___________________________
 
ead thee into
a labyrinth of fancies from which thou wilt find no escape though thou
hadst the cord of theseus; and they may also have done it to make me
uncertain in my mind, and unable to conjecture whence this evil comes to
me; for if on the one hand thou dost tell me that the barber and curate
of our village are here in company with us, and on the other i find
myself shut up in a cage, and know in my heart that no power on earth
that was not supernatural would have been able to shut me in, what
wouldst thou have me say or think, but that my enchantment is of a sort
that transcends all i have ever read of in all the histories that deal
with knights-errant that have been enchanted? so thou mayest set thy mind
at rest as to the idea that they are what thou sayest, for 
 
 ___________________________
 
h your worship, if so be you are so unfortunate,
or i so stupid, as not to be able to carry out my plan."

"i am content to do as thou sayest, brother sancho," said don quixote,
"and when thou seest an opportunity for effecting my release i will obey
thee absolutely; but thou wilt see, sancho, how mistaken thou art in thy
conception of my misfortune."

the knight-errant and the ill-errant squire kept up their conversation
till they reached the place where the curate, the canon, and the barber,
who had already dismounted, were waiting for them. the carter at once
unyoked the oxen and left them to roam at large about the pleasant green
spot, the freshness of which seemed to invite, not enchanted people like
don quixote, but wide-awake, sensible folk like his squire, who begged
the curate to allow his master to leave the cage for a little; for if
they did not let him out, the prison might not be as clean as the
propriety of such a gentleman as his master required. the curate
un
 
 ___________________________
 
t no violence of any kind is to be offered to
any damsel. but i trust in god our lord that the might of one malignant
enchanter may not prove so great but that the power of another better
disposed may prove superior to it, and then i promise you my support and
assistance, as i am bound to do by my profession, which is none other
than to give aid to the weak and needy."

the goatherd eyed him, and noticing don quixote's sorry appearance and
looks, he was filled with wonder, and asked the barber, who was next him,
"senor, who is this man who makes such a figure and talks in such a
strain?"

"who should it be," said the barber, "but the famous don quixote of la
mancha, the undoer of injustice, the righter of wrongs, the protector of
damsels, the terror of giants, and the winner of battles?"

"that," said the goatherd, "sounds like what one reads in the books of
the knights-errant, who did all that you say this man does; though it is
my belief that either you are joking, or els
 
 ___________________________
 
im, had not
sancho panza that instant come to the rescue, and grasping him by the
shoulders flung him down on the table, smashing plates, breaking glasses,
and upsetting and scattering everything on it. don quixote, finding
himself free, strove to get on top of the goatherd, who, with his face
covered with blood, and soundly kicked by sancho, was on all fours
feeling about for one of the table-knives to take a bloody revenge with.
the canon and the curate, however, prevented him, but the barber so
contrived it that he got don quixote under him, and rained down upon him
such a shower of fisticuffs that the poor knight's face streamed with
blood as freely as his own. the canon and the curate were bursting with
laughter, the officers were capering with delight, and both the one and
the other hissed them on as they do dogs that are worrying one another in
a fight. sancho alone was frantic, for he could not free himself from the
grasp of one of the canon's servants, who kept him fro
 
 ___________________________
 
 it is that
there should be knights in the world professing the order of knight-errantry;
now, i say, ye shall see, by the deliverance of that worthy lady who is
borne captive there, whether knights-errant deserve to be held in
estimation," and so saying he brought his legs to bear on rocinante--for
he had no spurs--and at a full canter (for in all this veracious history
we never read of rocinante fairly galloping) set off to encounter the
penitents, though the curate, the canon, and the barber ran to prevent
him. but it was out of their power, nor did he even stop for the shouts
of sancho calling after him, "where are you going, senor don quixote?
what devils have possessed you to set you on against our catholic faith?
plague take me! mind, that is a procession of penitents, and the lady
they are carrying on that stand there is the blessed image of the
immaculate virgin. take care what you are doing, senor, for this time it
may be safely said you don't know what you are about.
 
 ___________________________
 
o press
the saddle of rocinante, as this shoulder is all knocked to pieces."

"that i will do with all my heart, senor," said sancho; "and let us
return to our village with these gentlemen, who seek your good, and there
we will prepare for making another sally, which may turn out more
profitable and creditable to us."

"thou art right, sancho," returned don quixote; "it will be wise to let
the malign influence of the stars which now prevails pass off."

the canon, the curate, and the barber told him he would act very wisely
in doing as he said; and so, highly amused at sancho panza's
simplicities, they placed don quixote in the cart as before. the
procession once more formed itself in order and proceeded on its road;
the goatherd took his leave of the party; the officers of the brotherhood
declined to go any farther, and the curate paid them what was due to
them; the canon begged the curate to let him know how don quixote did,
whether he was cured of his madness or still su
 
 ___________________________
 
ffered from it, and then
begged leave to continue his journey; in short, they all separated and
went their ways, leaving to themselves the curate and the barber, don
quixote, sancho panza, and the good rocinante, who regarded everything
with as great resignation as his master. the carter yoked his oxen and
made don quixote comfortable on a truss of hay, and at his usual
deliberate pace took the road the curate directed, and at the end of six
days they reached don quixote's village, and entered it about the middle
of the day, which it so happened was a sunday, and the people were all in
the plaza, through which don quixote's cart passed. they all
 
 ___________________________
 
he academicians to make out
their meaning conjecturally. we have been informed that at the cost of
many sleepless nights and much toil he has succeeded, and that he means
to publish them in hopes of don quixote's third sally.

"forse altro cantera con miglior plectro."



end of part i.




    ===




don quixote

volume ii.

complete

by miguel de cervantes


translated by john ormsby




contents

part ii.


chapter i
of the interview the curate and the barber had with don quixote
about his malady

chapter ii
which treats of the notable altercation which sancho panza had
with don quixote's niece, and housekeeper, together with other droll
matters

chapter iii
of the laughable conversation that passed between don quixote,
sancho panza, and the bachelor samson carrasco

chapter iv
in which sancho panza gives a satisfactory reply to the doubts and
questions of the bachelor samson carrasco, together with other matters
worth knowing and tel
 
 ___________________________
 
ficient; and suffice it, too, that some
reputable person should have given an account of all these shrewd
lunacies of his without going into the matter again; for abundance, even
of good things, prevents them from being valued; and scarcity, even in
the case of what is bad, confers a certain value. i was forgetting to
tell thee that thou mayest expect the "persiles," which i am now
finishing, and also the second part of "galatea."




chapter i.

of the interview the curate and the barber had with don quixote about his
malady


cide hamete benengeli, in the second part of this history, and third
sally of don quixote, says that the curate and the barber remained nearly
a month without seeing him, lest they should recall or bring back to his
recollection what had taken place. they did not, however, omit to visit
his niece and housekeeper, and charge them to be careful to treat him
with attention, and give him comforting things to eat, and such as were
good for the heart 
 
 ___________________________
 
and the brain, whence, it was plain to see, all his
misfortune proceeded. the niece and housekeeper replied that they did so,
and meant to do so with all possible care and assiduity, for they could
perceive that their master was now and then beginning to show signs of
being in his right mind. this gave great satisfaction to the curate and
the barber, for they concluded they had taken the right course in
carrying him off enchanted on the ox-cart, as has been described in the
first part of this great as well as accurate history, in the last chapter
thereof. so they resolved to pay him a visit and test the improvement in
his condition, although they thought it almost impossible that there
could be any; and they agreed not to touch upon any point connected with
knight-errantry so as not to run the risk of reopening wounds which were
sti
 
 ___________________________
 
 prudent
warrior in providing for the safety of his realms in time, so that the
enemy may not find him unprepared; but if my advice were taken i would
recommend him to adopt a measure which at present, no doubt, his majesty
is very far from thinking of."

the moment the curate heard this he said to himself, "god keep thee in
his hand, poor don quixote, for it seems to me thou art precipitating
thyself from the height of thy madness into the profound abyss of thy
simplicity."

but the barber, who had the same suspicion as the curate, asked don
quixote what would be his advice as to the measures that he said ought to
be adopted; for perhaps it might prove to be one that would have to be
added to the list of the many impertinent suggestions that people were in
the habit of offering to princes.

"mine, master shaver," said don quixote, "will not be impertinent, but,
on the contrary, pertinent."

"i don't mean that," said the barber, "but that experience has shown that
all or
 
 ___________________________
 
mine, however," replied don quixote, "is neither impossible nor absurd,
but the easiest, the most reasonable, the readiest and most expeditious
that could suggest itself to any projector's mind."

"you take a long time to tell it, senor don quixote," said the curate.

"i don't choose to tell it here, now," said don quixote, "and have it
reach the ears of the lords of the council to-morrow morning, and some
other carry off the thanks and rewards of my trouble."

"for my part," said the barber, "i give my word here and before god that
i will not repeat what your worship says, to king, rook or earthly
man--an oath i learned from the ballad of the curate, who, in the
prelude, told the king of the thief who had robbed him of the hundred
gold crowns and his pacing mule."

"i am not versed in stories," said don quixote; "but i know the oath is a
good one, because i know the barber to be an honest fellow."

"even if he were not," said the curate, "i will go bail and answer for
hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s people, and will provide some one, who, if not so
valiant as the knights-errant of yore, at least will not be inferior to
them in spirit; but god knows what i mean, and i say no more."

"alas!" exclaimed the niece at this, "may i die if my master does not
want to turn knight-errant again;" to which don quixote replied, "a
knight-errant i shall die, and let the turk come down or go up when he
likes, and in as strong force as he can, once more i say, god knows what
i mean." but here the barber said, "i ask your worships to give me leave
to tell a short story of something that happened in seville, which comes
so pat to the purpose just now that i should like greatly to tell it."
don quixote gave him leave, and the rest prepared to listen, and he began
thus:

"in the madhouse at seville there was a man whom his relations had placed
there as being out of his mind. he was a graduate of osuna in canon law;
but even if he had been of salamanca, it was the opinion of most people
th
 
 ___________________________
 
aters, will rain as often
as it pleases me and may be needful.'

"the governor and the bystanders laughed, and at their laughter the
chaplain was half ashamed, and he replied, 'for all that, senor neptune,
it will not do to vex senor jupiter; remain where you are, and some other
day, when there is a better opportunity and more time, we will come back
for you.' so they stripped the licentiate, and he was left where he was;
and that's the end of the story."

"so that's the story, master barber," said don quixote, "which came in so
pat to the purpose that you could not help telling it? master shaver,
master shaver! how blind is he who cannot see through a sieve. is it
possible that you do not know that comparisons of wit with wit, valour
with valour, beauty with beauty, birth with birth, are always odious and
unwelcome? i, master barber, am not neptune, the god of the waters, nor
do i try to make anyone take me for an astute man, for i am not one. my
only endeavour is to convin
 
 ___________________________
 
ferrara
of the present day are descended, according to turpin in his
'cosmography.' all these knights, and many more that i could name, senor
curate, were knights-errant, the light and glory of chivalry. these, or
such as these, i would have to carry out my plan, and in that case his
majesty would find himself well served and would save great expense, and
the turk would be left tearing his beard. and so i will stay where i am,
as the chaplain does not take me away; and if jupiter, as the barber has
told us, will not send rain, here am i, and i will rain when i please. i
say this that master basin may know that i understand him."

"indeed, senor don quixote," said the barber, "i did not mean it in that
way, and, so help me god, my intention was good, and your worship ought
not to be vexed."

"as to whether i ought to be vexed or not," returned don quixote, "i
myself am the best judge."

hereupon the curate observed, "i have hardly said a word as yet; and i
would gladly be r
 
 ___________________________
 
from him; and as i have depicted
amadis, so i could, i think, portray and describe all the knights-errant
that are in all the histories in the world; for by the perception i have
that they were what their histories describe, and by the deeds they did
and the dispositions they displayed, it is possible, with the aid of
sound philosophy, to deduce their features, complexion, and stature."

"how big, in your worship's opinion, may the giant morgante have been,
senor don quixote?" asked the barber.

"with regard to giants," replied don quixote, "opinions differ as to
whether there ever were any or not in the world; but the holy scripture,
which cannot err by a jot from the truth, shows us that there were, when
it gives us the history of that big philistine, goliath, who was seven
cubits and a half in height, which is a huge size. likewise, in the
island of sicily, there have been found leg-bones and arm-bones so large
that their size makes it plain that their owners were giants, 
 
 ___________________________
 
surrender (which probably were not over
and above creditable), dropped her where he says:

how she received the sceptre of cathay,
some bard of defter quill may sing some day;

and this was no doubt a kind of prophecy, for poets are also called
vates, that is to say diviners; and its truth was made plain; for since
then a famous andalusian poet has lamented and sung her tears, and
another famous and rare poet, a castilian, has sung her beauty."

"tell me, senor don quixote," said the barber here, "among all those who
praised her, has there been no poet to write a satire on this lady
angelica?"

"i can well believe," replied don quixote, "that if sacripante or roland
had been poets they would have given the damsel a trimming; for it is
naturally the way with poets who have been scorned and rejected by their
ladies, whether fictitious or not, in short by those whom they select as
the ladies of their thoughts, to avenge themselves in satires and
libels--a vengeance, to be su
 
 ___________________________
 
ngelica, who turned the world upside down."

"strange," said the curate; but at this moment they heard the housekeeper
and the niece, who had previously withdrawn from the conversation,
exclaiming aloud in the courtyard, and at the noise they all ran out.




chapter ii.

which treats of the notable altercation which sancho panza had with don
quixote's niece, and housekeeper, together with other droll matters


the history relates that the outcry don quixote, the curate, and the
barber heard came from the niece and the housekeeper exclaiming to
sancho, who was striving to force his way in to see don quixote while
they held the door against him, "what does the vagabond want in this
house? be off to your own, brother, for it is you, and no one else, that
delude my master, and lead him astray, and take him tramping about the
country."

to which sancho replied, "devil's own housekeeper! it is i who am
deluded, and led astray, and taken tramping about the country, and not
 
 ___________________________
 
e thee, thou detestable sancho," said the niece;
"what are islands? is it something to eat, glutton and gormandiser that
thou art?"

"it is not something to eat," replied sancho, "but something to govern
and rule, and better than four cities or four judgeships at court."

"for all that," said the housekeeper, "you don't enter here, you bag of
mischief and sack of knavery; go govern your house and dig your
seed-patch, and give over looking for islands or shylands."

the curate and the barber listened with great amusement to the words of
the three; but don quixote, uneasy lest sancho should blab and blurt out
a whole heap of mischievous stupidities, and touch upon points that might
not be altogether to his credit, called to him and made the other two
hold their tongues and let him come in. sancho entered, and the curate
and the barber took their leave of don quixote, of whose recovery they
despaired when they saw how wedded he was to his crazy ideas, and how
saturated with th
 
 ___________________________
 
e nonsense of his unlucky chivalry; and said the curate
to the barber, "you will see, gossip, that when we are least thinking of
it, our gentleman will be off once more for another flight."

"i have no doubt of it," returned the barber; "but i do not wonder so
much at the madness of the knight as at the simplicity of the squire, who
has such a firm belief in all that about the island, that i suppose all
the exposures that could be imagined would not get it out of his head."

"god help them," said the curate; "and let us be on the look-out to see
what comes of all these absurdities of the knight and squire, for it
seems as if they had both been cast in the same mould, and the madness of
the master without the simplicit
 
 ___________________________
 
y of the man would not be worth a
farthing."

"that is true," said the barber, "and i should like very much to know
what the pair are talking about at this moment."

"i promise you," said the curate, "the niece or the housekeeper will tell
us by-and-by, for they are not the ones to forget to listen."

meanwhile don quixote shut himself up in his room with sancho, and when
they were alone he said to him, "it grieves me greatly, sancho, that thou
shouldst have said, and sayest, that i took thee out of thy cottage, when
thou knowest i did not remain in my house. we
 
 ___________________________
 
n bright and clean like burnished steel.

the curses which both housekeeper and niece poured out on the bachelor
were past counting; they tore their hair, they clawed their faces, and in
the style of the hired mourners that were once in fashion, they raised a
lamentation over the departure of their master and uncle, as if it had
been his death. samson's intention in persuading him to sally forth once
more was to do what the history relates farther on; all by the advice of
the curate and barber, with whom he had previously discussed the subject.
finally, then, during those three days, don quixote and sancho provided
themselves with what they considered necessary, and sancho having
pacified his wife, and don quixote his niece and housekeeper, at
nightfall, unseen by anyone except the bachelor, who thought fit to
accompany them half a league out of the village, they set out for el
toboso, don quixote on his good rocinante and sancho on his old dapple,
his alforjas furnished with 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and render him an account of what took place between him
and her. but don quixote was of one mind, he of the mirrors of another,
for he just then had no thought of anything but finding some village
where he could plaster himself, as has been said already. the history
goes on to say, then, that when the bachelor samson carrasco recommended
don quixote to resume his knight-errantry which he had laid aside, it was
in consequence of having been previously in conclave with the curate and
the barber on the means to be adopted to induce don quixote to stay at
home in peace and quiet without worrying himself with his ill-starred
adventures; at which consultation it was decided by the unanimous vote of
all, and on the special advice of carrasco, that don quixote should be
allowed to go, as it seemed impossible to restrain him, and that samson
should sally forth to meet him as a knight-errant, and do battle with
him, for there would be no difficulty about a cause, and vanquish him,
that
 
 ___________________________
 
 beards instead of hands; he therefore stretched his out
as far as he could, and at the same instant the jug began to pour and the
damsel with the soap rubbed his beard briskly, raising snow-flakes, for
the soap lather was no less white, not only over the beard, but all over
the face, and over the eyes of the submissive knight, so that they were
perforce obliged to keep shut. the duke and duchess, who had not known
anything about this, waited to see what came of this strange washing. the
barber damsel, when she had him a hand's breadth deep in lather,
pretended that there was no more water, and bade the one with the jug go
and fetch some, while senor don quixote waited. she did so, and don
quixote was left the strangest and most ludicrous figure that could be
imagined. all those present, and there were a good many, were watching
him, and as they saw him there with half a yard of neck, and that
uncommonly brown, his eyes shut, and his beard full of soap, it was a
great wonder, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 and other underlings, one of whom
carried a small trough full of water, that from its colour and impurity
was plainly dishwater. the one with the trough pursued him and followed
him everywhere he went, endeavouring with the utmost persistence to
thrust it under his chin, while another kitchen-boy seemed anxious to
wash his beard.

"what is all this, brothers?" asked the duchess. "what is it? what do you
want to do to this good man? do you forget he is a governor-elect?"

to which the barber kitchen-boy replied, "the gentleman will not let
himself be washed as is customary, and as my lord and the senor his
master have been."

"yes, i will," said sancho, in a great rage; "but i'd like it to be with
cleaner towels, clearer lye, and not such dirty hands; for there's not so
much difference between me and my master that he should be washed with
angels' water and i with devil's lye. the customs of countries and
princes' palaces are only good so long as they give no annoyance; but
 
 ___________________________
 
 dona rodriguez, who was present, made answer, "my lady the
duchess has duennas in her service that might be countesses if it was the
will of fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill of
duennas, above all of ancient maiden ones; for though i am not one
myself, i know and am aware of the advantage a maiden duenna has over one
that is a widow; but 'he who clipped us has kept the scissors.'"

"for all that," said sancho, "there's so much to be clipped about
duennas, so my barber said, that 'it will be better not to stir the rice
even though it sticks.'"

"these squires," returned dona rodriguez, "are always our enemies; and as
they are the haunting spirits of the antechambers and watch us at every
step, whenever they are not saying their prayers (and that's often
enough) they spend their time in tattling about us, digging up our bones
and burying our good name. but i can tell these walking blocks that we
will live in spite of them, and in great houses too, thou
 
 ___________________________
 
alcalde, and seeing this my
lady, filled with rage and vexation, pulled out a big pin, or, i rather
think, a bodkin, out of her needle-case and drove it into his back with
such force that my husband gave a loud yell, and writhing fell to the
ground with his lady. her two lacqueys ran to rise her up, and the
alcalde and the alguacils did the same; the guadalajara gate was all in
commotion--i mean the idlers congregated there; my mistress came back on
foot, and my husband hurried away to a barber's shop protesting that he
was run right through the guts. the courtesy of my husband was noised
abroad to such an extent, that the boys gave him no peace in the street;
and on this account, and because he was somewhat shortsighted, my lady
dismissed him; and it was chagrin at this i am convinced beyond a doubt
that brought on his death. i was left a helpless widow, with a daughter
on my hands growing up in beauty like the sea-foam; at length, however,
as i had the character of being an e
 
 ___________________________
 
rns, senor, i'll send her ladyship a peck and such big ones
that one might come to see them as a show and a wonder. and now,
sanchica, see that the gentleman is comfortable; put up his horse, and
get some eggs out of the stable, and cut plenty of bacon, and let's give
him his dinner like a prince; for the good news he has brought, and his
own bonny face deserve it all; and meanwhile i'll run out and give the
neighbours the news of our good luck, and father curate, and master
nicholas the barber, who are and always have been such friends of thy
father's."

"that i will, mother," said sanchica; "but mind, you must give me half of
that string; for i don't think my lady the duchess could have been so
stupid as to send it all to you."

"it is all for thee, my child," said teresa; "but let me wear it round my
neck for a few days; for verily it seems to make my heart glad."

"you will be glad too," said the page, "when you see the bundle there is
in this portmanteau, for it is a s
 
 ___________________________
 
oud for the duke and all present to hear, she read out as
follows.


teresa panza's letter to the duchess.

the letter your highness wrote me, my lady, gave me great pleasure, for
indeed i found it very welcome. the string of coral beads is very fine,
and my husband's hunting suit does not fall short of it. all this village
is very much pleased that your ladyship has made a governor of my good
man sancho; though nobody will believe it, particularly the curate, and
master nicholas the barber, and the bachelor samson carrasco; but i don't
care for that, for so long as it is true, as it is, they may all say what
they like; though, to tell the truth, if the coral beads and the suit had
not come i would not have believed it either; for in this village
everybody thinks my husband a numskull, and except for governing a flock
of goats, they cannot fancy what sort of government he can be fit for.
god grant it, and direct him according as he sees his children stand in
need of it. i a
 
 ___________________________
 
 long
to see much; i say it because i expect to see more if i live longer; for
i don't expect to stop until i see thee a farmer of taxes or a collector
of revenue, which are offices where, though the devil carries off those
who make a bad use of them, still they make and handle money. my lady the
duchess will tell thee the desire i have to go to the court; consider the
matter and let me know thy pleasure; i will try to do honour to thee by
going in a coach.

neither the curate, nor the barber, nor the bachelor, nor even the
sacristan, can believe that thou art a governor, and they say the whole
thing is a delusion or an enchantment affair, like everything belonging
to thy master don quixote; and samson says he must go in search of thee
and drive the government out of thy head and the madness out of don
quixote's skull; i only laugh, and look at my string of beads, and plan
out the dress i am going to make for our daughter out of thy suit. i sent
some acorns to my lady the duc
 
 ___________________________
 
 meadows carpets tinted with a thousand dyes; the clear pure
air will give us breath, the moon and stars lighten the darkness of the
night for us, song shall be our delight, lamenting our joy, apollo will
supply us with verses, and love with conceits whereby we shall make
ourselves famed for ever, not only in this but in ages to come."

"egad," said sancho, "but that sort of life squares, nay corners, with my
notions; and what is more the bachelor samson carrasco and master
nicholas the barber won't have well seen it before they'll want to follow
it and turn shepherds along with us; and god grant it may not come into
the curate's head to join the sheepfold too, he's so jovial and fond of
enjoying himself."

"thou art in the right of it, sancho," said don quixote; "and the
bachelor samson carrasco, if he enters the pastoral fraternity, as no
doubt he will, may call himself the shepherd samsonino, or perhaps the
shepherd carrascon; nicholas the barber may call himself niculoso,
 
 ___________________________
 
seen to be
arabic, as well by the al at the beginning as by the i they end with. i
mention this incidentally, the chance allusion to albogues having
reminded me of it; and it will be of great assistance to us in the
perfect practice of this calling that i am something of a poet, as thou
knowest, and that besides the bachelor samson carrasco is an accomplished
one. of the curate i say nothing; but i will wager he has some spice of
the poet in him, and no doubt master nicholas too, for all barbers, or
most of them, are guitar players and stringers of verses. i will bewail
my separation; thou shalt glorify thyself as a constant lover; the
shepherd carrascon will figure as a rejected one, and the curate
curiambro as whatever may please him best; and so all will go as gaily as
heart could wish."

to this sancho made answer, "i am so unlucky, senor, that i'm afraid the
day will never come when i'll see myself at such a calling. o what neat
spoons i'll make when i'm a shepherd! what
 
 ___________________________
 
if he too wanted to talk. night set in, they quickened their
pace, and the fears of the two prisoners grew greater, especially as they
heard themselves assailed with--"get on, ye troglodytes;" "silence, ye
barbarians;" "march, ye cannibals;" "no murmuring, ye scythians;" "don't
open your eyes, ye murderous polyphemes, ye blood-thirsty lions," and
suchlike names with which their captors harassed the ears of the wretched
master and man. sancho went along saying to himself, "we, tortolites,
barbers, animals! i don't like those names at all; 'it's in a bad wind
our corn is being winnowed;' 'misfortune comes upon us all at once like
sticks on a dog,' and god grant it may be no worse than them that this
unlucky adventure has in store for us."

don quixote rode completely dazed, unable with the aid of all his wits to
make out what could be the meaning of these abusive names they called
them, and the only conclusion he could arrive at was that there was no
good to be hoped for and muc
 
 ___________________________
 
 her eyes.
don quixote as he looked at them observed, "those two ladies were very
unfortunate not to have been born in this age, and i unfortunate above
all men not to have been born in theirs. had i fallen in with those
gentlemen, troy would not have been burned or carthage destroyed, for it
would have been only for me to slay paris, and all these misfortunes
would have been avoided."

"i'll lay a bet," said sancho, "that before long there won't be a tavern,
roadside inn, hostelry, or barber's shop where the story of our doings
won't be painted up; but i'd like it painted by the hand of a better
painter than painted these."

"thou art right, sancho," said don quixote, "for this painter is like
orbaneja, a painter there was at ubeda, who when they asked him what he
was painting, used to say, 'whatever it may turn out; and if he chanced
to paint a cock he would write under it, 'this is a cock,' for fear they
might think it was a fox. the painter or writer, for it's all the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
t for ever, but all tends ever downwards
from its beginning to its end, and above all man's life, and as don
quixote's enjoyed no special dispensation from heaven to stay its course,
its end and close came when he least looked for it. for whether it was of
the dejection the thought of his defeat produced, or of heaven's will
that so ordered it--a fever settled upon him and kept him in his bed for
six days, during which he was often visited by his friends the curate,
the bachelor, and the barber, while his good squire sancho panza never
quitted his bedside. they, persuaded that it was grief at finding himself
vanquished, and the object of his heart, the liberation and
disenchantment of dulcinea, unattained, that kept him in this state,
strove by all the means in their power to cheer him up; the bachelor
bidding him take heart and get up to begin his pastoral life, for which
he himself, he said, had already composed an eclogue that would take the
shine out of all sannazaro had ev
 
 ___________________________
 
as come so late that it leaves me no time to make some amends by reading
other books that might be a light to my soul. niece, i feel myself at the
point of death, and i would fain meet it in such a way as to show that my
life has not been so ill that i should leave behind me the name of a
madman; for though i have been one, i would not that the fact should be
made plainer at my death. call in to me, my dear, my good friends the
curate, the bachelor samson carrasco, and master nicholas the barber, for
i wish to confess and make my will." but his niece was saved the trouble
by the entrance of the three. the instant don quixote saw them he
exclaimed, "good news for you, good sirs, that i am no longer don quixote
of la mancha, but alonso quixano, whose way of life won for him the name
of good. now am i the enemy of amadis of gaul and of the whole countless
troop of his descendants; odious to me now are all the profane stories of
knight-errantry; now i perceive my folly, and the peri