return to the ragged
one, he went on to say:

"i give you this warning because i wish to pass briefly over the story of
my misfortunes, for recalling them to memory only serves to add fresh
ones, and the less you question me the sooner shall i make an end of the
recital, though i shall not omit to relate anything of importance in
order fully to satisfy your curiosity."

don quixote gave the promise for himself and the others, and with this
assurance he began as follows:

"my name is cardenio, my birthplace one of the best cities of this
andalusia, my family noble, my parents rich, my misfortune so great that
my parents must have wept and my family grieved over it without being
able by their wealth to lighten it; for the gifts of fortune can do
little to relieve reverses sent by heaven. in that same country there was
a heaven in which love had placed all the glory i could desire; such was
the beauty of luscinda, a damsel as noble and as rich as i, but of
happier fortunes, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ance with his full will and pleasure, luscinda was not to be taken
or given by stealth. i thanked him for his kindness, reflecting that
there was reason in what he said, and that my father would assent to it
as soon as i should tell him, and with that view i went the very same
instant to let him know what my desires were. when i entered the room
where he was i found him with an open letter in his hand, which, before i
could utter a word, he gave me, saying, 'by this letter thou wilt see,
cardenio, the disposition the duke ricardo has to serve thee.' this duke
ricardo, as you, sirs, probably know already, is a grandee of spain who
has his seat in the best part of this andalusia. i took and read the
letter, which was couched in terms so flattering that even i myself felt
it would be wrong in my father not to comply with the request the duke
made in it, which was that he would send me immediately to him, as he
wished me to become the companion, not servant, of his eldest son, and
wo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld take upon himself the charge of placing me in a position
corresponding to the esteem in which he held me. on reading the letter my
voice failed me, and still more when i heard my father say, 'two days
hence thou wilt depart, cardenio, in accordance with the duke's wish, and
give thanks to god who is opening a road to thee by which thou mayest
attain what i know thou dost deserve; and to these words he added others
of fatherly counsel. the time for my departure arrived; i spoke one night
to luscinda, i told her all that had occurred, as i did also to her
father, entreating him to allow some delay, and to defer the disposal of
her hand until i should see what the duke ricardo sought of me: he gave
me the promise, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
of my life;--though it occurs to me that i have not
got one of them now, thanks to the spite of wicked and envious
enchanters;--but pardon me for having broken the promise we made not to
interrupt your discourse; for when i hear chivalry or knights-errant
mentioned, i can no more help talking about them than the rays of the sun
can help giving heat, or those of the moon moisture; pardon me,
therefore, and proceed, for that is more to the purpose now."

while don quixote was saying this, cardenio allowed his head to fall upon
his breast, and seemed plunged in deep thought; and though twice don
quixote bade him go on with his story, he neither looked up nor uttered a
word in reply; but after some time he raised his head and said, "i cannot
get rid of the idea, nor will anyone in the world remove it, or make me
think otherwise--and he would be a blockhead who would hold or believe
anything else than that that arrant knave master elisabad made free with
queen madasima."

"that is 
 
 ___________________________
 
not true, by all that's good," said don quixote in high wrath,
turning upon him angrily, as his way was; "and it is a very great
slander, or rather villainy. queen madasima was a very illustrious lady,
and it is not to be supposed that so exalted a princess would have made
free with a quack; and whoever maintains the contrary lies like a great
scoundrel, and i will give him to know it, on foot or on horseback, armed
or unarmed, by night or by day, or as he likes best."

cardenio was looking at him steadily, and his mad fit having now come
upon him, he had no disposition to go on with his story, nor would don
quixote have listened to it, so much had what he had heard about madasima
disgusted him. strange to say, he stood up for her as if she were in
earnest his veritable born lady; to such a pass had his unholy books
brought him. cardenio, then, being, as i said, now mad, when he heard
himself given the lie, and called a scoundrel and other insulting names,
not r
 
 ___________________________
 
her to pieces.

"leave me alone, sir knight of the rueful countenance," said sancho,
grappling with the goatherd, "for of this fellow, who is a clown like
myself, and no dubbed knight, i can safely take satisfaction for the
affront he has offered me, fighting with him hand to hand like an honest
man."

"that is true," said don quixote, "but i know that he is not to blame for
what has happened."

with this he pacified them, and again asked the goatherd if it would be
possible to find cardenio, as he felt the greatest anxiety to know the
end of his story. the goatherd told him, as he had told him before, that
there was no knowing of a certainty where his lair was; but that if he
wandered about much in that neighbourhood he could not fail to fall in
with him either in or out of his senses.




chapter xxv.

which treats of the strange things that happened to the stout knight of
la mancha in the sierra morena, and of his imitation of the penance of
beltenebros


don qui
 
 ___________________________
 
know thou
wouldst say i had great patience that i did not break in pieces the mouth
that uttered such blasphemies, for a very great blasphemy it is to say or
imagine that a queen has made free with a surgeon. the truth of the story
is that that master elisabad whom the madman mentioned was a man of great
prudence and sound judgment, and served as governor and physician to the
queen, but to suppose that she was his mistress is nonsense deserving
very severe punishment; and as a proof that cardenio did not know what he
was saying, remember when he said it he was out of his wits."

"that is what i say," said sancho; "there was no occasion for minding the
words of a madman; for if good luck had not helped your worship, and he
had sent that stone at your head instead of at your breast, a fine way we
should have been in for standing up for my lady yonder, god confound her!
and then, would not cardenio have gone free as a madman?"

"against men in their senses or against madmen," said
 
 ___________________________
 
 the rueful countenance, "but how shall we
manage to write the letter?"

"and the ass-colt order too," added sancho.

"all shall be included," said don quixote; "and as there is no paper, it
would be well done to write it on the leaves of trees, as the ancients
did, or on tablets of wax; though that would be as hard to find just now
as paper. but it has just occurred to me how it may be conveniently and
even more than conveniently written, and that is in the note-book that
belonged to cardenio, and thou wilt take care to have it copied on paper,
in a good hand, at the first village thou comest to where there is a
schoolmaster, or if not, any sacristan will copy it; but see thou give it
not to any notary to copy, for they write a law hand that satan could not
make out."

"but what is to be done about the signature?" said sancho.

"the letters of amadis were never signed," said don quixote.

"that is all very well," said sancho, "but the order must needs be
signed, and if it
 
 ___________________________
 
er ladyship had best not drive me to say it, for by god
i will speak out and let off everything cheap, even if it doesn't sell: i
am pretty good at that! she little knows me; faith, if she knew me she'd
be in awe of me."

"in faith, sancho," said don quixote, "to all appearance thou art no
sounder in thy wits than i."

"i am not so mad," answered sancho, "but i am more peppery; but apart
from all this, what has your worship to eat until i come back? will you
sally out on the road like cardenio to force it from the shepherds?"

"let not that anxiety trouble thee," replied don quixote, "for even if i
had it i should not eat anything but the herbs and the fruits which this
meadow and these trees may yield me; the beauty of this business of mine
lies in not eating, and in performing other mortifications."

"do you know what i am afraid of?" said sancho upon this; "that i shall
not be able to find my way back to this spot where i am leaving you, it
is such an out-of-the-way place
 
 ___________________________
 
ign.

the song ended with a deep sigh, and again the listeners remained waiting
attentively for the singer to resume; but perceiving that the music had
now turned to sobs and heart-rending moans they determined to find out
who the unhappy being could be whose voice was as rare as his sighs were
piteous, and they had not proceeded far when on turning the corner of a
rock they discovered a man of the same aspect and appearance as sancho
had described to them when he told them the story of cardenio. he,
showing no astonishment when he saw them, stood still with his head bent
down upon his breast like one in deep thought, without raising his eyes
to look at them after the first glance when they suddenly came upon him.
the curate, who was aware of his misfortune and recognised him by the
description, being a man of good address, approached him and in a few
sensible words entreated and urged him to quit a life of such misery,
lest he should end it there, which would be the greatest of
 
 ___________________________
 
 all
misfortunes. cardenio was then in his right mind, free from any attack of
that madness which so frequently carried him away, and seeing them
dressed in a fashion so unusual among the frequenters of those wilds,
could not help showing some surprise, especially when he heard them speak
of his case as if it were a well-known matter (for the curate's words
gave him to understand as much) so he replied to them thus:

"i see plainly, sirs, whoever you may be, that heaven, whose care it is
to succour the good, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
tleman began his sad story in nearly the same
words and manner in which he had related it to don quixote and the
goatherd a few days before, when, through master elisabad, and don
quixote's scrupulous observance of what was due to chivalry, the tale was
left unfinished, as this history has already recorded; but now
fortunately the mad fit kept off, allowed him to tell it to the end; and
so, coming to the incident of the note which don fernando had found in
the volume of "amadis of gaul," cardenio said that he remembered it
perfectly and that it was in these words:

"luscinda to cardenio.

"every day i discover merits in you that oblige and compel me to hold you
in higher estimation; so if you desire to relieve me of this obligation
without cost to my honour, you may easily do so. i have a father who
knows you and loves me dearly, who without putting any constraint on my
inclination will grant what will be reasonable for you to have, if it be
that you value me as you say and as
 
 ___________________________
 
le on which i had
come at the house of the worthy man who had brought me the letter, and
fortune was pleased to be for once so kind that i found luscinda at the
grating that was the witness of our loves. she recognised me at once, and
i her, but not as she ought to have recognised me, or i her. but who is
there in the world that can boast of having fathomed or understood the
wavering mind and unstable nature of a woman? of a truth no one. to
proceed: as soon as luscinda saw me she said, 'cardenio, i am in my
bridal dress, and the treacherous don fernando and my covetous father are
waiting for me in the hall with the other witnesses, who shall be the
witnesses of my death before they witness my betrothal. be not
distressed, my friend, but contrive to be present at this sacrifice, and
if that cannot be prevented by my words, i have a dagger concealed which
will prevent more deliberate violence, putting an end to my life and
giving thee a first proof of the love i have borne and bea
 
 ___________________________
 
at least to rid
myself of life? be not weary, sirs, of listening to these digressions; my
sorrow is not one of those that can or should be told tersely and
briefly, for to me each incident seems to call for many words."

to this the curate replied that not only were they not weary of listening
to him, but that the details he mentioned interested them greatly, being
of a kind by no means to be omitted and deserving of the same attention
as the main story.

"to proceed, then," continued cardenio: "all being assembled in the hall,
the priest of the parish came in and as he took the pair by the hand to
perform the requisite ceremony, at the words, 'will you, senora luscinda,
take senor don fernando, here present, for your lawful husband, as the
holy mother church ordains?' i thrust my head and neck out from between
the tapestries, and with eager ears and throbbing heart set myself to
listen to luscinda's answer, awaiting in her reply the sentence of death
or the grant of life. oh,
 
 ___________________________
 
en i might have enjoyed happiness. she by her
fickleness strove to make my ruin irretrievable; i will strive to gratify
her wishes by seeking destruction; and it will show generations to come
that i alone was deprived of that of which all others in misfortune have
a superabundance, for to them the impossibility of being consoled is
itself a consolation, while to me it is the cause of greater sorrows and
sufferings, for i think that even in death there will not be an end of
them."

here cardenio brought to a close his long discourse and story, as full of
misfortune as it was of love; but just as the curate was going to address
some words of comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that reached his
ear, saying in melancholy tones what will be told in the fourth part of
this narrative; for at this point the sage and sagacious historian, cide
hamete benengeli, brought the third to a conclusion.




chapter xxviii.

which treats of the strange and delightful adventure that bef
 
 ___________________________
 
rable as that of seeking to revive and
restore to the world the long-lost and almost defunct order of
knight-errantry, we now enjoy in this age of ours, so poor in light
entertainment, not only the charm of his veracious history, but also of
the tales and episodes contained in it which are, in a measure, no less
pleasing, ingenious, and truthful, than the history itself; which,
resuming its thread, carded, spun, and wound, relates that just as the
curate was going to offer consolation to cardenio, he was interrupted by
a voice that fell upon his ear saying in plaintive tones:

"o god! is it possible i have found a place that may serve as a secret
grave for the weary load of this body that i support so unwillingly? if
the solitude these mountains promise deceives me not, it is so; ah! woe
is me! how much more grateful to my mind will be the society of these
rocks and brakes that permit me to complain of my misfortune to heaven,
than that of any human being, for there is none on e
 
 ___________________________
 
own jacket bound tight to
his body with a white cloth; he wore besides breeches and gaiters of
brown cloth, and on his head a brown montera; and he had the gaiters
turned up as far as the middle of the leg, which verily seemed to be of
pure alabaster.

as soon as he had done bathing his beautiful feet, he wiped them with a
towel he took from under the montera, on taking off which he raised his
face, and those who were watching him had an opportunity of seeing a
beauty so exquisite that cardenio said to the curate in a whisper:

"as this is not luscinda, it is no human creature but a divine being."

the youth then took off the montera, and shaking his head from side to
side there broke loose and spread out a mass of hair that the beams of
the sun might have envied; by this they knew that what had seemed a
peasant was a lovely woman, nay the most beautiful the eyes of two of
them had ever beheld, or even cardenio's if they had not seen and known
luscinda, for he afterwards decl
 
 ___________________________
 
s it was so early in the morning, and i was
so closely attended by my mother and the women of the household, and so
thickly veiled and so shy, that my eyes scarcely saw more ground than i
trod on), in spite of all this, the eyes of love, or idleness, more
properly speaking, that the lynx's cannot rival, discovered me, with the
help of the assiduity of don fernando; for that is the name of the
younger son of the duke i told of."

the moment the speaker mentioned the name of don fernando, cardenio
changed colour and broke into a sweat, with such signs of emotion that
the curate and the barber, who observed it, feared that one of the mad
fits which they heard attacked him sometimes was coming upon him; but
cardenio showed no further agitation and remained quiet, regarding the
peasant girl with fixed attention, for he began to suspect who she was.
she, however, without noticing the excitement of cardenio, continuing her
story, went on to say:

"and they had hardly discovered me, w
 
 ___________________________
 
linations were
not would willingly yield him what you, senor, would now obtain by force;
and this i say lest you should suppose that any but my lawful husband
shall ever win anything of me.' 'if that,' said this disloyal gentleman,
'be the only scruple you feel, fairest dorothea' (for that is the name of
this unhappy being), 'see here i give you my hand to be yours, and let
heaven, from which nothing is hid, and this image of our lady you have
here, be witnesses of this pledge.'"

when cardenio heard her say she was called dorothea, he showed fresh
agitation and felt convinced of the truth of his former suspicion, but he
was unwilling to interrupt the story, and wished to hear the end of what
he already all but knew, so he merely said:

"what! is dorothea your name, senora? i have heard of another of the same
name who can perhaps match your misfortunes. but proceed; by-and-by i may
tell you something that will astonish you as much as it will excite your
compassion."

dorothe
 
 ___________________________
 
a was struck by cardenio's words as well as by his strange and
miserable attire, and begged him if he knew anything concerning her to
tell it to her at once, for if fortune had left her any blessing it was
courage to bear whatever calamity might fall upon her, as she felt sure
that none could reach her capable of increasing in any degree what she
endured already.

"i would not let the occasion pass, senora," replied cardenio, "of
telling you what i think, if what i suspect were the truth, but so far
there has been no opportunity, nor is it of any importance to you to know
it."

"be it as it may," replied dorothea, "what happened in my story was that
don fernando, taking an image that stood in the chamber, placed it as a
witness of our betrothal, and with the most binding words and extravagant
oaths gave me his promise to become my husband; though before he had made
an end of pledging himself i bade him con
 
 ___________________________
 
estion of
honour, when my patience gave way and the secret of my heart became known
abroad. the reason was, that a few days later it was reported in the town
that don fernando had been married in a neighbouring city to a maiden of
rare beauty, the daughter of parents of distinguished position, though
not so rich that her portion would entitle her to look for so brilliant a
match; it was said, too, that her name was luscinda, and that at the
betrothal some strange things had happened."

cardenio heard the name of luscinda, but he only shrugged his shoulders,
bit his lips, bent his brows, and before long two streams of tears
escaped from his eyes. dorothea, however, did not interrupt her story,
but went on in these words:

"this sad intelligence reached my ears, and, instead of being struck with
a chill, with such wrath and fury did my heart burn that i scarcely
restrained myself from rushing out into the streets, crying aloud and
proclaiming openly the perfidy and treachery of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of such
notoriety in the city that it was the talk of every knot of idlers in the
street. he said that on the night of don fernando's betrothal with
luscinda, as soon as she had consented to be his bride by saying 'yes,'
she was taken with a sudden fainting fit, and that on the bridegroom
approaching to unlace the bosom of her dress to give her air, he found a
paper in her own handwriting, in which she said and declared that she
could not be don fernando's bride, because she was already cardenio's,
who, according to the man's account, was a gentleman of distinction of
the same city; and that if she had accepted don fernando, it was only in
obedience to her parents. in short, he said, the words of the paper made
it clear she meant to kill herself on the completion of the betrothal,
and gave her reasons for putting an end to herself all which was
confirmed, it was said, by a dagger they found somewhere in her clothes.
on seeing this, don fernando, persuaded that luscinda had befoo
 
 ___________________________
 
led,
slighted, and trifled with him, assailed her before she had recovered
from her swoon, and tried to stab her with the dagger that had been
found, and would have succeeded had not her parents and those who were
present prevented him. it was said, moreover, that don fernando went away
at once, and that luscinda did not recover from her prostration until the
next day, when she told her parents how she was really the bride of that
cardenio i have mentioned. i learned besides that cardenio, according to
report, had been present at the betrothal; and that upon seeing her
betrothed contrary to his expectation, he had quitted the city in
despair, leaving behind him a letter declaring the wrong luscinda had
done him, and his intention of going where no one should ever see him
again. all this was a matter of notoriety in the city, and everyone spoke
of it; especially when it became known that luscinda was missing from her
father's house and from the city, for she was not to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
them as they expect, that i had rather banish myself from their sight for
ever than look them in the face with the reflection that they beheld mine
stripped of that purity they had a right to expect in me."

with these words she became silent, and the colour that overspread her
face showed plainly the pain and shame she was suffering at heart. in
theirs the listeners felt as much pity as wonder at her misfortunes; but
as the curate was just about to offer her some consolation and advice
cardenio forestalled him, saying, "so then, senora, you are the fair
dorothea, the only daughter of the rich clenardo?" dorothea was
astonished at hearing her father's name, and at the miserable appearance
of him who mentioned it, for it has been already said how wretchedly clad
cardenio was; so she said to him:

"and who may you be, brother, who seem to know my father's name so well?
for so far, if i remember rightly, i have not mentioned it in the whole
story of my misfortunes."

"i am that 
 
 ___________________________
 
unhappy being, senora," replied cardenio, "whom, as you have
said, luscinda declared to be her husband; i am the unfortunate cardenio,
whom the wrong-doing of him who has brought you to your present condition
has reduced to the state you see me in, bare, ragged, bereft of all human
comfort, and what is worse, of reason, for i only possess it when heaven
is pleased for some short space to restore it to me. i, dorothea, am he
who witnessed the wrong done by don fernando, and waited to hear the
'yes' uttered by which luscinda owned herself his betrothed: i am he who
had not courage enough to see how her fainting fit ended
 
 ___________________________
 
to
happier fortunes; for i swear to you by the faith of a gentleman and a
christian not to desert you until i see you in possession of don
fernando, and if i cannot by words induce him to recognise his obligation
to you, in that case to avail myself of the right which my rank as a
gentleman gives me, and with just cause challenge him on account of the
injury he has done you, not regarding my own wrongs, which i shall leave
to heaven to avenge, while i on earth devote myself to yours."

cardenio's words completed the astonishment of dorothea, and not knowing
how to return thanks for such an offer, she attempted to kiss his feet;
but cardenio would not permit it, and the licentiate replied for both,
commended the sound reasoning of cardenio, and lastly, begged, advised,
and urged them to come with him to his village, where they might furnish
themselves with what they needed, and take measures to discover don
fernando, or restore dorothea to her parents, or do what seemed to them

 
 ___________________________
 
most advisable. cardenio and dorothea thanked him, and accepted the kind
offer he made them; and the barber, who had been listening to all
attentively and in silence, on his part some kindly words also, and with
no less good-will than the curate offered his services in any way that
might be of use to them. he also explained to them in a few words the
object that had brought them there, and the strange nature of don
quixote's madness, and how they were waiting for his squire, who had gone
in search of him. like t
 
 ___________________________
 
he recollection of a dream, the quarrel he had
had with don quixote came back to cardenio's memory, and he described it
to the others; but he was unable to say what the dispute was about.

at this moment they heard a shout, and recognised it as coming from
sancho panza, who, not finding them where he had left them, was calling
aloud to them. they went to meet him, and in answer to their inquiries
about don quixote, he told them how he had found him stripped to his
shirt, lank, yellow, half dead with hunger, and sighing for his lady
dulcinea; and although he had told him that
 
 ___________________________
 
 had
answered that he was determined not to appear in the presence of her
beauty until he had done deeds to make him worthy of her favour; and if
this went on, sancho said, he ran the risk of not becoming an emperor as
in duty bound, or even an archbishop, which was the least he could be;
for which reason they ought to consider what was to be done to get him
away from there. the licentiate in reply told him not to be uneasy, for
they would fetch him away in spite of himself. he then told cardenio and
dorothea what they had proposed to do to cure don quixote, or at any rate
take him home; upon which dorothea said that she could play the
distressed damsel better than the barber; especially as she had there the
dress in which to do it to the life, and that they might trust to her
acting the part in every particular requisite for carrying out their
scheme, for she had read a great many books of chivalry, and knew exactly
the style in which afflicted damsels begged boons of knights-er
 
 ___________________________
 
surdities of his master had taken of his fancy, for he had evidently
persuaded himself that he was going to be an emperor.

by this time dorothea had seated herself upon the curate's mule, and the
barber had fitted the ox-tail beard to his face, and they now told sancho
to conduct them to where don quixote was, warning him not to say that he
knew either the licentiate or the barber, as his master's becoming an
emperor entirely depended on his not recognising them; neither the curate
nor cardenio, however, thought fit to go with them; cardenio lest he
should remind don quixote of the quarrel he had with him, and the curate
as there was no necessity for his presence just yet, so they allowed the
others to go on before them, while they themselves followed slowly on
foot. the curate did not forget to instruct dorothea how to act, but she
said they might make their minds easy, as everything would be done
exactly as the books of chivalry required and described.

they had gone about t
 
 ___________________________
 
at ease all
the days of my life? not unless you go to sleep and haven't the wit or
skill to turn things to account and sell three, six, or ten thousand
vassals while you would be talking about it! by god i will stir them up,
big and little, or as best i can, and let them be ever so black i'll turn
them into white or yellow. come, come, what a fool i am!" and so he
jogged on, so occupied with his thoughts and easy in his mind that he
forgot all about the hardship of travelling on foot.

cardenio and the curate were watching all this from among some bushes,
not knowing how to join company with the others; but the curate, who was
very fertile in devices, soon hit upon a way of effecting their purpose,
and with a pair of scissors he had in a case he quickly cut off
cardenio's beard, and putting on him a grey jerkin of his own he gave him
a black cloak, leaving himself in his breeches and doublet, while
cardenio's appearance was so different from what it had been that he
would not h
 
 ___________________________
 
 have remained torn and lacerated, and when it could heal all that it
must be good for more than beards.

"and so it is," said the curate, and he promised to teach it to him on
the first opportunity. they then agreed that for the present the curate
should mount, and that the three should ride by turns until they reached
the inn, which might be about six leagues from where they were.

three then being mounted, that is to say, don quixote, the princess, and
the curate, and three on foot, cardenio, the barber, and sancho panza,
don quixote said to the damsel:

"let your highness, lady, lead on whithersoever is most pleasing to you;"
but before she could answer the licentiate said:

"towards what kingdom would your ladyship direct our course? is it
perchance towards that of micomicon? it must be, or else i know little
about kingdoms."

she, being ready on all points, understood that she was to answer "yes,"
so she said "yes, senor, my way lies towards that kingdom."

"in that
 
 ___________________________
 
 friend and barber, and i
were going to seville to receive some money that a relative of mine who
went to the indies many years ago had sent me, and not such a small sum
but that it was over sixty thousand pieces of eight, full weight, which
is something; and passing by this place yesterday we were attacked by
four footpads, who stripped us even to our beards, and them they stripped
off so that the barber found it necessary to put on a false one, and even
this young man here"-pointing to cardenio--"they completely transformed.
but the best of it is, the story goes in the neighbourhood that those who
attacked us belong to a number of galley slaves who, they say, were set
free almost on the very same spot by a man of such valour that, in spite
of the commissary and of the guards, he released the whole of them; and
beyond all doubt he must have been out of his senses, or he must be as
great a scoundrel as they, or some man without heart or conscience to let
the wolf loose among the 
 
 ___________________________
 
you have no objection to do
so, what is the nature of your trouble, and how many, who, and what are
the persons of whom i am to require due satisfaction, and on whom i am to
take vengeance on your behalf?"

"that i will do with all my heart," replied dorothea, "if it will not be
wearisome to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes."

"it will not be wearisome, senora," said don quixote; to which dorothea
replied, "well, if that be so, give me your attention." as soon as she
said this, cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted dorothea would invent for herself;
and sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the saddle, and
with the help of coughing and other preliminaries taken time to think,
began with great sprightliness of manner in this fashion.

"first of all, i would have you know, sirs, that my name is-" and here
she stopped for a moment, for
 
 ___________________________
 
mes amused herself
reading them; but that she did not know the situation of the provinces or
seaports, and so she had said at haphazard that she had landed at osuna.

"so i saw," said the curate, "and for that reason i made haste to say
what i did, by which it was all set right. but is it not a strange thing
to see how readily this unhappy gentleman believes all these figments and
lies, simply because they are in the style and manner of the absurdities
of his books?"

"so it is," said cardenio; "and so uncommon and unexampled, that were one
to attempt to invent and concoct it in fiction, i doubt if there be any
wit keen enough to imagine it."

"but another strange thing about it," said the curate, "is that, apart
from the silly things which this worthy gentleman says in connection with
his craze, when other subjects are dealt with, he can discuss them in a
perfectly rational manner, showing that his mind is quite clear and
composed; so that, provided his chivalry is not touch
 
 ___________________________
 
st at times! one would think thou hadst studied."

"in faith, then, i cannot even read."

master nicholas here called out to them to wait a while, as they wanted
to halt and drink at a little spring there was there. don quixote drew
up, not a little to the satisfaction of sancho, for he was by this time
weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his master catching him
tripping, for though he knew that dulcinea was a peasant girl of el
toboso, he had never seen her in all his life. cardenio had now put on
the clothes which dorothea was wearing when they found her, and though
they were not very good, they were far better than those he put off. they
dismounted together by the side of the spring, and with what the curate
had provided himself with at the inn they appeased, though not very well,
the keen appetite they all of them brought with them.

while they were so employed there happened to come by a youth passing on
his way, who stopping to examine the party at the spring,
 
 ___________________________
 
princess's squire, they could tell him that she had sent him on
before her to give notice to the people of her kingdom that she was
coming, and bringing with her the deliverer of them all. on this the
barber cheerfully restored the tail to the landlady, and at the same time
they returned all the accessories they had borrowed to effect don
quixote's deliverance. all the people of the inn were struck with
astonishment at the beauty of dorothea, and even at the comely figure of
the shepherd cardenio. the curate made them get ready such fare as there
was in the inn, and the landlord, in hope of better payment, served them
up a tolerably good dinner. all this time don quixote was asleep, and
they thought it best not to waken him, as sleeping would now do him more
good than eating.

while at dinner, the company consisting of the landlord, his wife, their
daughter, maritornes, and all the travellers, they discussed the strange
craze of don quixote and the manner in which he had been fo
 
 ___________________________
 
 bottom of
the river, carrying with it the knight who would not let go his hold; and
when they got down there he found himself among palaces and gardens so
pretty that it was a wonder to see; and then the serpent changed itself
into an old ancient man, who told him such things as were never heard.
hold your peace, senor; for if you were to hear this you would go mad
with delight. a couple of figs for your great captain and your diego
garcia!"

hearing this dorothea said in a whisper to cardenio, "our landlord is
almost fit to play a second part to don quixote."

"i think so," said cardenio, "for, as he shows, he accepts it as a
certainty that everything those books relate took place exactly as it is
written down; and the barefooted friars themselves would not persuade him
to the contrary."

"but consider, brother," said the curate once more, "there never was any
felixmarte of hircania in the world, nor any cirongilio of thrace, or any
of the other knights of the same sort, t
 
 ___________________________
 
t of me very earnestly; but i would not give
it, meaning to return it to the person who forgot the valise, books, and
papers here, for maybe he will return here some time or other; and though
i know i shall miss the books, faith i mean to return them; for though i
am an innkeeper, still i am a christian."

"you are very right, friend," said the curate; "but for all that, if the
novel pleases me you must let me copy it."

"with all my heart," replied the host.

while they were talking cardenio had taken up the novel and begun to read
it, and forming the same opinion of it as the curate, he begged him to
read it so that they might all hear it.

"i would read it," said the curate, "if the time would not be better
spent in sleeping."

"it will be rest enough for me," said dorothea, "to while away the time
by listening to some tale, for my spirits are not yet tranquil enough to
let me sleep when it would be seasonable."

"well then, in that case," said the curate, "i will read
 
 ___________________________
 
ing battle with the giant. for his imagination was so wrought
upon by the adventure he was going to accomplish, that it made him dream
he had already reached the kingdom of micomicon, and was engaged in
combat with his enemy; and believing he was laying on the giant, he had
given so many sword cuts to the skins that the whole room was full of
wine. on seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on don
quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way,
that if cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have
brought the war of the giant to an end. but in spite of all the poor
gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold water
from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on which don
quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what was the
matter. dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was, would not
go in to witness the battle between her champion and her opponent. as for
sancho, h
 
 ___________________________
 
e you, since by the help of god on high
and by the favour of her by whom i live and breathe, i have fulfilled it
so successfully."

"did not i say so?" said sancho on hearing this. "you see i wasn't drunk;
there you see my master has already salted the giant; there's no doubt
about the bulls; my county is all right!"

who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master and
man? and laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed himself; but
at length the barber, cardenio, and the curate contrived with no small
trouble to get don quixote on the bed, and he fell asleep with every
appearance of excessive weariness. they left him to sleep, and came out
to the gate of the inn to console sancho panza on not having found the
head of the giant; but much more work had they to appease the landlord,
who was furious at the sudden death of his wine-skins; and said the
landlady half scolding, half crying, "at an evil moment and in an unlucky
hour he came into my house
 
 ___________________________
 
ring
between a gallant and his mistress it might pass; but between husband and
wife there is something of an impossibility about it. as to the way in
which the story is told, however, i have no fault to find."




chapter xxxvi.

which treats of more curious incidents that occurred at the inn


just at that instant the landlord, who was standing at the gate of the
inn, exclaimed, "here comes a fine troop of guests; if they stop here we
may say gaudeamus."

"what are they?" said cardenio.

"four men," said the landlord, "riding a la jineta, with lances and
bucklers, and all with black veils, and with them there is a woman in
white on a side-saddle, whose face is also veiled, and two attendants on
foot."

"are they very near?" said the curate.

"so near," answered the landlord, "that here they come."

hearing this dorothea covered her face, and cardenio retreated into don
quixote's room, and they hardly had time to do so before the whole party
the host had described
 
 ___________________________
 
 entered the inn, and the four that were on
horseback, who were of highbred appearance and bearing, dismounted, and
came forward to take down the woman who rode on the side-saddle, and one
of them taking her in his arms placed her in a chair that stood at the
entrance of the room where cardenio had hidden himself. all this time
neither she nor they had removed their veils or spoken a word, only on
sitting down on the chair the woman gave a deep sigh and let her arms
fall like one that was ill and weak. the attendants on foot then led the
horses away to the stable. observing this the curate, curious to know who
these people in such a dress and preserving such silence were, went to
where the servants were standing and put the question to one of them, who
answered him.

"faith, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that woman, for it is her way to give no thanks for
anything that is done for her; and do not try to make her answer unless
you want to hear some lie from her lips."

"i have never told a lie," was the immediate reply of her who had been
silent until now; "on the contrary, it is because i am so truthful and so
ignorant of lying devices that i am now in this miserable condition; and
this i call you yourself to witness, for it is my unstained truth that
has made you false and a liar."

cardenio heard these words clearly and distinctly, being quite close to
the speaker, for there was only the door of don quixote's room between
them, and the instant he did so, uttering a loud exclamation he cried,
"good god! what is this i hear? what voice is this that has reached my
ears?" startled at the voice the lady turned her head; and not seeing the
speaker she stood up and attempted to enter the room; observing which the
gentleman held her back, preventing her from moving a step. in her
a
 
 ___________________________
 
her heart, she fell backwards fainting, and but for the barber being
close by to catch her in his arms, she would have fallen completely to
the ground. the curate at once hastened to uncover her face and throw
water on it, and as he did so don fernando, for he it was who held the
other in his arms, recognised her and stood as if death-stricken by the
sight; not, however, relaxing his grasp of luscinda, for it was she that
was struggling to release herself from his hold, having recognised
cardenio by his voice, as he had recognised her. cardenio also heard
dorothea's cry as she fell fainting, and imagining that it came from his
luscinda burst forth in terror from the room, and the first thing he saw
was don fernando with luscinda in his arms. don fernando, too, knew
cardenio at once; and all three, luscinda, cardenio, and dorothea, stood
in silent amazement scarcely knowing what had happened to them.

they gazed at one another without speaking, dorothea at don fernando, don
ferna
 
 ___________________________
 
ndo at cardenio, cardenio at luscinda, and luscinda at cardenio. the
first to break silence was luscinda, who thus addressed don fernando:
"leave me, senor don fernando, for the sake of what you owe to yourself;
if no other reason will induce you, leave me to cling to the wall of
which i am the ivy, to the support from which neither your importunities,
nor your threats, nor your promises, nor your gifts have been able to
detach me. see how heaven, by ways strange and hidden from our sight, has
brought me face to face with my true husband; and well yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ve come
here driven by my shame; it is only grief and sorrow at seeing myself
forgotten by thee that have led me. it was thy will to make me thine, and
thou didst so follow thy will, that now, even though thou repentest, thou
canst not help being mine. bethink thee, my lord, the unsurpassable
affection i bear thee may compensate for the beauty and noble birth for
which thou wouldst desert me. thou canst not be the fair luscinda's
because thou art mine, nor can she be thine because she is cardenio's;
and it will be easier, remember, to bend thy will to love one who adores
thee, than to lead one to love thee who abhors thee now. thou didst
address thyself to my simplicity, thou didst lay siege to my virtue, thou
wert not ignorant of my station, well dost thou know how i yielded wholly
to thy will; there is no ground or reason for thee to plead deception,
and if it be so, as it is, and if thou art a christian as thou art a
gentleman, why dost thou by such subterfuges put off making 
 
 ___________________________
 
omfort to
her, but was prevented by don fernando's grasp which held her fast. he,
overwhelmed with confusion and astonishment, after regarding dorothea for
some moments with a fixed gaze, opened his arms, and, releasing luscinda,
exclaimed:

"thou hast conquered, fair dorothea, thou hast conquered, for it is
impossible to have the heart to deny the united force of so many truths."

luscinda in her feebleness was on the point of falling to the ground when
don fernando released her, but cardenio, who stood near, having retreated
behind don fernando to escape recognition, casting fear aside and
regardless of what might happen, ran forward to support her, and said as
he clasped her in his arms, "if heaven in its compassion is willing to
let thee rest at last, mistress of my heart, true, constant, and fair,
nowhere canst thou rest more safely than in these arms that now receive
thee, and received thee before when fortune permitted me to call thee
mine."

at these words luscinda l
 
 ___________________________
 
ooked up at cardenio, at first beginning to
recognise him by his voice and then satisfying herself by her eyes that
it was he, and hardly knowing what she did, and heedless of all
considerations of decorum, she flung her arms around his neck and
pressing her face close to his, said, "yes, my dear lord, you are the
true master of this your slave, even though adverse fate interpose again,
and fresh dangers threaten this life that hangs on yours."

a strange sight was this for don fernando and those that stood
 
 ___________________________
 
 around,
filled with surprise at an incident so unlooked for. dorothea fancied
that don fernando changed colour and looked as though he meant to take
vengeance on cardenio, for she observed him put his hand to his sword;
and the instant the idea struck her, with wonderful quickness she clasped
him round the knees, and kissing them and holding him so as to prevent
his moving, she said, while her tears continued to flow, "what is it thou
wouldst do, my only refuge, in this unforeseen event? thou hast thy wife
at thy feet, and she whom thou wouldst have for thy wife is in the arms
of her husband: reflect whether it will be right for thee, whether it
will be p
 
 ___________________________
 
 the face and bosom of her lawful
husband. for god's sake i entreat of thee, for thine own i implore thee,
let not this open manifestation rouse thy anger; but rather so calm it as
to allow these two lovers to live in peace and quiet without any
interference from thee so long as heaven permits them; and in so doing
thou wilt prove the generosity of thy lofty noble spirit, and the world
shall see that with thee reason has more influence than passion."

all the time dorothea was speaking, cardenio, though he held luscinda in
his arms, never took his eyes off don fernando, determined, if he saw him
make any hostile movement, to try and defend himself and resist as best
he could all who might assail him, though it should cost him his life.
but now don fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the barber, who
had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy sancho panza,
ran forward and gathered round don fernando, entreating him to have
regard for the tears of dorothea,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and not suffer her reasonable hopes to
be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed, what she said was but
the truth; and bidding him observe that it was not, as it might seem, by
accident, but by a special disposition of providence that they had all
met in a place where no one could have expected a meeting. and the curate
bade him remember that only death could part luscinda from cardenio; that
even if some sword were to separate them they would think their death
most happy; and that in a case that admitted of no remedy his wisest
course was, by conquering and putting a constraint upon himself, to show
a generous mind, and of his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the
happiness heaven had granted them. he bade him, too, turn his eyes upon
the beauty of dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much
less excel her; while to that beauty should be added her mod
 
 ___________________________
 
f you is that you reproach me not
with my transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and
force that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against
being yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now
happy luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors: and
as she has found and gained the object of her desires, and i have found
in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her cardenio, as on my knees i pray
heaven to allow me to live with my dorothea;" and with these words he
once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so much
tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all. not
so luscinda, and cardenio, and almost all the others, for they shed so
many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the others, that
one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen
 
 ___________________________
 
 upon them all. even
sancho panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he only wept because
he saw that dorothea was not as he fancied the queen micomicona, of whom
he expected such great favours. their wonder as well as their weeping
lasted some time, and then cardenio and luscinda went and fell on their
knees before don fernando, returning him thanks for the favour he had
rendered them in language so grateful that he knew not how to answer
them, and raising them up embraced them with every mark of affection and
courtesy.

he then asked dorothea how she had managed to reach a place so far
removed from her own home, and she in a few fitting words told all that
she had previously related to cardenio, with which don fernando and his
companions were so d
 
 ___________________________
 
elighted that they wished the story had been longer;
so charmingly did dorothea describe her misadventures. when she had
finished don fernando recounted what had befallen him in the city after
he had found in luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she
was cardenio's wife, and never could be his. he said he meant to kill
her, and would have done so had he not been prevented by her parents, and
that he quitted the house full of rage and shame, and resolved to avenge
himself when a more convenient opportunity should offer. the next day he
learned that luscinda had disappeared from her father's house, and that
no one could tell whither she had gone. finally, at the end of some
months he ascertained that she was in a convent and meant to remain there
a
 
 ___________________________
 
ll the rest of her life, if she were not to share it with cardenio; and
as soon as he had learned this, taking these three gentlemen as his
companions, he arrived at the place where she was, but avoided speaking
to her, fearing that if it were known he was there stricter precautions
would be taken in the convent; and watching a time when the porter's
lodge was open he left two to guard the gate, and he and the other
entered the convent in quest of luscinda, whom they found in the
cloisters in conversation with one of the nuns, and carrying her off
with
 
 ___________________________
 
ntinued the story of the famous princess micomicona, with
other droll adventures


to all this sancho listened with no little sorrow at heart to see how his
hopes of dignity were fading away and vanishing in smoke, and how the
fair princess micomicona had turned into dorothea, and the giant into don
fernando, while his master was sleeping tranquilly, totally unconscious
of all that had come to pass. dorothea was unable to persuade herself
that her present happiness was not all a dream; cardenio was in a similar
state of mind, and luscinda's thoughts ran in the same direction. don
fernando gave thanks to heaven for the favour shown to him and for having
been rescued from the intricate labyrinth in which he had been brought so
near the destruction of his good name and of his soul; and in short
everybody in the inn was full of contentment and satisfaction at the
happy issue of such a complicated and hopeless business. the curate as a
sensible man made sound reflections upon the wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ole affair, and
congratulated each upon his good fortune; but the one that was in the
highest spirits and good humour was the landlady, because of the promise
cardenio and the curate had given her to pay for all the losses and
damage she had sustained through don quixote's means. sancho, as has been
already said, was the only one who was distressed, unhappy, and dejected;
and so with a long face he went in to his master, who had just awoke, and
said to him:

"sir rueful countenance, your worship may as well sleep on as much as you
like, without troubling yourself about killing any giant or restoring her
kingdom to the princess; for that is all over an
 
 ___________________________
 
ena pobre where he fancied himself stationed because of his lady's
scorn. he described to them also nearly all the adventures that sancho
had mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little, thinking
it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy intellect could be
capable of. but now, the curate said, that the lady dorothea's good
fortune prevented her from proceeding with their purpose, it would be
necessary to devise or discover some other way of getting him home.

cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and suggested
that luscinda would act and support dorothea's part sufficiently well.

"no," said don fernando, "that must not be, for i want dorothea to follow
out this idea of hers; and if the worthy gentleman's village is not very
far off, i shall be happy if i can do anything for his relief."

"it is not more than two days' journey from this," said the curate.

"even if it were more," said don fernando, "i would gladly travel so far

 
 ___________________________
 
ains to prepare for them the
best supper that was in his power. the hour therefore having arrived they
all took their seats at a long table like a refectory one, for round or
square table there was none in the inn, and the seat of honour at the
head of it, though he was for refusing it, they assigned to don quixote,
who desired the lady micomicona to place herself by his side, as he was
her protector. luscinda and zoraida took their places next her, opposite
to them were don fernando and cardenio, and next the captive and the
other gentlemen, and by the side of the ladies, the curate and the
barber. and so they supped in high enjoyment, which was increased when
they observed don quixote leave off eating, and, moved by an impulse like
that which made him deliver himself at such length when he supped with
the goatherds, begin to address them:

"verily, gentlemen, if we reflect upon it, great and marvellous are the
things they see, who make profession of the order of knight-errantr
 
 ___________________________
 
id to
him, "in truth, captain, the manner in which you have related this
remarkable adventure has been such as befitted the novelty and
strangeness of the matter. the whole story is curious and uncommon, and
abounds with incidents that fill the hearers with wonder and
astonishment; and so great is the pleasure we have found in listening to
it that we should be glad if it were to begin again, even though
to-morrow were to find us still occupied with the same tale." and while
he said this cardenio and the rest of them offered to be of service to
him in any way that lay in their power, and in words and language so
kindly and sincere that the captain was much gratified by their
good-will. in particular don fernando offered, if he would go back with
him, to get his brother the marquis to become godfather at the baptism of
zoraida, and on his own part to provide him with the means of making his
appearance in his own country with the credit and comfort he was entitled
to. for all this 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll find arms in their supreme
excellence, and beauty in its highest perfection."

the judge was struck with amazement at the language of don quixote, whom
he scrutinized very carefully, no less astonished by his figure than by
his talk; and before he could find words to answer him he had a fresh
surprise, when he saw opposite to him luscinda, dorothea, and zoraida,
who, having heard of the new guests and of the beauty of the young lady,
had come to see her and welcome her; don fernando, cardenio, and the
curate, however, greeted him in a more intelligible and polished style.
in short, the judge made his entrance in a state of bewilderment, as well
with what he saw as what he heard, and the fair ladies of the inn gave
the fair damsel a cordial welcome. on the whole he could perceive that
all who were there were people of quality; but with the figure,
countenance, and bearing of don quixote he was at his wits' end; and all
civilities having been exchanged, and the accommodation of
 
 ___________________________
 
 was his brother, asked one of the
servants who accompanied him what his name was, and whether he knew from
what part of the country he came. the servant replied that he was called
the licentiate juan perez de viedma, and that he had heard it said he
came from a village in the mountains of leon. from this statement, and
what he himself had seen, he felt convinced that this was his brother who
had adopted letters by his father's advice; and excited and rejoiced, he
called don fernando and cardenio and the curate aside, and told them how
the matter stood, assuring them that the judge was his brother. the
servant had further informed him that he was now going to the indies with
the appointment of judge of the supreme court of mexico; and he had
learned, likewise, that the young lady was his daughter, whose mother had
died in giving birth to her, and that he was very rich in consequence of
the dowry left to him with the daughter. he asked their advice as to what
means he should adopt
 
 ___________________________
 

a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies that it
forced them all to listen attentively, but especially dorothea, who had
been awake, and by whose side dona clara de viedma, for so the judge's
daughter was called, lay sleeping. no one could imagine who it was that
sang so sweetly, and the voice was unaccompanied by any instrument. at
one moment it seemed to them as if the singer were in the courtyard, at
another in the stable; and as they were all attention, wondering,
cardenio came to the door and said, "listen, whoever is not asleep, and
you will hear a muleteer's voice that enchants as it chants."

"we are listening to it already, senor," said dorothea; on which cardenio
went away; and dorothea, giving all her attention to it, made out the
words of the song to be these:




chapter xliii.

wherein is related the pleasant story of the muleteer, together with
other strange things that came to pass in the inn

ah me, love's mariner am i
  on love's dee
 
 ___________________________
 
service, better
pleased than you can imagine that we shall return so soon and be able to
restore you to those eyes that so yearn for you."

"that shall be as i please, or as heaven orders," returned don luis.

"what can you please or heaven order," said the other, "except to agree
to go back? anything else is impossible."

all this conversation between the two was overheard by the muleteer at
whose side don luis lay, and rising, he went to report what had taken
place to don fernando, cardenio, and the others, who had by this time
dressed themselves; and told them how the man had addressed the youth as
"don," and what words had passed, and how he wanted him to return to his
father, which the youth was unwilling to do. with this, and what they
already knew of the rare voice that heaven had bestowed upon him, they
all felt very anxious to know more particularly who he was, and even to
help him if it was attempted to employ force against him; so they
hastened to where he was stil
 
 ___________________________
 
l talking and arguing with his servant.
dorothea at this instant came out of her room, followed by dona clara all
in a tremor; and calling cardenio aside, she told him in a few words the
story of the musician and dona clara, and he at the same time told her
what had happened, how his father's servants had come in search of him;
but in telling her so, he did not speak low enough but that dona clara
heard what he said, at which she was so much agitated that had not
dorothea hastened to support her she would have fallen to the ground.
cardenio then bade dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to
make the whole matter right, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t he could not do so on any account until
he had concluded some business in which his life, honour, and heart were
at stake. the servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would
not return without him, and that they would take him away whether he
liked it or not.

"you shall not do that," replied don luis, "unless you take me dead;
though however you take me, it will be without life."

by this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the dispute,
but particularly cardenio, don fernando, his companions, the judge, the
curate, the barber, and don quixote; for he now considered there was no
necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer. cardenio being
already acquainted with the young man's story, asked the men who wanted
to take him away, what object they had in seeking to carry off this youth
against his will.

"our object," said one of the four, "is to save the life of his father,
who is in danger of losing it through this gentleman's disappear
 
 ___________________________
 
h
submission to sounder judgments--that this piece we have now before us,
which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is no barber's
basin, but is as far from being one as white is from black, and truth
from falsehood; i say, moreover, that this, although it is a helmet, is
not a complete helmet."

"certainly not," said don quixote, "for half of it is wanting, that is to
say the beaver."

"it is quite true," said the curate, who saw the object of his friend the
barber; and cardenio, don fernando and his companions agreed with him,
and even the judge, if his thoughts had not been so full of don luis's
affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so taken up
with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid little or no
attention to these facetious proceedings.

"god bless me!" exclaimed their butt the barber at this; "is it possible
that such an honourable company can say that this is not a basin but a
helmet? why, this is a thing that would as
 
 ___________________________
 
he landlord, who was of the
fraternity, ran at once to fetch his staff of office and his sword, and
ranged himself on the side of his comrades; the servants of don luis
clustered round him, lest he should escape from them in the confusion;
the barber, seeing the house turned upside down, once more laid hold of
his pack-saddle and sancho did the same; don quixote drew his sword and
charged the officers; don luis cried out to his servants to leave him
alone and go and help don quixote, and cardenio and don fernando, who
were supporting him; the curate was shouting at the top of his voice, the
landlady was screaming, her daughter was wailing, maritornes was weeping,
dorothea was aghast, luscinda terror-stricken, and dona clara in a faint.
the barber cudgelled sancho, and sancho pommelled the barber; don luis
gave one of his servants, who ventured to catch him by the arm to keep
him from escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood; the judge took
his part; don fernando had got on
 
 ___________________________
 
 side for the eagle, on this for the
helmet; we are all fighting, and all at cross purposes. come then, you,
senor judge, and you, senor curate; let the one represent king agramante
and the other king sobrino, and make peace among us; for by god almighty
it is a sorry business that so many persons of quality as we are should
slay one another for such trifling cause." the officers, who did not
understand don quixote's mode of speaking, and found themselves roughly
handled by don fernando, cardenio, and their companions, were not to be
appeased; the barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle
were the worse for the struggle; sancho like a good servant obeyed the
slightest word of his master; while the four servants of don luis kept
quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so. the landlord
alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of this
madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at length
the uproar was stilled fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r the present; the pack-saddle remained a
caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet and the inn a
castle in don quixote's imagination.

all having been now pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the
judge and the curate, the servants of don luis began again to urge him to
return with them at once; and while he was discussing the matter with
them, the judge took counsel with don fernando, cardenio, and the curate
as to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and
what don luis had said to him. it was agreed at length that don fernando
should tell the servants of don luis who he was, and that it was his
desire that don luis should accompany him to andalusia, where he would
receive from the marquis his brother the welcome his quality entitled him
to; for, otherwise, it was easy to see from the determination of don luis
that he would not return to his father at pre
 
 ___________________________
 
; and the reason is that as they carry hell with
them wherever they go, and can get no ease whatever from their torments,
and as a sweet smell is a thing that gives pleasure and enjoyment, it is
impossible that they can smell sweet; if, then, this devil thou speakest
of seems to thee to smell of amber, either thou art deceiving thyself, or
he wants to deceive thee by making thee fancy he is not a devil."

such was the conversation that passed between master and man; and don
fernando and cardenio, apprehensive of sancho's making a complete
discovery of their scheme, towards which he had already gone some way,
resolved to hasten their departure, and calling the landlord aside, they
directed him to saddle rocinante and put the pack-saddle on sancho's ass,
which he did with great alacrity. in the meantime the curate had made an
arrangement with the officers that they should bear them company as far
as his village, he paying them so much a day. cardenio hung the buckler
on one side o