daughter at whose birth her mother died, the most respected woman there
was in this neighbourhood; i fancy i can see her now with that
countenance which had the sun on one side and the moon on the other; and
moreover active, and kind to the poor, for which i trust that at the
present moment her soul is in bliss with god in the other world. her
husband guillermo died of grief at the death of so good a wife, leaving
his daughter marcela, a child and rich, to the care of an uncle of hers,
a priest and prebendary in our village. the girl grew up with such beauty
that it reminded us of her mother's, which was very great, and yet it was
thought that the daughter's would exceed it; and so when she reached the
age of fourteen to fifteen years nobody beheld her but blessed god that
had made her so beautiful, and the greater number were in love with her
past redemption. her uncle kept her in great seclusion and retirement,
but for all that the fame of her great beauty spread so that, as w
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, and
importuned, to give her in marriage not only by those of our town but of
those many leagues round, and by the persons of highest quality in them.
but he, being a good christian man, though he desired to give her in
marriage at once, seeing her to be old enough, was unwilling to do so
without her consent, not that he had any eye to the gain and profit which
the custody of the girl's property brought him while he put off her
marriage; and, faith, this was said in praise of the good priest in more
than one set in the town. for i would have you know, sir errant, that in
these little villages everything is talked about and everything is carped
at, and rest assured, as i am, that the priest must be over and above
good who forces his parishioners to speak well of him, especially in
villages."

"that is the truth," said don quixote; "but go on, for the story is very
good, and you, good pedro, tell it with very good grace."

"may that of the lord not be wanting to me," said p
 
 ___________________________
 


"then what the devil brought you here, being a churchman?" said don
quixote.

"what, senor?" said the other. "my bad luck."

"then still worse awaits you," said don quixote, "if you do not satisfy
me as to all i asked you at first."

"you shall be soon satisfied," said the licentiate; "you must know, then,
that though just now i said i was a licentiate, i am only a bachelor, and
my name is alonzo lopez; i am a native of alcobendas, i come from the
city of baeza with eleven others, priests, the same who fled with the
torches, and we are going to the city of segovia accompanying a dead body
which is in that litter, and is that of a gentleman who died in baeza,
where he was interred; and now, as i said, we are taking his bones to
their burial-place, which is in segovia, where he was born."

"and who killed him?" asked don quixote.

"god, by means of a malignant fever that took him," answered the
bachelor.

"in that case," said don quixote, "the lord has relieved me of t
 
 ___________________________
 
ous don quixote of la mancha, otherwise called the knight of the
rueful countenance."

the bachelor then took his departure.

i forgot to mention that before he did so he said to don quixote,
"remember that you stand excommunicated for having laid violent hands on
a holy thing, juxta illud, si quis, suadente diabolo."

"i do not understand that latin," answered don quixote, "but i know well
i did not lay hands, only this pike; besides, i did not think i was
committing an assault upon priests or things of the church, which, like a
catholic and faithful christian as i am, i respect and revere, but upon
phantoms and spectres of the other world; but even so, i remember how it
fared with cid ruy diaz when he broke the chair of the ambassador of that
king before his holiness the pope, who excommunicated him for the same;
and yet the good roderick of vivar bore himself that day like a very
noble and valiant knight."

on hearing this the bachelor took his departure, as has been sa
 
 ___________________________
 
down
to the waist of mingled red and white, for it was, as has been said, the
tail of a clay-red ox.

they took leave of all, and of the good maritornes, who, sinner as she
was, promised to pray a rosary of prayers that god might grant them
success in such an arduous and christian undertaking as that they had in
hand. but hardly had he sallied forth from the inn when it struck the
curate that he was doing wrong in rigging himself out in that fashion, as
it was an indecorous thing for a priest to dress himself that way even
though much might depend upon it; and saying so to the barber he begged
him to change dresses, as it was fitter he should be the distressed
damsel, while he himself would play the squire's part, which would be
less derogatory to his dignity; otherwise he was resolved to have nothing
more to do with the matter, and let the devil take don quixote. just at
this moment sancho came up, and on seeing the pair in such a costume he
was unable to restrain his laught
 
 ___________________________
 
rs, of listening to these digressions; my
sorrow is not one of those that can or should be told tersely and
briefly, for to me each incident seems to call for many words."

to this the curate replied that not only were they not weary of listening
to him, but that the details he mentioned interested them greatly, being
of a kind by no means to be omitted and deserving of the same attention
as the main story.

"to proceed, then," continued cardenio: "all being assembled in the hall,
the priest of the parish came in and as he took the pair by the hand to
perform the requisite ceremony, at the words, 'will you, senora luscinda,
take senor don fernando, here present, for your lawful husband, as the
holy mother church ordains?' i thrust my head and neck out from between
the tapestries, and with eager ears and throbbing heart set myself to
listen to luscinda's answer, awaiting in her reply the sentence of death
or the grant of life. oh, that i had but dared at that moment to rush
f
 
 ___________________________
 
in the object of thy wishes, for luscinda is my bride,
and i am her husband!' fool that i am! now that i am far away, and out of
danger, i say i should have done what i did not do: now that i have
allowed my precious treasure to be robbed from me, i curse the robber, on
whom i might have taken vengeance had i as much heart for it as i have
for bewailing my fate; in short, as i was then a coward and a fool,
little wonder is it if i am now dying shame-stricken, remorseful, and
mad.

"the priest stood waiting for the answer of luscinda, who for a long time
withheld it; and just as i thought she was taking out the dagger to save
her honour, or struggling for words to make some declaration of the truth
on my behalf, i heard her say in a faint and feeble voice, 'i will:' don
fernando said the same, and giving her the ring they stood linked by a
knot that could never be loosed. the bridegroom then approached to
embrace his bride; and she, pressing her hand upon her heart, fell
faint
 
 ___________________________
 
uch
surprised to see him there, and made great efforts to dismount. this,
however, the curate would not allow, on which don quixote said, "permit
me, senor licentiate, for it is not fitting that i should be on horseback
and so reverend a person as your worship on foot."

"on no account will i allow it," said the curate; "your mightiness must
remain on horseback, for it is on horseback you achieve the greatest
deeds and adventures that have been beheld in our age; as for me, an
unworthy priest, it will serve me well enough to mount on the haunches of
one of the mules of these gentlefolk who accompany your worship, if they
have no objection, and i will fancy i am mounted on the steed pegasus, or
on the zebra or charger that bore the famous moor, muzaraque, who to this
day lies enchanted in the great hill of zulema, a little distance from
the great complutum."

"nor even that will i consent to, senor licentiate," answered don
quixote, "and i know it will be the good pleasure of
 
 ___________________________
 
ut seeing
that don quixote did not stir hand or foot; and so, fancying he had
killed him, he hastily hitched up his tunic under his girdle and took to
his heels across the country like a deer.

by this time all don quixote's companions had come up to where he lay;
but the processionists seeing them come running, and with them the
officers of the brotherhood with their crossbows, apprehended mischief,
and clustering round the image, raised their hoods, and grasped their
scourges, as the priests did their tapers, and awaited the attack,
resolved to defend themselves and even to take the offensive against
their assailants if they could. fortune, however, arranged the matter
better than they expected, for all sancho did was to fling himself on his
master's body, raising over him the most doleful and laughable
lamentation that ever was heard, for he believed he was dead. the curate
was known to another curate who walked in the procession, and their
recognition of one another set a
 
 ___________________________
 
 that direct others to the heaven
of honour and ambition of merited praise; and moreover it is to be
observed that it is not with grey hairs that one writes, but with the
understanding, and that commonly improves with years. i take it amiss,
too, that he calls me envious, and explains to me, as if i were ignorant,
what envy is; for really and truly, of the two kinds there are, i only
know that which is holy, noble, and high-minded; and if that be so, as it
is, i am not likely to attack a priest, above all if, in addition, he
holds the rank of familiar of the holy office. and if he said what he did
on account of him on whose behalf it seems he spoke, he is entirely
mistaken; for i worship the genius of that person, and admire his works
and his unceasing and strenuous industry. after all, i am grateful to
this gentleman, the author, for saying that my novels are more satirical
than exemplary, but that they are good; for they could not be that unless
there was a little of everythi
 
 ___________________________
 
ntures, which he made the end and aim of his desires.
there was a renewal of offers of service and civilities, and then, with
the gracious permission of the lady of the castle, they took their
departure, don quixote on rocinante, and sancho on dapple.




chapter xix.

in which is related the adventure of the enamoured shepherd, together
with other truly droll incidents


don quixote had gone but a short distance beyond don diego's village,
when he fell in with a couple of either priests or students, and a couple
of peasants, mounted on four beasts of the ass kind. one of the students
carried, wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau,
what seemed to be a little linen and a couple of pairs of ribbed
stockings; the other carried nothing but a pair of new fencing-foils with
buttons. the peasants carried divers articles that showed they were on
their way from some large town where they had bought them, and were
taking them home to their village; and bo
 
 ___________________________
 
ust
be told farther on.




chapter xxi.

in which camacho's wedding is continued, with other delightful incidents


while don quixote and sancho were engaged in the discussion set forth the
last chapter, they heard loud shouts and a great noise, which were
uttered and made by the men on the mares as they went at full gallop,
shouting, to receive the bride and bridegroom, who were approaching with
musical instruments and pageantry of all sorts around them, and
accompanied by the priest and the relatives of both, and all the most
distinguished people of the surrounding villages. when sancho saw the
bride, he exclaimed, "by my faith, she is not dressed like a country
girl, but like some fine court lady; egad, as well as i can make out, the
patena she wears rich coral, and her green cuenca stuff is thirty-pile
velvet; and then the white linen trimming--by my oath, but it's satin!
look at her hands--jet rings on them! may i never have luck if they're
not gold rings, and re
 
 ___________________________
 
oolly, and deliberately threw himself
upon it, and in an instant the bloody point and half the steel blade
appeared at his back, the unhappy man falling to the earth bathed in his
blood, and transfixed by his own weapon.

his friends at once ran to his aid, filled with grief at his misery and
sad fate, and don quixote, dismounting from rocinante, hastened to
support him, and took him in his arms, and found he had not yet ceased to
breathe. they were about to draw out the rapier, but the priest who was
standing by objected to its being withdrawn before he had confessed him,
as the instant of its withdrawal would be that of this death. basilio,
however, reviving slightly, said in a weak voice, as though in pain, "if
thou wouldst consent, cruel quiteria, to give me thy hand as my bride in
this last fatal moment, i might still hope that my rashness would find
pardon, as by its means i attained the bliss of being thine."

hearing this the priest bade him think of the welfare of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
e lost, that they
moved, nay, forced him, to say that if quiteria were willing to give it
he was satisfied, as it was only putting off the fulfillment of his
wishes for a moment. at once all assailed quiteria and pressed her, some
with prayers, and others with tears, and others with persuasive
arguments, to give her hand to poor basilio; but she, harder than marble
and more unmoved than any statue, seemed unable or unwilling to utter a
word, nor would she have given any reply had not the priest bade her
decide quickly what she meant to do, as basilio now had his soul at his
teeth, and there was no time for hesitation.

on this the fair quiteria, to all appearance distressed, grieved, and
repentant, advanced without a word to where basilio lay, his eyes already
turned in his head, his breathing short and painful, murmuring the name
of quiteria between his teeth, and apparently about to die like a heathen
and not like a christian. quiteria approached him, and kneeling, demanded
 
 ___________________________
 
eased to grant me, thus do i give
myself to be thy husband."

"and i give myself to be thy wife," said quiteria, "whether thou livest
many years, or they carry thee from my arms to the grave."

"for one so badly wounded," observed sancho at this point, "this young
man has a great deal to say; they should make him leave off billing and
cooing, and attend to his soul; for to my thinking he has it more on his
tongue than at his teeth."

basilio and quiteria having thus joined hands, the priest, deeply moved
and with tears in his eyes, pronounced the blessing upon them, and
implored heaven to grant an easy passage to the soul of the newly wedded
man, who, the instant he received the blessing, started nimbly to his
feet and with unparalleled effrontery pulled out the rapier that had been
sheathed in his body. all the bystanders were astounded, and some, more
simple than inquiring, began shouting, "a miracle, a miracle!" but
basilio replied, "no miracle, no miracle; only a trick,
 
 ___________________________
 
 a trick!" the
priest, perplexed and amazed, made haste to examine the wound with both
hands, and found that the blade had passed, not through basilio's flesh
and ribs, but through a hollow iron tube full of blood, which he had
adroitly fixed at the place, the blood, as was afterwards ascertained,
having been so prepared as not to congeal. in short, the priest and
camacho and most of those present saw they were tricked and made fools
of. the bride showed no signs of displeasure at the deception; on the
contrary, hearing them say that the marriage, being fraudulent, would not
be valid, she said that she confirmed it afresh, whence they all
concluded that the affair had been planned by agreement and understanding
between the pair, whereat camacho and his supporters were so mortified
that they proceeded to revenge themselves by violence, and a gr
 
 ___________________________
 
nd as it pleases him. basilio has but
this ewe-lamb, and no one, however powerful he may be, shall take her
from him; these two whom god hath joined man cannot separate; and he who
attempts it must first pass the point of this lance;" and so saying he
brandished it so stoutly and dexterously that he overawed all who did not
know him.

but so deep an impression had the rejection of quiteria made on camacho's
mind that it banished her at once from his thoughts; and so the counsels
of the priest, who was a wise and kindly disposed man, prevailed with
him, and by their means he and his partisans were pacified and
tranquillised, and to prove it put up their swords again, inveighing
against the pliancy of quiteria rather than the craftiness of basilio;
camacho maintaining that, if quiteria as a maiden had such a love for
basilio, she would have loved him too as a married woman, and that he
ought to thank heaven more for having taken her than for having given
her.

camacho and tho
 
 ___________________________
 
e to say; and now remember to-morrow is
the day you must set out for the government of the island, and this
evening they will provide you with the proper attire for you to wear, and
all things requisite for your departure."

"let them dress me as they like," said sancho; "however i'm dressed i'll
be sancho panza."

"that's true," said the duke; "but one's dress must be suited to the
office or rank one holds; for it would not do for a jurist to dress like
a soldier, or a soldier like a priest. you, sancho, shall go partly as a
lawyer, partly as a captain, for, in the island i am giving you, arms are
needed as much as letters, and letters as much as arms."

"of letters i know but little," said sancho, "for i don't even know the a
b c; but it is enough for me to have the christus in my memory to be a
good governor. as for arms, i'll handle those they give me till i drop,
and then, god be my help!"

"with so good a memory," said the duke, "sancho cannot go wrong in
anything."
 
 ___________________________
 
ll; he asked two ducats, which they paid him in
advance; he worked for eight days, and at the end of them had nothing
painted, and then said he had no turn for painting such trifling things;
he returned the money, and for all that has married on the pretence of
being a good workman; to be sure he has now laid aside his paint-brush
and taken a spade in hand, and goes to the field like a gentleman. pedro
lobo's son has received the first orders and tonsure, with the intention
of becoming a priest. minguilla, mingo silvato's granddaughter, found it
out, and has gone to law with him on the score of having given her
promise of marriage. evil tongues say she is with child by him, but he
denies it stoutly. there are no olives this year, and there is not a drop
of vinegar to be had in the whole village. a company of soldiers passed
through here; when they left they took away with them three of the girls
of the village; i will not tell thee who they are; perhaps they will come
back, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ses, who are here
present, are the fairest and most courteous maidens in the world,
excepting only the peerless dulcinea del toboso, sole mistress of my
thoughts, be it said without offence to those who hear me, ladies and
gentlemen."

on hearing this sancho, who had been listening with great attention,
cried out in a loud voice, "is it possible there is anyone in the world
who will dare to say and swear that this master of mine is a madman? say,
gentlemen shepherds, is there a village priest, be he ever so wise or
learned, who could say what my master has said; or is there
knight-errant, whatever renown he may have as a man of valour, that could
offer what my master has offered now?"

don quixote turned upon sancho, and with a countenance glowing with anger
said to him, "is it possible, sancho, there is anyone in the whole world
who will say thou art not a fool, with a lining to match, and i know not
what trimmings of impertinence and roguery? who asked thee to meddle in
m