hs or tears to soften
me: were i to see any of the things i speak of in him whom my parents
gave me as a husband, his will should be mine, and mine should be bounded
by his; and my honour being preserved even though my inclinations were
not would willingly yield him what you, senor, would now obtain by force;
and this i say lest you should suppose that any but my lawful husband
shall ever win anything of me.' 'if that,' said this disloyal gentleman,
'be the only scruple you feel, fairest dorothea' (for that is the name of
this unhappy being), 'see here i give you my hand to be yours, and let
heaven, from which nothing is hid, and this image of our lady you have
here, be witnesses of this pledge.'"

when cardenio heard her say she was called dorothea, he showed fresh
agitation and felt convinced of the truth of his former suspicion, but he
was unwilling to interrupt the story, and wished to hear the end of what
he already all but knew, so he merely said:

"what! is dorothea you
 
 ___________________________
 
r name, senora? i have heard of another of the same
name who can perhaps match your misfortunes. but proceed; by-and-by i may
tell you something that will astonish you as much as it will excite your
compassion."

dorothea was struck by cardenio's words as well as by his strange and
miserable attire, and begged him if he knew anything concerning her to
tell it to her at once, for if fortune had left her any blessing it was
courage to bear whatever calamity might fall upon her, as she felt sure
that none could reach her capable of increasing in any degree what she
endured already.

"i would not let the occasion pass, senora," replied cardenio, "of
telling you what i think, if what i suspect were the truth,
 
 ___________________________
 
 but so far
there has been no opportunity, nor is it of any importance to you to know
it."

"be it as it may," replied dorothea, "what happened in my story was that
don fernando, taking an image that stood in the chamber, placed it as a
witness of our betrothal, and with the most binding words and extravagant
oaths gave me his promise to become my husband; though before he had made
an end of pledging himself i bade him consider well what he was doing,
and think of the anger his father would feel at seeing him married to a
peasant girl and one of his vassals; i told him not to let my beauty,
such as it was, blind 
 
 ___________________________
 
 don fernando had been married in a neighbouring city to a maiden of
rare beauty, the daughter of parents of distinguished position, though
not so rich that her portion would entitle her to look for so brilliant a
match; it was said, too, that her name was luscinda, and that at the
betrothal some strange things had happened."

cardenio heard the name of luscinda, but he only shrugged his shoulders,
bit his lips, bent his brows, and before long two streams of tears
escaped from his eyes. dorothea, however, did not interrupt her story,
but went on in these words:

"this sad intelligence reached my ears, and, instead of being struck with
a chill, with such wrath and fury did my heart burn that i scarcely
restrained myself from rushing out into the streets, crying aloud and
proclaiming openly the perfidy and treachery of which i was the victim;
but this transport of rage was for the time checked by a resolution i
formed, to be carried out the same night, and that was to assume this
 
 ___________________________
 
for
ever than look them in the face with the reflection that they beheld mine
stripped of that purity they had a right to expect in me."

with these words she became silent, and the colour that overspread her
face showed plainly the pain and shame she was suffering at heart. in
theirs the listeners felt as much pity as wonder at her misfortunes; but
as the curate was just about to offer her some consolation and advice
cardenio forestalled him, saying, "so then, senora, you are the fair
dorothea, the only daughter of the rich clenardo?" dorothea was
astonished at hearing her father's name, and at the miserable appearance
of him who mentioned it, for it has been already said how wretchedly clad
cardenio was; so she said to him:

"and who may you be, brother, who seem to know my father's name so well?
for so far, if i remember rightly, i have not mentioned it in the whole
story of my misfortunes."

"i am that unhappy being, senora," replied cardenio, "whom, as you have
said, lu
 
 ___________________________
 
scinda declared to be her husband; i am the unfortunate cardenio,
whom the wrong-doing of him who has brought you to your present condition
has reduced to the state you see me in, bare, ragged, bereft of all human
comfort, and what is worse, of reason, for i only possess it when heaven
is pleased for some short space to restore it to me. i, dorothea, am he
who witnessed the wrong done by don fernando, and waited to hear the
'yes' uttered by which luscinda owned herself his betrothed: i am he who
had not courage enough to see how her fainting fit ended, or what came of
the paper that was found in her bosom, because my heart had not the
fortitude to endure so many strokes of ill-fortune at once; and so losing
patience i quitted the house, and leaving a letter with my host, which i
entreated him to place in luscinda's hands, i betook m
 
 ___________________________
 
 faith of a gentleman and a
christian not to desert you until i see you in possession of don
fernando, and if i cannot by words induce him to recognise his obligation
to you, in that case to avail myself of the right which my rank as a
gentleman gives me, and with just cause challenge him on account of the
injury he has done you, not regarding my own wrongs, which i shall leave
to heaven to avenge, while i on earth devote myself to yours."

cardenio's words completed the astonishment of dorothea, and not knowing
how to return thanks for such an offer, she attempted to kiss his feet;
but cardenio would not permit it, and the licentiate replied for both,
commended the sound reasoning of cardenio, and lastly, begged, advised,
and urged them to come with him to his village, where they might furnish
themselves with what they needed, and take measures to discover don
fernando, or restore dorothea to her parents, or do what seemed to them
most advisable. cardenio and dorothea thanked h
 
 ___________________________
 
 that he was determined not to appear in the presence of her
beauty until he had done deeds to make him worthy of her favour; and if
this went on, sancho said, he ran the risk of not becoming an emperor as
in duty bound, or even an archbishop, which was the least he could be;
for which reason they ought to consider what was to be done to get him
away from there. the licentiate in reply told him not to be uneasy, for
they would fetch him away in spite of himself. he then told cardenio and
dorothea what they had proposed to do to cure don quixote, or at any rate
take him home; upon which dorothea said that she could play the
distressed damsel better than the barber; especially as she had there the
dress in which to do it to the life, and that they might trust to her
acting the part in every particular requisite for carrying out their
scheme, for she had read a great many books of chivalry, and knew exactly
the style in which afflicted damsels begged boons of knights-errant.

"in t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat case," said the curate, "there is nothing more required than to
set about it at once, for beyond a doubt fortune is declaring itself in
our favour, since it has so unexpectedly begun to open a door for your
relief, and smoothed the way for us to our object."

dorothea then took out of her pillow-case a complete petticoat of some
rich stuff, and a green mantle of some other fine material, and a
necklace and other ornaments out of a little box, and with these in an
instant she so arrayed herself that she looked like a great and rich
lady. all this, and more, she said, she had taken from home in case of
need, but that until then she had had no occasion to make use of it. they
were all highly delighted with her grace, air, and beauty, and declared
don fer
 
 ___________________________
 
da, and diego of valladolid; and
it may be that over there in guinea queens have the same way of taking
the names of their kingdoms."

"so it may," said the curate; "and as for your master's marrying, i will
do all in my power towards it:" with which sancho was as much pleased as
the curate was amazed at his simplicity and at seeing what a hold the
absurdities of his master had taken of his fancy, for he had evidently
persuaded himself that he was going to be an emperor.

by this time dorothea had seated herself upon the curate's mule, and the
barber had fitted the ox-tail beard to his face, and they now told sancho
to conduct them to where don quixote was, warning him not to say that he
knew either the licentiate or the barber, as his master's becoming an
emperor entirely depended on his not recognising them; neither the curate
nor cardenio, however, thought fit to go with them; cardenio lest he
should remind don quixote of the quarrel he had with him, and the curate
as there
 
 ___________________________
 
 was no necessity for his presence just yet, so they allowed the
others to go on before them, while they themselves followed slowly on
foot. the curate did not forget to instruct dorothea how to act, but she
said they might make their minds easy, as everything would be done
exactly as the books of chivalry required and described.

they had gone about three-quarters of a league when they discovered don
quixote in a wilderness of rocks, by this time clothed, but without his
armour; and as soon as dorothea saw him and was told by sancho that that
was don quixote, she whipped her palfrey, the well-bearded barber
following her, and on coming up to him her squire sprang from h
 
 ___________________________
 
o much to his glory, his
master had achieved, and hence the curate in alluding to it made the most
of it to see what would be said or done by don quixote; who changed
colour at every word, not daring to say that it was he who had been the
liberator of those worthy people. "these, then," said the curate, "were
they who robbed us; and god in his mercy pardon him who would not let
them go to the punishment they deserved."




chapter xxx.

which treats of address displayed by the fair dorothea, with other
matters pleasant and amusing


the curate had hardly ceased speaking, when sancho said, "in faith, then,
senor licentiate, he who did that deed was my master; and it was not for
want of my telling him beforehand and warning him to mind what he was
about, and that it was a sin to set them at liberty, as they were all on
the march there because they were special scoundrels."

"blockhead!" said don quixote at this, "it is no business or concern of
knights-errant to inquire w
 
 ___________________________
 
akes objection to it, saving the sacred dignity of the senor
licentiate and his honoured person, i say he knows little about chivalry
and lies like a whoreson villain, and this i will give him to know to the
fullest extent with my sword;" and so saying he settled himself in his
stirrups and pressed down his morion; for the barber's basin, which
according to him was mambrino's helmet, he carried hanging at the
saddle-bow until he could repair the damage done to it by the galley
slaves.

dorothea, who was shrewd and sprightly, and by this time thoroughly
understood don quixote's crazy turn, and that all except sancho panza
were making game of him, not to be behind the rest said to him, on
observing his irritation, "sir knight, remember the boon you have
promised me, and that in accordance with it you must not engage in any
other adventure, be it ever so pressing; calm yourself, for if the
licentiate had known that the galley slaves had been set free by that
unconquered arm he wou
 
 ___________________________
 
 peace, senora," said don quixote, "and i will curb the
natural anger that had arisen in my breast, and will proceed in peace and
quietness until i have fulfilled my promise; but in return for this
consideration i entreat you to tell me, if you have no objection to do
so, what is the nature of your trouble, and how many, who, and what are
the persons of whom i am to require due satisfaction, and on whom i am to
take vengeance on your behalf?"

"that i will do with all my heart," replied dorothea, "if it will not be
wearisome to you to hear of miseries and misfortunes."

"it will not be wearisome, senora," said don quixote; to which dorothea
replied, "well, if that be so, give me your attention." as soon as she
said this, cardenio and the barber drew close to her side, eager to hear
what sort of story the quick-witted dorothea would invent for herself;
and sancho did the same, for he was as much taken in by her as his
master; and she having settled herself comfortably in the sad
 
 ___________________________
 
y of defending myself
against the giant's devilish power; and that i should at once with some
of my followers set out for spain, where i should obtain relief in my
distress on finding a certain knight-errant whose fame by that time would
extend over the whole kingdom, and who would be called, if i remember
rightly, don azote or don gigote."

"'don quixote,' he must have said, senora," observed sancho at this,
"otherwise called the knight of the rueful countenance."

"that is it," said dorothea; "he said, moreover, that he would be tall of
stature and lank featured; and that on his right side under the left
shoulder, or thereabouts, he would have a grey mole with hairs like
bristles."

on hearing this, don quixote said to his squire, "here, sancho my son,
bear a hand and help me to strip, for i want to see if i am the knight
that sage king foretold."

"what does your worship want to strip for?" said dorothea.

"to see if i have that mole your father spoke of," answered don 
 
 ___________________________
 
quixote.

"there is no occasion to strip," said sancho; "for i know your worship
has just such a mole on the middle of your backbone, which is the mark of
a strong man."

"that is enough," said dorothea, "for with friends we must not look too
closely into trifles; and whether it be on the shoulder or on the
backbone matters little; it is enough if there is a mole, be it where it
may, for it is all the same flesh; no doubt my good father hit the truth
in every particular, and i have made a lucky hit in commending myself to
don quixote; for he is the one my father spoke of, as the features of his
countenance correspond with those assigned to this knight by that wide
fame he has acquired n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot only in spain but in all la mancha; for i had
scarcely landed at osuna when i heard such accounts of his achievements,
that at once my heart told me he was the very one i had come in search
of."

"but how did you land at osuna, senora," asked don quixote, "when it is
not a seaport?"

but before dorothea could reply the curate anticipated her, saying, "the
princess meant to say that after she had landed at malaga the first place
where she heard of your worship was osuna."

"that is what i meant to say," said dorothea.

"and that would be only natural," said the curate. "will your majesty
please proceed?"

"there is no more to add," said dorothea, "save that in finding don
quixote i have had such good fortune, that i already reckon and regard
myself queen and mistress of my entire dom
 
 ___________________________
 
end sancho?" said don quixote at this.
"hearest thou that? did i not tell thee so? see how we have already got a
kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!"

"on my oath it is so," said sancho; "and foul fortune to him who won't
marry after slitting senor pandahilado's windpipe! and then, how
ill-favoured the queen is! i wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!"

and so saying he cut a couple of capers in the air with every sign of
extreme satisfaction, and then ran to seize the bridle of dorothea's
mule, and checking it fell on his knees before her, begging her to give
him her hand to kiss in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen
and mistress. which of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see
the madness of the master and the simplicity of the servant? dorothea
therefore gave her hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her
kingdom, when heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and
enjoy it, for which sancho returned thanks in words that set th
 
 ___________________________
 
em all
laughing again.

"this, sirs," continued dorothea, "is my story; it only remains to tell
you that of all the attendants i took with me from my kingdom i have none
left except this well-bearded squire, for all were drowned in a great
tempest we encountered when in sight of port; and he and i came to land
on a couple of planks as if by a miracle; and indeed the whole course of
my life is a miracle and a mystery as you may have observed; and if i
have been over minute in any respect or not as precise as i ought, let it
be accounted for by 
 
 ___________________________
 
ttom of the sea. in the devil's name, marry, marry, and take this
kingdom that comes to hand without any trouble, and when you are king
make me a marquis or governor of a province, and for the rest let the
devil take it all."

don quixote, when he heard such blasphemies uttered against his lady
dulcinea, could not endure it, and lifting his pike, without saying
anything to sancho or uttering a word, he gave him two such thwacks that
he brought him to the ground; and had it not been that dorothea cried out
to him to spare him he would have no doubt taken his life on the spot.

"do you think," he said to him after a pause, "you scurvy clown, that you
are to be always interfering with me, and that you are to be always
offending and i always pardoning? don't fancy it, impious scoundrel, for
that beyond a doubt thou art, since thou hast set thy tongue going
against the peerless dulcinea. know you not, lout, vagabond, beggar, that
were it not for the might that she infuses into my ar
 
 ___________________________
 
trument of her
achievements? she fights in me and conquers in me, and i live and breathe
in her, and owe my life and being to her. o whoreson scoundrel, how
ungrateful you are, you see yourself raised from the dust of the earth to
be a titled lord, and the return you make for so great a benefit is to
speak evil of her who has conferred it upon you!"

sancho was not so stunned but that he heard all his master said, and
rising with some degree of nimbleness he ran to place himself behind
dorothea's palfrey, and from that position he said to his master:

"tell me, senor; if your worship is resolved not to marry this great
princess, it is plain the kingdom will not be yours; and not being so,
how can you bestow favours upon me? that is what i complain of. let your
worship at any rate marry this queen, now that we have got her here as if
showered down from heaven, and afterwards you may go back to my lady
dulcinea; for there must have been kings in the world who kept
mistresses. as
 
 ___________________________
 
plied sancho, "and with me the wish to speak is always
the first impulse, and i cannot help saying, once at any rate, what i
have on the tip of my tongue."

"for all that, sancho," said don quixote, "take heed of what thou sayest,
for the pitcher goes so often to the well--i need say no more to thee."

"well, well," said sancho, "god is in heaven, and sees all tricks, and
will judge who does most harm, i in not speaking right, or your worship
in not doing it."

"that is enough," said dorothea; "run, sancho, and kiss your lord's hand
and beg his pardon, and henceforward be more circumspect with your praise
and abuse; and say nothing in disparagement of that lady toboso, of whom
i know nothing save that i am her servant; and put your trust in god, for
you will not fail to obtain some dignity so as to live like a prince."

sancho advanced hanging his head and begged his master's hand, which don
quixote with dignity presented to him, giving him his blessing as soon as
he had kis
 
 ___________________________
 
 my comrade?"
all the while kissing him and caressing him as if he were a human being.
the ass held his peace, and let himself be kissed and caressed by sancho
without answering a single word. they all came up and congratulated him
on having found dapple, don quixote especially, who told him that
notwithstanding this he would not cancel the order for the three
ass-colts, for which sancho thanked him.

while the two had been going along conversing in this fashion, the curate
observed to dorothea that she had shown great cleverness, as well in the
story itself as in its conciseness, and the resemblance it bore to those
of the books of chivalry. she said that she had many times amused herself
reading them; but that she did not know the situation of the provinces or
seaports, and so she had said at haphazard that she had landed at osuna.

"so i saw," said the curate, "and for that reason i made haste to say
what i did, by which it was all set right. but is it not a strange thing
t
 
 ___________________________
 
died."

"in faith, then, i cannot even read."

master nicholas here called out to them to wait a while, as they wanted
to halt and drink at a little spring there was there. don quixote drew
up, not a little to the satisfaction of sancho, for he was by this time
weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his master catching him
tripping, for though he knew that dulcinea was a peasant girl of el
toboso, he had never seen her in all his life. cardenio had now put on
the clothes which dorothea was wearing when they found her, and though
they were not very good, they were far better than those he put off. they
dismounted together by the side of the spring, and with what the curate
had provided himself with at the inn they appeased, though not very well,
the keen appetite they all of them brought with them.

while they were so employed there happened to come by a youth passing on
his way, who stopping to examine the party at the spring, the next moment
ran to don quixote and cl
 
 ___________________________
 
experience that there is no clown who will keep his word if he
finds it will not suit him to keep it; but thou rememberest, andres, that
i swore if he did not pay thee i would go and seek him, and find him
though he were to hide himself in the whale's belly."

"that is true," said andres; "but it was of no use."

"thou shalt see now whether it is of use or not," said don quixote; and
so saying, he got up hastily and bade sancho bridle rocinante, who was
browsing while they were eating. dorothea asked him what he meant to do.
he replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and chastise him
for such iniquitous conduct, and see andres paid to the last maravedi,
despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the world. to which she
replied that he must remember that in accordance with his promise he
could not engage in any enterprise until he had concluded hers; and that
as he knew this better than anyone, he should restrain his ardour until
his return from her kingdom.

"t
 
 ___________________________
 
the galley slaves robbed him; and should he ask for
the princess's squire, they could tell him that she had sent him on
before her to give notice to the people of her kingdom that she was
coming, and bringing with her the deliverer of them all. on this the
barber cheerfully restored the tail to the landlady, and at the same time
they returned all the accessories they had borrowed to effect don
quixote's deliverance. all the people of the inn were struck with
astonishment at the beauty of dorothea, and even at the comely figure of
the shepherd cardenio. the curate made them get ready such fare as there
was in the inn, and the landlord, in hope of better payment, served them
up a tolerably good dinner. all this time don quixote was asleep, and
they thought it best not to waken him, as sleeping would now do him more
good than eating.

while at dinner, the company consisting of the landlord, his wife, their
daughter, maritornes, and all the travellers, they discussed the strange
cr
 
 ___________________________
 
o you think, young lady?" said the curate turning to the
landlord's daughter.

"i don't know indeed, senor," said she; "i listen too, and to tell the
truth, though i do not understand it, i like hearing it; but it is not
the blows that my father likes that i like, but the laments the knights
utter when they are separated from their ladies; and indeed they
sometimes make me weep with the pity i feel for them."

"then you would console them if it was for you they wept, young lady?"
said dorothea.

"i don't know what i should do," said the girl; "i only know that there
are some of those ladies so cruel that they call their knights tigers and
lions and a thousand other foul names: and jesus! i don't know what sort
of folk they can be, so unfeeling and heartless, that rather than bestow
a glance upon a worthy man they leave him to die or go mad. i don't know
what is the good of such prudery; if it is for honour's sake, why not
marry them? that's all they want."

"hush, child," s
 
 ___________________________
 
 but to let itself sink to the bottom of
the river, carrying with it the knight who would not let go his hold; and
when they got down there he found himself among palaces and gardens so
pretty that it was a wonder to see; and then the serpent changed itself
into an old ancient man, who told him such things as were never heard.
hold your peace, senor; for if you were to hear this you would go mad
with delight. a couple of figs for your great captain and your diego
garcia!"

hearing this dorothea said in a whisper to cardenio, "our landlord is
almost fit to play a second part to don quixote."

"i think so," said cardenio, "for, as he shows, he accepts it as a
certainty that everything those books relate took place exactly as it is
written down; and the barefooted friars themselves would not persuade him
to the contrary."

"but consider, brother," said the curate once more, "there never was any
felixmarte of hircania in the world, nor any cirongilio of thrace, or any
of the oth
 
 ___________________________
 
a christian."

"you are very right, friend," said the curate; "but for all that, if the
novel pleases me you must let me copy it."

"with all my heart," replied the host.

while they were talking cardenio had taken up the novel and begun to read
it, and forming the same opinion of it as the curate, he begged him to
read it so that they might all hear it.

"i would read it," said the curate, "if the time would not be better
spent in sleeping."

"it will be rest enough for me," said dorothea, "to while away the time
by listening to some tale, for my spirits are not yet tranquil enough to
let me sleep when it would be seasonable."

"well then, in that case," said the curate, "i will read it, if it were
only out of curiosity; perhaps it may contain something pleasant."

master nicholas added his entreaties to the same effect, and sancho too;
seeing which, and considering that he would give pleasure to all, and
receive it himself, the curate said, "well then, attend to me eve
 
 ___________________________
 
seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on don
quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way,
that if cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have
brought the war of the giant to an end. but in spite of all the poor
gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold water
from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on which don
quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what was the
matter. dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was, would not
go in to witness the battle between her champion and her opponent. as for
sancho, he went searching all over the floor for the head of the giant,
and not finding it he said, "i see now that it's all enchantment in this
house; for the last time, on this very spot where i am now, i got ever so
many thumps without knowing who gave them to me, or being able to see
anybody; and now this head is not to be seen anywhere about, though i saw

 
 ___________________________
 
wn every quarts; or my name is not what it
is, and i am not my father's daughter." all this and more to the same
effect the landlady delivered with great irritation, and her good maid
maritornes backed her up, while the daughter held her peace and smiled
from time to time. the curate smoothed matters by promising to make good
all losses to the best of his power, not only as regarded the wine-skins
but also the wine, and above all the depreciation of the tail which they
set such store by. dorothea comforted sancho, telling him that she
pledged herself, as soon as it should appear certain that his master had
decapitated the giant, and she found herself peacefully established in
her kingdom, to bestow upon him the best county there was in it. with
this sancho consoled himself, and assured the princess she might rely
upon it that he had seen the head of the giant, and more by token it had
a beard that reached to the girdle, and that if it was not to be seen now
it was because everyth
 
 ___________________________
 
ing that happened in that house went by
enchantment, as he himself had proved the last time he had lodged there.
dorothea said she fully believed it, and that he need not be uneasy, for
all would go well and turn out as he wished. all therefore being
appeased, the curate was anxious to go on with the novel, as he saw there
was but little more left to read. dorothea and the others begged him to
finish it, and he, as he was willing to please them, and enjoyed reading
it himself, continued the tale in these words:

the result was, that from the confidence anselmo felt in camilla's
virtue, he lived happy and free from anxiety, and camilla purposely
looked coldly on lothario, that anselmo might suppose her feelings
towards him to be the opposite of what they were; and the better to
support the position, lothario begged to be excused from coming to the
 
 ___________________________
 
standing at the gate of the
inn, exclaimed, "here comes a fine troop of guests; if they stop here we
may say gaudeamus."

"what are they?" said cardenio.

"four men," said the landlord, "riding a la jineta, with lances and
bucklers, and all with black veils, and with them there is a woman in
white on a side-saddle, whose face is also veiled, and two attendants on
foot."

"are they very near?" said the curate.

"so near," answered the landlord, "that here they come."

hearing this dorothea covered her face, and cardenio retreated into don
quixote's room, and they hardly had time to do so before the whole party
the host had described entered the inn, and the four that were on
horseback, who were of highbred appearance and bearing, dismounted, and
came forward to take down the woman who rode on the side-saddle, and one
of them taking her in his arms placed her in a chair that stood at the
entrance of the room where cardenio had hidden himself. all this time
neither she nor t
 
 ___________________________
 
lence on the road, for not a sound is to be heard among them except the
poor lady's sighs and sobs, which make us pity her; and we feel sure that
wherever it is she is going, it is against her will, and as far as one
can judge from her dress she is a nun or, what is more likely, about to
become one; and perhaps it is because taking the vows is not of her own
free will, that she is so unhappy as she seems to be."

"that may well be," said the curate, and leaving them he returned to
where dorothea was, who, hearing the veiled lady sigh, moved by natural
compassion drew near to her and said, "what are you suffering from,
senora? if it be anything that women are accustomed and know how to
relieve, i offer you my services with all my heart."

to this the unhappy lady made no reply; and though dorothea repeated her
offers more earnestly she still kept silence, until the gentleman with
the veil, who, the servant said, was obeyed by the rest, approached and
said to dorothea, "do not gi
 
 ___________________________
 
peaker she stood up and attempted to enter the room; observing which the
gentleman held her back, preventing her from moving a step. in her
agitation and sudden movement the silk with which she had covered her
face fell off and disclosed a countenance of incomparable and marvellous
beauty, but pale and terrified; for she kept turning her eyes, everywhere
she could direct her gaze, with an eagerness that made her look as if she
had lost her senses, and so marked that it excited the pity of dorothea
and all who beheld her, though they knew not what caused it. the
gentleman grasped her firmly by the shoulders, and being so fully
occupied with holding her back, he was unable to put a hand to his veil
which was falling off, as it did at length entirely, and dorothea, who
was holding the lady in her arms, raising her eyes saw that he who
likewise held her was her husband, don fernando. the instant she
recognised him, with a prolonged plaintive cry drawn from the depths of
her heart, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
close by to catch her in his arms, she would have fallen completely to
the ground. the curate at once hastened to uncover her face and throw
water on it, and as he did so don fernando, for he it was who held the
other in his arms, recognised her and stood as if death-stricken by the
sight; not, however, relaxing his grasp of luscinda, for it was she that
was struggling to release herself from his hold, having recognised
cardenio by his voice, as he had recognised her. cardenio also heard
dorothea's cry as she fell fainting, and imagining that it came from his
luscinda burst forth in terror from the room, and the first thing he saw
was don fernando with luscinda in his arms. don fernando, too, knew
cardenio at once; and all three, luscinda, cardenio, and dorothea, stood
in silent amazement scarcely knowing what had happened to them.

they gazed at one another without speaking, dorothea at don fernando, don
fernando at cardenio, cardenio at luscinda, and luscinda at cardenio. the

 
 ___________________________
 
ace to face with my true husband; and well you know by
dear-bought experience that death alone will be able to efface him from
my memory. may this plain declaration, then, lead you, as you can do
nothing else, to turn your love into rage, your affection into
resentment, and so to take my life; for if i yield it up in the presence
of my beloved husband i count it well bestowed; it may be by my death he
will be convinced that i kept my faith to him to the last moment of
life."

meanwhile dorothea had come to herself, and had heard luscinda's words,
by means of which she divined who she was; but seeing that don fernando
did not yet release her or reply to her, summoning up her resolution as
well as she could she rose and knelt at his feet, and with a flood of
bright and touching tears addressed him thus:

"if, my lord, the beams of that sun that thou holdest eclipsed in thine
arms did not dazzle and rob thine eyes of sight thou wouldst have seen by
this time that she who kneels a
 
 ___________________________
 
t thy feet is, so long as thou wilt have
it so, the unhappy and unfortunate dorothea. i am that lowly peasant girl
whom thou in thy goodness or for thy pleasure wouldst raise high enough
to call herself thine; i am she who in the seclusion of innocence led a
contented life until at the voice of thy importunity, and thy true and
tender passion, as it seemed, she opened the gates of her modesty and
surrendered to thee the keys of her liberty; a gift received by thee but
thanklessly, as is clearly shown by my forced retreat to the place where
thou dost find me, and by thy a
 
 ___________________________
 
thy words,
which must not and ought not to be false, if thou dost pride thyself on
that for want of which thou scornest me; witness the pledge which thou
didst give me, and witness heaven, which thou thyself didst call to
witness the promise thou hadst made me; and if all this fail, thy own
conscience will not fail to lift up its silent voice in the midst of all
thy gaiety, and vindicate the truth of what i say and mar thy highest
pleasure and enjoyment."

all this and more the injured dorothea delivered with such earnest
feeling and such tears that all present, even those who came with don
fernando, were constrained to join her in them. don fernando listened to
her without replying, until, ceasing to speak, she gave way to such sobs
and sighs that it must have been a heart of brass that was not softened
by the sight of so great sorrow. luscinda stood regarding her with no
less compassion for her sufferings than admiration for her intelligence
and beauty, and would have gone to
 
 ___________________________
 
 her to say some words of comfort to
her, but was prevented by don fernando's grasp which held her fast. he,
overwhelmed with confusion and astonishment, after regarding dorothea for
some moments with a fixed gaze, opened his arms, and, releasing luscinda,
exclaimed:

"thou hast conquered, fair dorothea, thou hast conquered, for it is
impossible to have the heart to deny the united force of so many truths."

luscinda in her feebleness was on the point of falling to the ground when
don fernando released her, but cardenio, who stood near, having retreated
behind don fernando to escape recognition, casting fear aside and
regardless of what might happen, ran forward to support her, and said as
he clasped her in his arms, "if heaven in its compassion is willing to
let thee rest at last, mis
 
 ___________________________
 
tisfying herself by her eyes that
it was he, and hardly knowing what she did, and heedless of all
considerations of decorum, she flung her arms around his neck and
pressing her face close to his, said, "yes, my dear lord, you are the
true master of this your slave, even though adverse fate interpose again,
and fresh dangers threaten this life that hangs on yours."

a strange sight was this for don fernando and those that stood around,
filled with surprise at an incident so unlooked for. dorothea fancied
that don fernando changed colour and looked as though he meant to take
vengeance on cardenio, for she observed him put his hand to his sword;
and the instant the idea struck her, with wonderful quickness she clasped
him round the knees, and kissing them and holding him so as to prevent
his moving, she said, while her tears continued to flow, "what is it thou
wouldst do, my only refuge, in this unforeseen event? thou hast thy wife
at thy feet, and she whom thou wouldst have for th
 
 ___________________________
 
 with the tears of love the face and bosom of her lawful
husband. for god's sake i entreat of thee, for thine own i implore thee,
let not this open manifestation rouse thy anger; but rather so calm it as
to allow these two lovers to live in peace and quiet without any
interference from thee so long as heaven permits them; and in so doing
thou wilt prove the generosity of thy lofty noble spirit, and the world
shall see that with thee reason has more influence than passion."

all the time dorothea was speaking, cardenio, though he held luscinda in
his arms, never took his eyes off don fernando, determined, if he saw him
make any hostile movement, to try and defend himself and resist as best
he could all who might assail him, though it should cost him his life.
but now don fernando's friends, as well as the curate and the barber, who
had been present all the while, not forgetting the worthy sancho panza,
ran forward and gathered round don fernando, entreating him to have
regard for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the tears of dorothea, and not suffer her reasonable hopes to
be disappointed, since, as they firmly believed, what she said was but
the truth; and bidding him observe that it was not, as it might seem, by
accident, but by a special disposition of providence that they had all
met in a place where no one could have expected a meeting. and the curate
bade him remember that only death could part luscinda from cardenio; that
even if some sword were to separate them they would think their death
most happy; and tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t in a case that admitted of no remedy his wisest
course was, by conquering and putting a constraint upon himself, to show
a generous mind, and of his own accord suffer these two to enjoy the
happiness heaven had granted them. he bade him, too, turn his eyes upon
the beauty of dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much
less excel her; while to that beauty should be added her modesty and the
surpassing love she bore him. but besides all this, he reminded him that
if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a christian, he could not
do otherwise than keep his plighted word; and that in doing so he would
obey god and meet the approval of all sensible people, who know and
recognised it to be the privilege of beauty, even in one of humble birth,
provided v
 
 ___________________________
 
when the potent sway of passion asserts
itself, so long as there be no mixture of sin in it, he is not to be
blamed who gives way to it.

to be brief, they added to these such other forcible arguments that don
fernando's manly heart, being after all nourished by noble blood, was
touched, and yielded to the truth which, even had he wished it, he could
not gainsay; and he showed his submission, and acceptance of the good
advice that had been offered to him, by stooping down and embracing
dorothea, saying to her, "rise, dear lady, it is not right that what i
hold in my heart should be kneeling at my feet; and if until now i have
shown no sign of what i own, it may have been by heaven's decree in order
that, seeing the constancy with which you love me, i may learn to value
you as you deserve. what i entreat of you is that you reproach me not
with my transgression and grievous wrong-doing; for the same cause and
force that drove me to make you mine impelled me to struggle against
be
 
 ___________________________
 
ing yours; and to prove this, turn and look at the eyes of the now
happy luscinda, and you will see in them an excuse for all my errors: and
as she has found and gained the object of her desires, and i have found
in you what satisfies all my wishes, may she live in peace and
contentment as many happy years with her cardenio, as on my knees i pray
heaven to allow me to live with my dorothea;" and with these words he
once more embraced her and pressed his face to hers with so much
tenderness that he had to take great heed to keep his tears from
completing the proof of his love and repentance in the sight of all. not
so luscinda, and cardenio, and almost all the others, for they shed so
many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the others, that
one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon them all. even
sancho panza was weeping; though afterwards he
 
 ___________________________
 
 said he only wept because
he saw that dorothea was not as he fancied the queen micomicona, of whom
he expected such great favours. their wonder as well as their weeping
lasted some time, and then cardenio and luscinda went and fell on their
knees before don fernando, returning him thanks for the favour he had
rendered them in language so grateful that he knew not how to answer
them, and raising them up embraced them with every mark of affection and
courtesy.

he then asked dorothea how she had managed to reach a place so far
removed from her own home, and she in a few fitting words told all that
she had previously related to cardenio, with which don fernando and his
companions were so delighted that they wished the story had been longer;
so charmingly did dorothea describe her misadventures. when she had
finished don fernando recounted what had befallen him in the city after
he had found in luscinda's bosom the paper in which she declared that she
was cardenio's wi
 
 ___________________________
 
and sigh without speaking a
word; and thus in silence and tears they reached that inn, which for him
was reaching heaven where all the mischances of earth are over and at an
end.





chapter xxxvii.

in which is continued the story of the famous princess micomicona, with
other droll adventures


to all this sancho listened with no little sorrow at heart to see how his
hopes of dignity were fading away and vanishing in smoke, and how the
fair princess micomicona had turned into dorothea, and the giant into don
fernando, while his master was sleeping tranquilly, totally unconscious
of all that had come to pass. dorothea was unable to persuade herself
that her present happiness was not all a dream; cardenio was in a similar
state of mind, and luscinda's thoughts ran in the same direction. don
fernando gave thanks to heaven for the favour shown to him and for having
been rescued from the intricate labyrinth in which he had been brought so
near the destruction of his good n
 
 ___________________________
 
 know, if you don't know it, that the dead giant is a
hacked wine-skin, and the blood four-and-twenty gallons of red wine that
it had in its belly, and the cut-off head is the bitch that bore me; and
the devil take it all."

"what art thou talking about, fool?" said don quixote; "art thou in thy
senses?"

"let your worship get up," said sancho, "and you will see the nice
business you have made of it, and what we have to pay; and you will see
the queen turned into a private lady called dorothea, and other things
that will astonish you, if you understand them."

"i shall not be surprised at anything of the kind," returned don quixote;
"for if thou dost remember the last time we were here i told thee that
everything that happened here was a matter of enchantment, and it would
be no wonder if it were the same now."

"i could believe all that," replied sancho, "if my blanketing was the
same sort of thing also; only it wasn't, but real and genuine; for i saw
the landlord, who is 
 
 ___________________________
 
he curate
gave don fernando and the others present an account of don quixote's
madness and of the stratagem they had made use of to withdraw him from
that pena pobre where he fancied himself stationed because of his lady's
scorn. he described to them also nearly all the adventures that sancho
had mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little, thinking
it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy intellect could be
capable of. but now, the curate said, that the lady dorothea's good
fortune prevented her from proceeding with their purpose, it would be
necessary to devise or discover some other way of getting him home.

cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and suggested
that luscinda would act and support dorothea's part sufficiently well.

"no," said don fernando, "that must not be, for i want dorothea to follow
out this idea of hers; and if the worthy gentleman's village is not very
far off, i shall be happy if i can do anything for hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ake of doing so good a work.

"at this moment don quixote came out in full panoply, with mambrino's
helmet, all dinted as it was, on his head, his buckler on his arm, and
leaning on his staff or pike. the strange figure he presented filled don
fernando and the rest with amazement as they contemplated his lean yellow
face half a league long, his armour of all sorts, and the solemnity of
his deportment. they stood silent waiting to see what he would say, and
he, fixing his eyes on the air dorothea, addressed her with great gravity
and composure:

"i am informed, fair lady, by my squire here that your greatness has been
annihilated and your being abolished, since, from a queen and lady of
high degree as you used to be, you have been turned into a private
maiden. if this has been done by the command of the magician king your
father, through fear that i should not afford you the aid you need and
are entitled to, i may tell you he did not know and does not know half
the mass, and wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 and easy way of
remedying my misfortune; for i believe, senor, that had it not been for
you i should never have lit upon the good fortune i now possess; and in
this i am saying what is perfectly true; as most of these gentlemen who
are present can fully testify. all that remains is to set out on our
journey to-morrow, for to-day we could not make much way; and for the
rest of the happy result i am looking forward to, i trust to god and the
valour of your heart."

so said the sprightly dorothea, and on hearing her don quixote turned to
sancho, and said to him, with an angry air, "i declare now, little
sancho, thou art the greatest little villain in spain. say, thief and
vagabond, hast thou not just now told me that this princess had been
turned into a maiden called dorothea, and that the head which i am
persuaded i cut off from a giant was the bitch that bore thee, and other
nonsense that put me in the greatest perplexity i have ever been in all
my life? i vow" (and here he loo
 
 ___________________________
 
e man was of a robust and
well-proportioned frame, in age a little over forty, rather swarthy in
complexion, with long moustaches and a full beard, and, in short, his
appearance was such that if he had been well dressed he would have been
taken for a person of quality and good birth. on entering he asked for a
room, and when they told him there was none in the inn he seemed
distressed, and approaching her who by her dress seemed to be a moor he
her down from saddle in his arms. luscinda, dorothea, the landlady, her
daughter and maritornes, attracted by the strange, and to them entirely
new costume, gathered round her; and dorothea, who was always kindly,
courteous, and quick-witted, perceiving that both she and the man who had
brought her were annoyed at not finding a room, said to her, "do not be
put out, senora, by the discomfort and want of luxuries here, for it is
the way of road-side inns to be without them; still, if you will be
pleased to share our lodging with us (pointin
 
 ___________________________
 
upy, where she shall be made as comfortable as the circumstances
allow, with the good-will we are bound to show all strangers that stand
in need of it, especially if it be a woman to whom the service is
rendered."

"on her part and my own, senora," replied the captive, "i kiss your
hands, and i esteem highly, as i ought, the favour you have offered,
which, on such an occasion and coming from persons of your appearance,
is, it is plain to see, a very great one."

"tell me, senor," said dorothea, "is this lady a christian or a moor? for
her dress and her silence lead us to imagine that she is what we could
wish she was not."

"in dress and outwardly," said he, "she is a moor, but at heart she is a
thoroughly good christian, for she has the greatest desire to become
one."

"then she has not been baptised?" returned luscinda.

"there has been no opportunity for that," replied the captive, "since she
left algiers, her native country and home; and up to the present she has
not 
 
 ___________________________
 
to baptise her before she has been instructed in all the
ceremonies our holy mother church ordains; but, please god, ere long she
shall be baptised with the solemnity befitting her which is higher than
her dress or mine indicates."

by these words he excited a desire in all who heard him, to know who the
moorish lady and the captive were, but no one liked to ask just then,
seeing that it was a fitter moment for helping them to rest themselves
than for questioning them about their lives. dorothea took the moorish
lady by the hand and leading her to a seat beside herself, requested her
to remove her veil. she looked at the captive as if to ask him what they
meant and what she was to do. he said to her in arabic that they asked
her to take off her veil, and thereupon she removed it and disclosed a
countenance so lovely, that to dorothea she seemed more beautiful than
luscinda, and to luscinda more beautiful than dorothea, and all the
bystanders felt that if any beauty could compare
 
 ___________________________
 
 it," said the squire; but in the meantime a man had got
out of the coach whose dress indicated at a glance the office and post he
held, for the long robe with ruffled sleeves that he wore showed that he
was, as his servant said, a judge of appeal. he led by the hand a young
girl in a travelling dress, apparently about sixteen years of age, and of
such a high-bred air, so beautiful and so graceful, that all were filled
with admiration when she made her appearance, and but for having seen
dorothea, luscinda, and zoraida, who were there in the inn, they would
have fancied that a beauty like that of this maiden's would have been
hard to find. don quixote was present at the entrance of the judge with
the young lady, and as soon as he saw him he said, "your worship may with
confidence enter and take your ease in this castle; for though the
accommodation be scanty and poor, there are no quarters so cramped or
inconvenient that they cannot make room for arms and letters; above all
if ar
 
 ___________________________
 
r, your worship, i say, into this
paradise, for here you will find stars and suns to accompany the heaven
your worship brings with you, here you will find arms in their supreme
excellence, and beauty in its highest perfection."

the judge was struck with amazement at the language of don quixote, whom
he scrutinized very carefully, no less astonished by his figure than by
his talk; and before he could find words to answer him he had a fresh
surprise, when he saw opposite to him luscinda, dorothea, and zoraida,
who, having heard of the new guests and of the beauty of the young lady,
had come to see her and welcome her; don fernando, cardenio, and the
curate, however, greeted him in a more intelligible and polished style.
in short, the judge made his entrance in a state of bewilderment, as well
with what he saw as what he heard, and the fair ladies of the inn gave
the fair damsel a cordial welcome. on the whole he could perceive that
all who were there were people of quality; but w
 
 ___________________________
 
d at thy bridal that would give us all such happiness!"

all this and more the judge uttered with such deep emotion at the news he
had received of his brother that all who heard him shared in it, showing
their sympathy with his sorrow. the curate, seeing, then, how well he had
succeeded in carrying out his purpose and the captain's wishes, had no
desire to keep them unhappy any longer, so he rose from the table and
going into the room where zoraida was he took her by the hand, luscinda,
dorothea, and the judge's daughter following her. the captain was waiting
to see what the curate would do, when the latter, taking him with the
other hand, advanced with both of them to where the judge and the other
gentlemen were and said, "let your tears cease to flow, senor judge, and
the wish of your heart be gratified as fully as you could desire, for you
have before you your worthy brother and your good sister-in-law. he whom
you see here is the captain viedma, and this is the fair moor who 
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the trappings of his ass, which, as will be told
farther on, cost him so dear.

the ladies, then, having retired to their chamber, and the others having
disposed themselves with as little discomfort as they could, don quixote
sallied out of the inn to act as sentinel of the castle as he had
promised. it happened, however, that a little before the approach of dawn
a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies that it
forced them all to listen attentively, but especially dorothea, who had
been awake, and by whose side dona clara de viedma, for so the judge's
daughter was called, lay sleeping. no one could imagine who it was that
sang so sweetly, and the voice was unaccompanied by any instrument. at
one moment it seemed to them as if the singer were in the courtyard, at
another in the stable; and as they were all attention, wondering,
cardenio came to the door and said, "listen, whoever is not asleep, and
you will hear a muleteer's voice that enchants as it chants
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"we are listening to it already, senor," said dorothea; on which cardenio
went away; and dorothea, giving all her attention to it, made out the
words of the song to be these:




chapter xliii.

wherein is related the pleasant story of the muleteer, together with
other strange things that came to pass in the inn

ah me, love's mariner am i
  on love's deep ocean sailing;
i know not where the haven lies,
  i dare not hope to gain it.

one solitary distant star
  is all i have to guide me,
a brighter orb than those of old
  that palinurus lighted.

and vaguely drifting am
 
 ___________________________
 
 i borne,
  i know not where it leads me;
i fix my gaze on it alone,
  of all beside it heedless.

but over-cautious prudery,
  and coyness cold and cruel,
when most i need it, these, like clouds,
  its longed-for light refuse me.

bright star, goal of my yearning eyes
  as thou above me beamest,
when thou shalt hide thee from my sight
  i'll know that death is near me.

the singer had got so far when it struck dorothea that it was not fair to
let clara miss hearing such a sweet voice, so, shaking her from side to
side, she woke her, saying:

"forgive me, child, for waking thee, but i do so that thou mayest have
the pleasure of hearing the best voice thou hast ever heard, perhaps, in
all thy life."

clara awoke quite drowsy, and not understanding at the moment what
dorothea said, asked her what it was; she repeated what she had said, and
clara became attentive at once; but she had hardly heard two li
 
 ___________________________
 
nes, as
the singer continued, when a strange trembling seized her, as if she were
suffering from a severe attack of quartan ague, and throwing her arms
round dorothea she said:

"ah, dear lady of my soul and life! why did you wake me? the greatest
kindness fortune could do me now would be to close my eyes and ears so as
neither to see or hear that unhappy musician."

"what art thou talking about, child?" said dorothea. "why, they say this
singer is a muleteer!"

"nay, he is the lord of many places," replied clara, "and that one in my
heart which he holds so firmly shall never be taken from him, unless he
be willing to surrender it."

dorothea was amazed at the ardent language of the girl, for it seemed to
be far beyond such experience of life as her tender years gave any
promise of, so she said to her:

"you speak in such a way that i cannot understand you, senora clara;
explain yourself more cle
 
 ___________________________
 
arly, and tell me what is this you are saying
about hearts and places and this musician whose voice has so moved you?
but do not tell me anything now; i do not want to lose the pleasure i get
from listening to the singer by giving my attention to your transports,
for i perceive he is beginning to sing a new strain and a new air."

"let him, in heaven's name," returned clara; and not to hear him she
stopped both ears with her hands, at which dorothea was again surprised;
but turning her attention to the song she found that it ran in this
fashion:

  sweet hope, my stay,
that onward to the goal of thy intent
  dost make thy way,
heedless of hindrance or impediment,
  have thou no fear
if at each step thou findest death is near.

  no victory,
no joy of triumph doth the faint heart know;
  unblest is he
that a bold front to fortune dares not show,
  but soul and sense
in bondage yieldeth up to indolence.

  if love his wares
 
 ___________________________
 

do dearly sell, his right must be contest;
  what gold compares
with that whereon his stamp he hath imprest?
  and all men know
what costeth little that we rate but low.

  love resolute
knows not the word "impossibility;"
  and though my suit
beset by endless obstacles i see,
  yet no despair
shall hold me bound to earth while heaven is there.

here the voice ceased and clara's sobs began afresh, all which excited
dorothea's curiosity to know what could be the cause of singing so sweet
and weeping so bitter, so she again asked her what it was she was going
to say before. on this clara, afraid that luscinda might overhear her,
winding her arms tightly round dorothea put her mouth so close to her ear
that she could speak without fear of being heard by anyone else, and
said:

"this singer, dear senora, is the son of a gentleman of aragon, lord of
two villages, who lives opposite my father's house at madrid; 
 
 ___________________________
 
him or hear him sing i tremble all over, and am
terrified lest my father should recognise him and come to know of our
loves. i have never spoken a word to him in my life; and for all that i
love him so that i could not live without him. this, dear senora, is all
i have to tell you about the musician whose voice has delighted you so
much; and from it alone you might easily perceive he is no muleteer, but
a lord of hearts and towns, as i told you already."

"say no more, dona clara," said dorothea at this, at the same time
kissing her a thousand times over, "say no more, i tell you, but wait
till day comes; when i trust in god to arrange this affair of yours so
that it may have the happy ending such an innocent beginning deserves."

"ah, senora," said dona clara, "what end can be hoped for when his father
is of such lofty position, and so wealthy, that he would think i was not
fit to be even a servant to his son, much less wife? and as to marrying
without the knowledge of my fath
 
 ___________________________
 
t this youth should go back and
leave me; perhaps with not seeing him, and the long distance we shall
have to travel, the pain i suffer now may become easier; though i daresay
the remedy i propose will do me very little good. i don't know how the
devil this has come about, or how this love i have for him got in; i such
a young girl, and he such a mere boy; for i verily believe we are both of
an age, and i am not sixteen yet; for i will be sixteen michaelmas day,
next, my father says."

dorothea could not help laughing to hear how like a child dona clara
spoke. "let us go to sleep now, senora," said she, "for the little of the
night that i fancy is left to us: god will soon send us daylight, and we
will set all to rights, or it will go hard with me."

with this they fell asleep, and deep silence reigned all through the inn.
the only persons not asleep were the landlady's daughter and her servant
maritornes, who, knowing the weak point of don quixote's humour, and that
he was ou
 
 ___________________________
 
other; and
while two of them went in, one remained at the gate and the other made
the circuit of the inn; observing all which, the landlord was unable to
conjecture for what reason they were taking all these precautions, though
he understood they were looking for the youth whose description they had
given him.

it was by this time broad daylight; and for that reason, as well as in
consequence of the noise don quixote had made, everybody was awake and
up, but particularly dona clara and dorothea; for they had been able to
sleep but badly that night, the one from agitation at having her lover so
near her, the other from curiosity to see him. don quixote, when he saw
that not one of the four travellers took any notice of him or replied to
his challenge, was furious and ready to die with indignation and wrath;
and if he could have found in the ordinances of chivalry that it was
lawful for a knight-errant to undertake or engage in another enterprise,
when he had plighted his word an
 
 ___________________________
 
ressed themselves; and told them how the man had addressed the youth as
"don," and what words had passed, and how he wanted him to return to his
father, which the youth was unwilling to do. with this, and what they
already knew of the rare voice that heaven had bestowed upon him, they
all felt very anxious to know more particularly who he was, and even to
help him if it was attempted to employ force against him; so they
hastened to where he was still talking and arguing with his servant.
dorothea at this instant came out of her room, followed by dona clara all
in a tremor; and calling cardenio aside, she told him in a few words the
story of the musician and dona clara, and he at the same time told her
what had happened, how his father's servants had come in search of him;
but in telling her so, he did not speak low enough but that dona clara
heard what he said, at which she was so much agitated that had not
dorothea hastened to support her she would have fallen to the ground.
car
 
 ___________________________
 
denio then bade dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to
make the whole matter right, and they did as he desired. all the four who
had come in quest of don luis had now come into the inn and surrounded
him, urging him to return and console his father at once and without a
moment's delay. he replied that he could not do so on any account until
he had concluded some business in which his life, honour, and heart were
at stake. the servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would
not return w
 
 ___________________________
 
 you have
got your permission my master will be in the other world."

"give me leave, senora, to obtain the permission i speak of," returned
don quixote; "and if i get it, it will matter very little if he is in the
other world; for i will rescue him thence in spite of all the same world
can do; or at any rate i will give you such a revenge over those who
shall have sent him there that you will be more than moderately
satisfied;" and without saying anything more he went and knelt before
dorothea, requesting her highness in knightly and errant phrase to be
pleased to grant him permission to aid and succour the castellan of that
castle, who now stood in grievous jeopardy. the princess granted it
graciously, and he at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing
his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where the two guests were still
handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot he
stopped short and stood still, though maritornes and the landlady asked
him why h
 
 ___________________________
 
round him, lest he should escape from them in the confusion;
the barber, seeing the house turned upside down, once more laid hold of
his pack-saddle and sancho did the same; don quixote drew his sword and
charged the officers; don luis cried out to his servants to leave him
alone and go and help don quixote, and cardenio and don fernando, who
were supporting him; the curate was shouting at the top of his voice, the
landlady was screaming, her daughter was wailing, maritornes was weeping,
dorothea was aghast, luscinda terror-stricken, and dona clara in a faint.
the barber cudgelled sancho, and sancho pommelled the barber; don luis
gave one of his servants, who ventured to catch him by the arm to keep
him from escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood; the judge took
his part; don fernando had got one of the officers down and was
belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised his voice again calling for
help for the holy brotherhood; so that the whole inn was nothing but
cries
 
 ___________________________
 
of
octavianus: for all which it was the universal opinion that their thanks
were due to the great zeal and eloquence of the curate, and to the
unexampled generosity of don fernando.

finding himself now clear and quit of all quarrels, his squire's as well
as his own, don quixote considered that it would be advisable to continue
the journey he had begun, and bring to a close that great adventure for
which he had been called and chosen; and with this high resolve he went
and knelt before dorothea, who, however, would not allow him to utter a
word until he had risen; so to obey her he rose, and said, "it is a
common proverb, fair lady, that 'diligence is the mother of good
fortune,' and experience has often shown in important affairs that the
earnestness of the negotiator brings the doubtful case to a successful
termination; but in nothing does this truth show itself more plainly than
in war, where quickness and activity forestall the devices of the enemy,
and win the victory befo
 
 ___________________________
 
 "provided thy words be not
meant to work upon my fears; for thou, if thou fearest, art behaving like
thyself; but i like myself, in not fearing."

"it is nothing of the sort, as i am a sinner before god," said sancho,
"but that i take it to be sure and certain that this lady, who calls
herself queen of the great kingdom of micomicon, is no more so than my
mother; for, if she was what she says, she would not go rubbing noses
with one that is here every instant and behind every door."

dorothea turned red at sancho's words, for the truth was that her husband
don fernando had now and then, when the others were not looking, gathered
from her lips some of the reward his love had earned, and sancho seeing
this had considered that such freedom was more like a courtesan than a
queen of a great kingdom; she, however, being unable or not caring to
answer him, allowed him to proceed, and he continued, "this i say, senor,
because, if after we have travelled roads and highways, and passed 
 
 ___________________________
 
ain of
my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his cheeks,
gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his right
foot, showing in every way the rage that was pent up in his heart; and at
his words and furious gestures sancho was so scared and terrified that he
would have been glad if the earth had opened that instant and swallowed
him, and his only thought was to turn round and make his escape from the
angry presence of his master.

but the ready-witted dorothea, who by this time so well understood don
quixote's humour, said, to mollify his wrath, "be not irritated at the
absurdities your good squire has uttered, sir knight of the rueful
countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and christian conscience it is not likely that he would
bear false witness against anyone. we may therefore believe, without any
hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight, everything in this castle
goes and is brought abou
 
 ___________________________
 
e assured him it was all
enchantment. for all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch
that he could persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth,
without any deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by
beings of flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms,
as his master believed and protested.

the illustrious company had now been two days in the inn; and as it
seemed to them time to depart, they devised a plan so that, without
giving dorothea and don fernando the trouble of going back with don
quixote to his village under pretence of restoring queen micomicona, the
curate and the barber might carry him away with them as they proposed,
and the curate be able to take his madness in hand at home; and in
pursuance of their plan they arranged with the owner of an oxcart who
happened to be passing that way to carry him after this fashion. they
constructed a kind of cage with wooden bars, large enough to hold don
quixote comfortably
 
 ___________________________
 
o which some malevolent
enchanter has consigned me; and should i find myself released therefrom,
the favours that ye have bestowed upon me in this castle shall be held in
memory by me, that i may acknowledge, recognise, and requite them as they
deserve."

while this was passing between the ladies of the castle and don quixote,
the curate and the barber bade farewell to don fernando and his
companions, to the captain, his brother, and the ladies, now all made
happy, and in particular to dorothea and luscinda. they all embraced one
another, and promised to let each other know how things went with them,
and don fernando directed the curate where to write to him, to tell him
what became of don quixote, assuring him that there was nothing that
could give him more pleasure than to hear of it, and that he too, on his
part, would send him word of everything he thought he would like to know,
about his marriage, zoraida's baptism, don luis's affair, and luscinda's
return to her home. the