ld
with sancho panza, well worth reading and noting

chapter xxxiv
which relates how they learned the way in which they were to
disenchant the peerless dulcinea del toboso, which is one of the
rarest adventures in this book

chapter xxxv
wherein is continued the instruction given to don quixote touching
the disenchantment of dulcinea, together with other marvellous incidents

chapter xxxvi
wherein is related the strange and undreamt-of adventure of the
distressed duenna, alias the countess trifaldi, together with a letter
which sancho panza wrote to his wife, teresa panza

chapter xxxvii
wherein is continued the notable adventure of the distressed duenna

chapter xxxviii
wherein is told the distressed duenna's tale of her misfortunes

chapter xxxix
in which the trifaldi continues her marvellous and memorable story

chapter xl
of matters relating and belonging to this adventure and to this
memorable history

chapter xli
of the arrival of clavileno and the end of this protr
 
 ___________________________
 

breeze, the clear light, each and all showed that the day that came
treading on the skirts of morning would be calm and bright. the duke and
duchess, pleased with their hunt and at having carried out their plans so
cleverly and successfully, returned to their castle resolved to follow up
their joke; for to them there was no reality that could afford them more
amusement.




chapter xxxvi.

wherein is related the strange and undreamt-of adventure of the
distressed duenna, alias the countess trifaldi, together with a letter
which sancho panza wrote to his wife, teresa panza


the duke had a majordomo of a very facetious and sportive turn, and he it
was that played the part of merlin, made all the arrangements for the
late adventure, composed the verses, and got a page to represent
dulcinea; and now, with the assistance of his master and mistress, he got
up another of the drollest and strangest contrivances that can be
imagined.

the duchess asked sancho the next day if he had mad
 
 ___________________________
 
on any account
allow him to speak until he had risen. the prodigious scarecrow obeyed,
and standing up, removed the veil from his face and disclosed the most
enormous, the longest, the whitest and the thickest beard that human eyes
had ever beheld until that moment, and then fetching up a grave, sonorous
voice from the depths of his broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes
on the duke, he said:

"most high and mighty senor, my name is trifaldin of the white beard; i
am squire to the countess trifaldi, otherwise called the distressed
duenna, on whose behalf i bear a message to your highness, which is that
your magnificence will be pleased to grant her leave and permission to
come and tell you her trouble, which is one of the strangest and most
wonderful that the mind most familiar with trouble in the world could
have imagined; but first she desires to know if the valiant and never
vanquished knight, don quixote of la mancha, is in this your castle, for
she has come in quest of him on 
 
 ___________________________
 
y to your realms here; a thing which may and ought to
be regarded as a miracle or set down to enchantment; she is even now at
the gate of this fortress or plaisance, and only waits for your
permission to enter. i have spoken." and with that he coughed, and
stroked down his beard with both his hands, and stood very tranquilly
waiting for the response of the duke, which was to this effect: "many
days ago, worthy squire trifaldin of the white beard, we heard of the
misfortune of my lady the countess trifaldi, whom the enchanters have
caused to be called the distressed duenna. bid her enter, o stupendous
squire, and tell her that the valiant knight don quixote of la mancha is
here, and from his generous disposition she may safely promise herself
every protection and assistance; and you may tell her, too, that if my
aid be necessary it will not be withheld, for i am bound to give it to
her by my quality of knight, which involves the protection of women of
all sorts, especially widowed, wronged
 
 ___________________________
 
o an end and began the next, following
up the same adventure, which is one of the most notable in the history.




chapter xxxviii.

wherein is told the distressed duenna's tale of her misfortunes


following the melancholy musicians there filed into the garden as many as
twelve duennas, in two lines, all dressed in ample mourning robes
apparently of milled serge, with hoods of fine white gauze so long that
they allowed only the border of the robe to be seen. behind them came the
countess trifaldi, the squire trifaldin of the white beard leading her by
the hand, clad in the finest unnapped black baize, such that, had it a
nap, every tuft would have shown as big as a martos chickpea; the tail,
or skirt, or whatever it might be called, ended in three points which
were borne up by the hands of three pages, likewise dressed in mourning,
forming an elegant geometrical figure with the three acute angles made by
the three points, from which all who saw the peaked skirt concluded that
it 
 
 ___________________________
 

with these words, leaving clavileno behind them, they retired with easy
dignity the way they came. as soon as the distressed one saw the horse,
almost in tears she exclaimed to don quixote, "valiant knight, the
promise of malambruno has proved trustworthy; the horse has come, our
beards are growing, and by every hair in them all of us implore thee to
shave and shear us, as it is only mounting him with thy squire and making
a happy beginning with your new journey."

"that i will, senora countess trifaldi," said don quixote, "most gladly
and with right goodwill, without stopping to take a cushion or put on my
spurs, so as not to lose time, such is my desire to see you and all these
duennas shaved clean."

"that i won't," said sancho, "with good-will or bad-will, or any way at
all; and if this shaving can't be done without my mounting on the croup,
my master had better look out for another squire to go with him, and
these ladies for some other way of making their faces smooth; i'm no
wit
 
 ___________________________
 
es in the same garden from which they had started, and
seeing such a number of people stretched on the ground; and their
astonishment was increased when at one side of the garden they perceived
a tall lance planted in the ground, and hanging from it by two cords of
green silk a smooth white parchment on which there was the following
inscription in large gold letters: "the illustrious knight don quixote of
la mancha has, by merely attempting it, finished and concluded the
adventure of the countess trifaldi, otherwise called the distressed
duenna; malambruno is now satisfied on every point, the chins of the
duennas are now smooth and clean, and king don clavijo and queen
antonomasia in their original form; and when the squirely flagellation
shall have been completed, the white dove shall find herself delivered
from the pestiferous gerfalcons that persecute her, and in the arms of
her beloved mate; for such is the decree of the sage merlin,
arch-enchanter of enchanters."

as soon as don qu
 
 ___________________________
 
nd they
fell into the hands of the duke, who showed them to the duchess and they
were both amazed afresh at the madness and wit of don quixote. to carry
on the joke, then, the same evening they despatched sancho with a large
following to the village that was to serve him for an island. it happened
that the person who had him in charge was a majordomo of the duke's, a
man of great discretion and humour--and there can be no humour without
discretion--and the same who played the part of the countess trifaldi in
the comical way that has been already described; and thus qualified, and
instructed by his master and mistress as to how to deal with sancho, he
carried out their scheme admirably. now it came to pass that as soon as
sancho saw this majordomo he seemed in his features to recognise those of
the trifaldi, and turning to his master, he said to him, "senor, either
the devil will carry me off, here on this spot, righteous and believing,
or your worship will own to me that the face of this 