more crimes than all the rest put
together, and was so daring and such a villain, that though they marched
him in that fashion they did not feel sure of him, but were in dread of
his making his escape.

"what crimes can he have committed," said don quixote, "if they have not
deserved a heavier punishment than being sent to the galleys?"

"he goes for ten years," replied the guard, "which is the same thing as
civil death, and all that need be said is that this good fellow is the
famous gines de pasamonte, otherwise called ginesillo de parapilla."

"gently, senor commissary," said the galley slave at this, "let us have
no fixing of names or surnames; my name is gines, not ginesillo, and my
family name is pasamonte, not parapilla as you say; let each one mind his
own business, and he will be doing enough."

"speak with less impertinence, master thief of extra measure," replied
the commissary, "if you don't want me to make you hold your tongue in
spite of your teeth."

"it is easy to se
 
 ___________________________
 
 hundred reals."

"and i mean to take it out of pawn," said gines, "though it were in for
two hundred ducats."

"is it so good?" said don quixote.

"so good is it," replied gines, "that a fig for 'lazarillo de tormes,'
and all of that kind that have been written, or shall be written compared
with it: all i will say about it is that it deals with facts, and facts
so neat and diverting that no lies could match them."

"and how is the book entitled?" asked don quixote.

"the 'life of gines de pasamonte,'" replied the subject of it.

"and is it finished?" asked don quixote.

"how can it be finished," said the other, "when my life is not yet
finished? all that is written is from my birth down to the point when
they sent me to the galleys this last time."

"then you have been there before?" said don quixote.

"in the service of god and the king i have been there for four years
before now, and i know by this time what the biscuit and courbash are
like," replied gines; "and it is no gr
 
 ___________________________
 
ho was waiting for them with great calmness; and no doubt it
would have gone badly with him if the galley slaves, seeing the chance
before them of liberating themselves, had not effected it by contriving
to break the chain on which they were strung. such was the confusion,
that the guards, now rushing at the galley slaves who were breaking
loose, now to attack don quixote who was waiting for them, did nothing at
all that was of any use. sancho, on his part, gave a helping hand to
release gines de pasamonte, who was the first to leap forth upon the
plain free and unfettered, and who, attacking the prostrate commissary,
took from him his sword and the musket, with which, aiming at one and
levelling at another, he, without ever discharging it, drove every one of
the guards off the field, for they took to flight, as well to escape
pasamonte's musket, as the showers of stones the now released galley
slaves were raining upon them. sancho was greatly grieved at the affair,
because he anticipated 
 
 ___________________________
 
ure
that, laden with that chain which i have taken off your necks, ye at once
set out and proceed to the city of el toboso, and there present
yourselves before the lady dulcinea del toboso, and say to her that her
knight, he of the rueful countenance, sends to commend himself to her;
and that ye recount to her in full detail all the particulars of this
notable adventure, up to the recovery of your longed-for liberty; and
this done ye may go where ye will, and good fortune attend you."

gines de pasamonte made answer for all, saying, "that which you, sir, our
deliverer, demand of us, is of all impossibilities the most impossible to
comply with, because we cannot go together along the roads, but only
singly and separate, and each one his own way, endeavouring to hide
ourselves in the bowels of the earth to escape the holy brotherhood,
which, no doubt, will come out in search of us. what your worship may do,
and fairly do, is to change this service and tribute as regards the lady
dulcinea d
 
 ___________________________
 
ded as a miracle, seeing how they pillaged
and ransacked.

that night they reached the very heart of the sierra morena, where it
seemed prudent to sancho to pass the night and even some days, at least
as many as the stores he carried might last, and so they encamped between
two rocks and among some cork trees; but fatal destiny, which, according
to the opinion of those who have not the light of the true faith,
directs, arranges, and settles everything in its own way, so ordered it
that gines de pasamonte, the famous knave and thief who by the virtue and
madness of don quixote had been released from the chain, driven by fear
of the holy brotherhood, which he had good reason to dread, resolved to
take hiding in the mountains; and his fate and fear led him to the same
spot to which don quixote and sancho panza had been led by theirs, just
in time to recognise them and leave them to fall asleep: and as the
wicked are always ungrateful, and necessity leads to evildoing, and
immediate advantag
 
 ___________________________
 
es deprive the sufferers of their
memory."

"they shall not deprive me of mine, exalted and worthy princess," said
don quixote, "however great and unexampled those which i shall endure in
your service may be; and here i confirm anew the boon i have promised
you, and i swear to go with you to the end of the world until i find
myself in the presence of your fierce enemy, whose haughty head i trust
by the aid of my arm to cut off with the edge of this--i will not say
good sword, thanks to gines de pasamonte who carried away mine"--(this he
said between his teeth, and then continued), "and when it has been cut
off and you have been put in peaceful possession of your realm it shall
be left to your own decision to dispose of your person as may be most
pleasing to you; for so long as my memory is occupied, my will enslaved,
and my understanding enthralled by her-i say no more--it is impossible
for me for a moment to contemplate marriage, even with a phoenix."

the last words of his master abou
 
 ___________________________
 
continued sancho, "and the moment i stirred the stakes gave
way and i fell to the ground with a mighty come down; i looked about for
the ass, but could not see him; the tears rushed to my eyes and i raised
such a lamentation that, if the author of our history has not put it in,
he may depend upon it he has left out a good thing. some days after, i
know not how many, travelling with her ladyship the princess micomicona,
i saw my ass, and mounted upon him, in the dress of a gipsy, was that
gines de pasamonte, the great rogue and rascal that my master and i freed
from the chain."

"that is not where the mistake is," replied samson; "it is, that before
the ass has turned up, the author speaks of sancho as being mounted on
it."

"i don't know what to say to that," said sancho, "unless that the
historian made a mistake, or perhaps it might be a blunder of the
printer's."

"no doubt that's it," said samson; "but what became of the hundred
crowns? did they vanish?"

to which sancho answered
 
 ___________________________
 
--a moor, only meant that, just as a catholic
christian taking an oath swears, or ought to swear, what is true, and
tell the truth in what he avers, so he was telling the truth, as much as
if he swore as a catholic christian, in all he chose to write about
quixote, especially in declaring who master pedro was and what was the
divining ape that astonished all the villages with his divinations. he
says, then, that he who has read the first part of this history will
remember well enough the gines de pasamonte whom, with other galley
slaves, don quixote set free in the sierra morena: a kindness for which
he afterwards got poor thanks and worse payment from that evil-minded,
ill-conditioned set. this gines de pasamonte--don ginesillo de parapilla,
don quixote called him--it was that stole dapple from sancho panza;
which, because by the fault of the printers neither the how nor the when
was stated in the first part, has been a puzzle to a good many people,
who attribute to the bad memory of the 