ess be mine without alloy.

gandalin, squire of amadis of gaul,
to sancho panza, squire of don quixote

sonnet

 all hail, illustrious man! fortune, when she
   bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade,
   her care and tenderness of thee displayed,
 shaping thy course from misadventure free.
 no longer now doth proud knight-errantry
   regard with scorn the sickle and the spade;
   of towering arrogance less count is made
 than of plain esquire-like simplicity.
 i envy thee thy dapple, and thy name,
   and those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff
 with comforts that thy providence proclaim.
     excellent sancho! hail to thee again!
     to thee alone the ovid of our spain
   does homage with the rustic kiss and cuff.




   from el donoso, the motley poet,

on sancho panza and rocinante

on sancho

i am the esquire sancho pan--
who served don quixote of la man--;
but from his service i retreat-,
resolved to pass my life discreet-;
for villadiego, called th
 
 ___________________________
 
nt any more fulling mills to finish off fulling
and knocking our senses out."

"the devil take thee, man," said don quixote; "what has a helmet to do
with fulling mills?"

"i don't know," replied sancho, "but, faith, if i might speak as i used,
perhaps i could give such reasons that your worship would see you were
mistaken in what you say."

"how can i be mistaken in what i say, unbelieving traitor?" returned don
quixote; "tell me, seest thou not yonder knight coming towards us on a
dappled grey steed, who has upon his head a helmet of gold?"

"what i see and make out," answered sancho, "is only a man on a grey ass
like my own, who has something that shines on his head."

"well, that is the helmet of mambrino," said don quixote; "stand to one
side and leave me alone with him; thou shalt see how, without saying a
word, to save time, i shall bring this adventure to an issue and possess
myself of the helmet i have so longed for."

"i will take care to stand aside," said sa
 
 ___________________________
 
rved
the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who required to be bled and
another man who wanted to be shaved, and on this errand the barber was
going, carrying with him a brass basin; but as luck would have it, as he
was on the way it began to rain, and not to spoil his hat, which probably
was a new one, he put the basin on his head, and being clean it glittered
at half a league's distance. he rode upon a grey ass, as sancho said, and
this was what made it seem to don quixote to be a dapple-grey steed and a
knight and a golden helmet; for everything he saw he made to fall in with
his crazy chivalry and ill-errant notions; and when he saw the poor
knight draw near, without entering into any parley with him, at
rocinante's top speed he bore down upon him with the pike pointed low,
fully determined to run him through and through, and as he reached him,
without checking the fury of his charge, he cried to him:

"defend thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine own accord 
 
 ___________________________
 
or
the rape of helen, who, if she were alive now, or if my dulcinea had
lived then, might depend upon it she would not be so famous for her
beauty as she is;" and here he heaved a sigh and sent it aloft; and said
sancho, "let it pass for a jest as it cannot be revenged in earnest, but
i know what sort of jest and earnest it was, and i know it will never be
rubbed out of my memory any more than off my shoulders. but putting that
aside, will your worship tell me what are we to do with this dapple-grey
steed that looks like a grey ass, which that martino that your worship
overthrew has left deserted here? for, from the way he took to his heels
and bolted, he is not likely ever to come back for it; and by my beard
but the grey is a good one."

"i have never been in the habit," said don quixote, "of taking spoil of
those whom i vanquish, nor is it the practice of chivalry to take away
their horses and leave them to go on foot, unless indeed it be that the
victor have lost his own 
 
 ___________________________
 
d necessity leads to evildoing, and
immediate advantage overcomes all considerations of the future, gines,
who was neither grateful nor well-principled, made up his mind to steal
sancho panza's ass, not troubling himself about rocinante, as being a
prize that was no good either to pledge or sell. while sancho slept he
stole his ass, and before day dawned he was far out of reach.

aurora made her appearance bringing gladness to the earth but sadness to
sancho panza, for he found that his dapple was missing, and seeing
himself bereft of him he began the saddest and most doleful lament in the
world, so loud that don quixote awoke at his exclamations and heard him
saying, "o son of my bowels, born in my very house, my children's
plaything, my wife's joy, the envy of my neighbours, relief of my
burdens, and lastly, half supporter of myself, for with the
six-and-twenty maravedis thou didst earn me daily i met half my charges."

don quixote, when he heard the lament and learned the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was in quest of. they brought back to his
memory the marvellous adventures that had befallen knights-errant in like
solitudes and wilds, and he went along reflecting on these things, so
absorbed and carried away by them that he had no thought for anything
else.

nor had sancho any other care (now that he fancied he was travelling in a
safe quarter) than to satisfy his appetite with such remains as were left
of the clerical spoils, and so he marched behind his master laden with
what dapple used to carry, emptying the sack and packing his paunch, and
so long as he could go that way, he would not have given a farthing to
meet with another adventure.

while so engaged he raised his eyes and saw that his master had halted,
and was trying with the point of his pike to lift some bulky object that
lay upon the ground, on which he hastened to join him and help him if it
were needful, and reached him just as with the point of the pike he was
raising a saddle-pad with a valise atta
 
 ___________________________
 
n instant relieved him of saddle and bridle, and
giving him a slap on the croup, said, "he gives thee freedom who is
bereft of it himself, oh steed as excellent in deed as thou art
unfortunate in thy lot; begone where thou wilt, for thou bearest written
on thy forehead that neither astolfo's hippogriff, nor the famed frontino
that cost bradamante so dear, could equal thee in speed."

seeing this sancho said, "good luck to him who has saved us the trouble
of stripping the pack-saddle off dapple! by my faith he would not have
gone without a slap on the croup and something said in his praise; though
if he were here i would not let anyone strip him, for there would be no
occasion, as he had nothing of the lover or victim of despair about him,
inasmuch as his master, which i was while it was god's pleasure, was
nothing of the sort; and indeed, sir knight of the rueful countenance, if
my departure and your worship's madness are to come off in earnest, it
will be as well to saddle ro
 
 ___________________________
 
cinante again in order that he may supply the
want of dapple, because it will save me time in going and returning: for
if i go on foot i don't know when i shall get there or when i shall get
back, as i am, in truth, a bad walker."

"i declare, sancho," returned don quixote, "it shall be as thou wilt, for
thy plan does not seem to me a bad one, and three days hence thou wilt
depart, for i wish thee to observe in the meantime what i do and say for
her sake, that thou mayest be able to tell it."

"but what more have i to see besides what i have see
 
 ___________________________
 
skin
and performing a dozen or two of insanities, which i can get done in less
than half an hour; for having seen them with thine own eyes, thou canst
then safely swear to the rest that thou wouldst add; and i promise thee
thou wilt not tell of as many as i mean to perform."

"for the love of god, master mine," said sancho, "let me not see your
worship stripped, for it will sorely grieve me, and i shall not be able
to keep from tears, and my head aches so with all i shed last night for
dapple, that i am not fit to begin any fresh weeping; but if it is your
worship's pleasure that i should see some insanities, do them in your
clothes, short ones, and such as come readiest to hand; for i myself want
nothing of the sort, and, as i have said, it will be a saving of time for
my return, which will be with the news your worship desires and deserves.
if not, let the lady dulcinea look to it; if she does not answer
reasonably, i swear as solemnly as i can that i will fetch a fair answe
 
 ___________________________
 
d happened him
that he gave himself such rough treatment.

"what should happen me?" replied sancho, "but to have lost from one hand
to the other, in a moment, three ass-colts, each of them like a castle?"

"how is that?" said the barber.

"i have lost the note-book," said sancho, "that contained the letter to
dulcinea, and an order signed by my master in which he directed his niece
to give me three ass-colts out of four or five he had at home;" and he
then told them about the loss of dapple.

the curate consoled him, telling him that when his master was found he
would get him to renew the order, and make a fresh draft on paper, as was
usual and customary; for those made in notebooks were never accepted or
honoured.

sancho comforted himself with this, and said if that were so the loss of
dulcinea's letter did not trouble him much, for he had it almost by
heart, and it could be taken down from him wherever and whenever they
liked.

"repeat it then, sancho," said the bar
 
 ___________________________
 
es at great pains to hide his
laughter and not let his beard fall, for had it fallen maybe their fine
scheme would have come to nothing; but now seeing the boon granted, and
the promptitude with which don quixote prepared to set out in compliance
with it, he rose and took his lady's hand, and between them they placed
her upon the mule. don quixote then mounted rocinante, and the barber
settled himself on his beast, sancho being left to go on foot, which made
him feel anew the loss of his dapple, finding the want of him now. but he
bore all with cheerfulness, being persuaded that his master had now
fairly started and was just on the point of becoming an emperor; for he
felt no doubt at all that he would marry this princess, and be king of
micomicon at least. the only thing that troubled him was the reflection
that this kingdom was in the land of the blacks, and that the people they
would give him for vassals would be all black; but for this he soon found
a remedy in his fancy, a
 
 ___________________________
 
asing to me; i have already pardoned thee for that, and
thou knowest the common saying, 'for a fresh sin a fresh penance.'"

while this was going on they saw coming along the road they were
following a man mounted on an ass, who when he came close seemed to be a
gipsy; but sancho panza, whose eyes and heart were there wherever he saw
asses, no sooner beheld the man than he knew him to be gines de
pasamonte; and by the thread of the gipsy he got at the ball, his ass,
for it was, in fact, dapple that carried pasamonte, who to escape
recognition and to sell the ass had disguised himself as a gipsy, being
able to speak the gipsy language, and many more, as well as if they were
his own. sancho saw him and recognised him, and the instant he did so he
shouted to him, "ginesillo, you thief, give up my treasure, release my
life, embarrass thyself not with my repose, quit my ass, leave my
delight, be off, rip, get thee gone, thief, and give up what is not
thine."

there was no necessi
 
 ___________________________
 
ty for so many words or objurgations, for at the
first one gines jumped down, and at a like racing speed made off and got
clear of them all. sancho hastened to his dapple, and embracing him he
said, "how hast thou fared, my blessing, dapple of my eyes, my comrade?"
all the while kissing him and caressing him as if he were a human being.
the ass held his peace, and let himself be kissed and caressed by sancho
without answering a single word. they all came up and congratulated him
on having found dapple, don quixote especially, who told him that
notwithstanding this he would not cancel the order for the three
ass-colts, for which sancho thanked him.

while the two had been going along conversing in this fashion, the curate

 
 ___________________________
 
the risk to which he who prints a book exposes
himself, for of all impossibilities the greatest is to write one that
will satisfy and please all readers."

"that which treats of me must have pleased few," said don quixote.

"quite the contrary," said the bachelor; "for, as stultorum infinitum est
numerus, innumerable are those who have relished the said history; but
some have brought a charge against the author's memory, inasmuch as he
forgot to say who the thief was who stole sancho's dapple; for it is not
stated there, but only to be inferred from what is set down, that he was
stolen, and a little farther on we see sancho mounted on the same ass,
without any reappearance of it. they say, too, that he forgot to state
what sancho did with those hundred crowns that he found in the valise in
the sierra morena, as he never alludes to them again, and there are many
who would be glad to know what he did with them, or what he spent them
on, for it is one of the serious omissions of
 
 ___________________________
 
ote's house, and returning to the late
subject of conversation, he said, "as to what senor samson said, that he
would like to know by whom, or how, or when my ass was stolen, i say in
reply that the same night we went into the sierra morena, flying from the
holy brotherhood after that unlucky adventure of the galley slaves, and
the other of the corpse that was going to segovia, my master and i
ensconced ourselves in a thicket, and there, my master leaning on his
lance, and i seated on my dapple, battered and weary with the late frays
we fell asleep as if it had been on four feather mattresses; and i in
particular slept so sound, that, whoever he was, he was able to come and
prop me up on four stakes, which he put under the four corners of the
pack-saddle in such a way that he left me mounted on it, and took away
dapple from under me without my feeling it."

"that is an easy matter," said don quixote, "and it is no new occurrence,
for the same thing happened to sacripante at th
 
 ___________________________
 
more solid and lasting, for the happiness i have is mingled with
sorrow at leaving thee; so that i was right in saying i would be glad, if
it were god's will, not to be well pleased."

"look here, sancho," said teresa; "ever since you joined on to a
knight-errant you talk in such a roundabout way that there is no
understanding you."

"it is enough that god understands me, wife," replied sancho; "for he is
the understander of all things; that will do; but mind, sister, you must
look to dapple carefully for the next three days, so that he may be fit
to take arms; double his feed, and see to the pack-saddle and other
harness, for it is not to a wedding we are bound, but to go round the
world, and play at give and take with giants and dragons and monsters,
and hear hissings and roarings and bellowings and howlings; and even all
this would be lavender, if we had not to reckon with yanguesans and
enchanted moors."

"i know well enough, husband," said teresa, "that squires-errant 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the advice of
the curate and barber, with whom he had previously discussed the subject.
finally, then, during those three days, don quixote and sancho provided
themselves with what they considered necessary, and sancho having
pacified his wife, and don quixote his niece and housekeeper, at
nightfall, unseen by anyone except the bachelor, who thought fit to
accompany them half a league out of the village, they set out for el
toboso, don quixote on his good rocinante and sancho on his old dapple,
his alforjas furnished with certain matters in the way of victuals, and
his purse with money that don quixote gave him to meet emergencies.
samson embraced him, and entreated him to let him hear of his good or
evil fortunes, so that he might rejoice over the former or condole with
him over the latter, as the laws of friendship required. don quixote
promised him he would do so, and samson returned to the village, and the
other two took the road for the great city of el toboso.




c
 
 ___________________________
 
vements and humours of don quixote and
his squire are now about to begin; and he urges them to forget the former
chivalries of the ingenious gentleman and to fix their eyes on those that
are to come, which now begin on the road to el toboso, as the others
began on the plains of montiel; nor is it much that he asks in
consideration of all he promises, and so he goes on to say:

don quixote and sancho were left alone, and the moment samson took his
departure, rocinante began to neigh, and dapple to sigh, which, by both
knight and squire, was accepted as a good sign and a very happy omen;
though, if the truth is to be told, the sighs and brays of dapple were
louder than the neighings of the hack, from which sancho inferred that
his good fortune was to exceed and overtop that of his master, building,
perhaps, upon some judicial astrology that he may have known, though the
history says nothing about it; all that can be said is, that when he
stumbled or fell, he was heard to say he 
 
 ___________________________
 
are no pegs;
and moreover they say, the hare jumps up where it's not looked for. i say
this because, if we could not find my lady's palaces or castles to-night,
now that it is daylight i count upon finding them when i least expect it,
and once found, leave it to me to manage her."

"verily, sancho," said don quixote, "thou dost always bring in thy
proverbs happily, whatever we deal with; may god give me better luck in
what i am anxious about."

with this, sancho wheeled about and gave dapple the stick, and don
quixote remained behind, seated on his horse, resting in his stirrups and
leaning on the end of his lance, filled with sad and troubled
forebodings; and there we will leave him, and accompany sancho, who went
off no less serious and troubled than he left his master; so much so,
that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and looking round saw that
don quixote was not within sight, he dismounted from his ass, and seating
himself at the foot of a tree began to commune
 
 ___________________________
 
d another time; or
maybe he will think, as i suspect he will, that one of those wicked
enchanters, who he says have a spite against him, has changed her form
for the sake of doing him an ill turn and injuring him."

with this reflection sancho made his mind easy, counting the business as
good as settled, and stayed there till the afternoon so as to make don
quixote think he had time enough to go to el toboso and return; and
things turned out so luckily for him that as he got up to mount dapple,
he spied, coming from el toboso towards the spot where he stood, three
peasant girls on three colts, or fillies--for the author does not make
the point clear, though it is more likely they were she-asses, the usual
mount with village girls; but as it is of no great consequence, we need
not stop to prove it.

to be brief, the instant sancho saw the peasant girls, he returned full
speed to seek his master, and found him sighing and uttering a thousand
passionate lamentations. when don q
 
 ___________________________
 
 my
beard if that was the case!"

"well, i can only say, sancho, my friend," said don quixote, "that it is
as plain they are jackasses--or jennyasses--as that i am don quixote, and
thou sancho panza: at any rate, they seem to me to be so."

"hush, senor," said sancho, "don't talk that way, but open your eyes, and
come and pay your respects to the lady of your thoughts, who is close
upon us now;" and with these words he advanced to receive the three
village lasses, and dismounting from dapple, caught hold of one of the
asses of the three country girls by the halter, and dropping on both
knees on the ground, he said, "queen and princess and duchess of beauty,
may it please your haughtiness and greatness to receive into your favour
and good-will your captive knight who stands there turned into marble
stone, and quite stupefied and benumbed at finding himself in your
magnificent presence. i am sancho panza, his squire, and he the vagabond
knight don quixote of la mancha, otherwi
 
 ___________________________
 
d them, and this merry-andrew
approaching don quixote, began flourishing his stick and banging the
ground with the bladders and cutting capers with great jingling of the
bells, which untoward apparition so startled rocinante that, in spite of
don quixote's efforts to hold him in, taking the bit between his teeth he
set off across the plain with greater speed than the bones of his anatomy
ever gave any promise of.

sancho, who thought his master was in danger of being thrown, jumped off
dapple, and ran in all haste to help him; but by the time he reached him
he was already on the ground, and beside him was rocinante, who had come
down with his master, the usual end and upshot of rocinante's vivacity
and high spirits. but the moment sancho quitted his beast to go and help
don quixote, the dancing devil with the bladders jumped up on dapple, and
beating him with them, more by the fright and the noise than by the pain
of the blows, made him fly across the fields towards the villag
 
 ___________________________
 
e where
they were going to hold their festival. sancho witnessed dapple's career
and his master's fall, and did not know which of the two cases of need he
should attend to first; but in the end, like a good squire and good
servant, he let his love for his master prevail over his affection for
his ass; though every time he saw the bladders rise in the air and come
down on the hind quarters of his dapple he felt the pains and terrors of
death, and he would have rather had the blows fall on the apples of his
own eyes than on the least hair of his ass's tail. in this trouble and
perplexity he came to where don quixote lay in a far sorrier plight than
he liked, and having helped him to mount rocinante, he said to him,
"senor, the devil has carried off my dapple."

"what devil?" asked don quixote.

"the one with the bladders," said sancho.

"then i will recover him," said don quixote, "e
 
 ___________________________
 
ven if he be shut up with
him in the deepest and darkest dungeons of hell. follow me, sancho, for
the cart goes slowly, and with the mules of it i will make good the loss
of dapple."

"you need not take the trouble, senor," said sancho; "keep cool, for as i
now see, the devil has let dapple go and he is coming back to his old
quarters;" and so it turned out, for, having come down with dapple, in
imitation of don quixote and rocinante, the devil made off on foot to the
town, and the ass came back to his master.

"for all that," said don quixote, "it will be well to visit the
discourtesy of that devil upon some of those in the cart, even if it were
the emperor himself."

"don't think of it, your worship," returned sancho; "take my advice and
never meddle with actors, for they are a favoured class; i myself have
known an actor taken up for two murders, and yet come off scot-
 
 ___________________________
 
 quiet, perhaps it will to know for certain that among all
these, though they look like kings, princes, and emperors, there is not a
single knight-errant."

"now indeed thou hast hit the point, sancho," said don quixote, "which
may and should turn me from the resolution i had already formed. i cannot
and must not draw sword, as i have many a time before told thee, against
anyone who is not a dubbed knight; it is for thee, sancho, if thou wilt,
to take vengeance for the wrong done to thy dapple; and i will help thee
from here by shouts and salutary counsels."

"there is no occasion to take vengeance on anyone, senor," replied
sancho; "for it is not the part of good christians to revenge wrongs; and
besides, i will arrange it with my ass to leave his grievance to my
good-will and pleasure, and that is to live in peace as long as heaven
grants me life."

"well," said don quixote, "if that be thy determination, good sancho,
sensible sancho, christian sancho, honest sancho, let 
 
 ___________________________
 
us leave these
phantoms alone and turn to the pursuit of better and worthier adventures;
for, from what i see of this country, we cannot fail to find plenty of
marvellous ones in it."

he at once wheeled about, sancho ran to take possession of his dapple,
death and his flying squadron returned to their cart and pursued their
journey, and thus the dread adventure of the cart of death ended happily,
thanks to the advice sancho gave his master; who had, the following day,
a fresh adventure, of no less thrilling interest than the last, with an
enamoured knight-errant.




chapter xii.

of the strange adventure which befell the valiant don quixote with the
bold knight of the mirrors


the night succeeding the day of the encounter wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h death, don quixote and
his squire passed under some tall shady trees, and don quixote at
sancho's persuasion ate a little from the store carried by dapple, and
over their supper sancho said to his master, "senor, what a fool i should
have looked if i had chosen for my reward the spoils of the first
adventure your worship achieved, instead of the foals of the three mares.
after all, 'a sparrow in the hand is better than a vulture on the wing.'"

"at the same time, sancho," replied don quixote, "if thou hadst let me
attack them as i wanted, at the very least the emperor's gold crown and
cupid's painted wings would have fallen to thee as spo
 
 ___________________________
 
implicity into the abyss of his ignorance; and
where he showed his culture and his memory to the greatest advantage was
in dragging in proverbs, no matter whether they had any bearing or not
upon the subject in hand, as may have been seen already and will be
noticed in the course of this history.

in conversation of this kind they passed a good part of the night, but
sancho felt a desire to let down the curtains of his eyes, as he used to
say when he wanted to go to sleep; and stripping dapple he left him at
liberty to graze his fill. he did not remove rocinante's saddle, as his
master's express orders were, that so long as they were in the field or
not sleeping under a roof rocinante was not to be stripped--the ancient
usage established and observed by knights-errant being to take off the
bridle and hang it on the saddle-bow, but to remove the saddle from the
horse--never! sancho acted accordingly, and gave him the same liberty he
had given dapple, between whom and rocinante 
 
 ___________________________
 
p so
unequalled and so strong, that it is handed down by tradition from father
to son, that the author of this veracious history devoted some special
chapters to it, which, in order to preserve the propriety and decorum due
to a history so heroic, he did not insert therein; although at times he
forgets this resolution of his and describes how eagerly the two beasts
would scratch one another when they were together and how, when they were
tired or full, rocinante would lay his neck across dapple's, stretching
half a yard or more on the other side, and the pair would stand thus,
gazing thoughtfully on the ground, for three days, or at least so long as
they were left alone, or hunger did not drive them to go and look for
food. i may add that they say the author left it on record that he
likened their friendship to that of nisus and euryalus, and pylades and
orestes; and if that be so, it may be perceived, to the admiration of
mankind, how firm the friendship must have been between
 
 ___________________________
 
r fishing,
for instance; for what squire in the world is there so poor as not to
have a hack and a couple of greyhounds and a fishingrod to amuse himself
with in his own village?"

"i am not in want of any of those things," said sancho; "to be sure i
have no hack, but i have an ass that is worth my master's horse twice
over; god send me a bad easter, and that the next one i am to see, if i
would swap, even if i got four bushels of barley to boot. you will laugh
at the value i put on my dapple--for dapple is the colour of my beast. as
to greyhounds, i can't want for them, for there are enough and to spare
in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in sport when it is at
other people's expense."

"in truth and earnest, sir squire," said he of the grove, "i have made up
my mind and determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of these
knights, and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for i have
three, like three oriental pearls."

"i have two," said 
 
 ___________________________
 
this,
"for our horse is the most virtuous and well-behaved horse in the world;
he never does anything wrong on such occasions, and the only time he
misbehaved, my master and i suffered for it sevenfold; i say again your
worship may pull up if you like; for if she was offered to him between
two plates the horse would not hanker after her."

the traveller drew rein, amazed at the trim and features of don quixote,
who rode without his helmet, which sancho carried like a valise in front
of dapple's pack-saddle; and if the man in green examined don quixote
closely, still more closely did don quixote examine the man in green, who
struck him as being a man of intelligence. in appearance he was about
fifty years of age, with but few grey hairs, an aquiline cast of
features, and an expression between grave and gay; and his dress and
accoutrements showed him to be a man of good condition. what he in green
thought of don quixote of la mancha was that a man of that sort and shape
he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
sy and vainglory, those enemies that subtly take
possession of the most watchful heart, find an entrance into mine. i
strive to make peace between those whom i know to be at variance; i am
the devoted servant of our lady, and my trust is ever in the infinite
mercy of god our lord."

sancho listened with the greatest attention to the account of the
gentleman's life and occupation; and thinking it a good and a holy life,
and that he who led it ought to work miracles, he threw himself off
dapple, and running in haste seized his right stirrup and kissed his foot
again and again with a devout heart and almost with tears.

seeing this the gentleman asked him, "what are you about, brother? what
are these kisses for?"

"let me kiss," said sancho, "for i think your worship is the first saint
in the saddle i ever saw all the days of my life."

"i am no saint," replied the gentleman, "but a great sinner; but you are,
brother, for you must be a good fellow, as your simplicity shows."
 
 ___________________________
 
ho had turned aside out of the road to beg a
little milk from some shepherds, who were milking their ewes hard by; and
just as the gentleman, highly pleased, was about to renew the
conversation, don quixote, raising his head, perceived a cart covered
with royal flags coming along the road they were travelling; and
persuaded that this must be some new adventure, he called aloud to sancho
to come and bring him his helmet. sancho, hearing himself called, quitted
the shepherds, and, prodding dapple vigorously, came up to his master, to
whom there fell a terrific and desperate adventure.




chapter xvii.

wherein is shown the furthest and highest point which the unexampled
courage of don quixote reached or could reach; together with the happily
achieved adventure of the lions


the history tells that when don quixote called out to sancho to bring him
his helmet, sancho was buying some curds the shepherds agreed to sell
him, and flurried by the great haste his master was in 
 
 ___________________________
 
epair to dulcinea--i say no
more." to these he added some further words that banished all hope of his
giving up his insane project. he of the green gaban would have offered
resistance, but he found himself ill-matched as to arms, and did not
think it prudent to come to blows with a madman, for such don quixote now
showed himself to be in every respect; and the latter, renewing his
commands to the keeper and repeating his threats, gave warning to the
gentleman to spur his mare, sancho his dapple, and the carter his mules,
all striving to get away from the cart as far as they could before the
lions broke loose. sancho was weeping over his master's death, for this
time he firmly believed it was in store for him from the claws of the
lions; and he cursed his fate and called it an unlucky hour when he
thought of taking service with him again; but with all his tears and
lamentations he did not forget to thrash dapple so as to put a good space
between himself and the cart. the keeper,
 
 ___________________________
 
the brain."

both father and son were amazed afresh at the strange medley don quixote
talked, at one moment sense, at another nonsense, and at the pertinacity
and persistence he displayed in going through thick and thin in quest of
his unlucky adventures, which he made the end and aim of his desires.
there was a renewal of offers of service and civilities, and then, with
the gracious permission of the lady of the castle, they took their
departure, don quixote on rocinante, and sancho on dapple.




chapter xix.

in which is related the adventure of the enamoured shepherd, together
with other truly droll incidents


don quixote had gone but a short distance beyond don diego's village,
when he fell in with a couple of either priests or students, and a couple
of peasants, mounted on four beasts of the ass kind. one of the students
carried, wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau,
what seemed to be a little linen and a couple of pairs of ribbed
stoc
 
 ___________________________
 
d so far, it
seems to me, i have not broken the said article."

"i remember no such article, sancho," said don quixote; "and even if it
were so, i desire you to hold your tongue and come along; for the
instruments we heard last night are already beginning to enliven the
valleys again, and no doubt the marriage will take place in the cool of
the morning, and not in the heat of the afternoon."

sancho did as his master bade him, and putting the saddle on rocinante
and the pack-saddle on dapple, they both mounted and at a leisurely pace
entered the arcade. the first thing that presented itself to sancho's
eyes was a whole ox spitted on a whole elm tree, and in the fire at which
it was to be roasted there was burning a middling-sized mountain of
faggots, and six stewpots that stood round the blaze had not been made in
the ordinary mould of common pots, for they were six half wine-jars, each
fit to hold the contents of a slaughter-house; they swallowed up whole
sheep and hid them
 
 ___________________________
 
om waiting for camacho's splendid feast and
festival, which lasted until night; and thus dragged away, he moodily
followed his master, who accompanied basilio's party, and left behind him
the flesh-pots of egypt; though in his heart he took them with him, and
their now nearly finished skimmings that he carried in the bucket
conjured up visions before his eyes of the glory and abundance of the
good cheer he was losing. and so, vexed and dejected though not hungry,
without dismounting from dapple he followed in the footsteps of
rocinante.




chapter xxii.

wherin is related the grand adventure of the cave of montesinos in the
heart of la mancha, which the valiant don quixote brought to a happy
termination


many and great were the attentions shown to don quixote by the newly
married couple, who felt themselves under an obligation to him for coming
forward in defence of their cause; and they exalted his wisdom to the
same level with his courage, rating him as a cid in ar
 
 ___________________________
 
lry, who
would have great pleasure in conducting him to the mouth of the very
cave, and would show him the lakes of ruidera, which were likewise famous
all over la mancha, and even all over spain; and he assured him he would
find him entertaining, for he was a youth who could write books good
enough to be printed and dedicated to princes. the cousin arrived at
last, leading an ass in foal, with a pack-saddle covered with a
parti-coloured carpet or sackcloth; sancho saddled rocinante, got dapple
ready, and stocked his alforjas, along with which went those of the
cousin, likewise well filled; and so, commending themselves to god and
bidding farewell to all, they set out, taking the road for the famous
cave of montesinos.

on the way don quixote asked the cousin of what sort and character his
pursuits, avocations, and studies were, to which he replied that he was
by profession a humanist, and that his pursuits and studies were making
books for the press, all of great utility and
 
 ___________________________
 
; and as he was somewhat inquisitive, and always
tortured by his anxiety to learn something new, he decided to set out at
once, and go and pass the night at the inn instead of stopping at the
hermitage, where the cousin would have had them halt. accordingly they
mounted and all three took the direct road for the inn, which they
reached a little before nightfall. on the road the cousin proposed they
should go up to the hermitage to drink a sup. the instant sancho heard
this he steered his dapple towards it, and don quixote and the cousin did
the same; but it seems sancho's bad luck so ordered it that the hermit
was not at home, for so a sub-hermit they found in the hermitage told
them. they called for some of the best. she replied that her master had
none, but that if they liked cheap water she would give it with great
pleasure.

"if i found any in water," said sancho, "there are wells along the road
where i could have had enough of it. ah, camacho's wedding, and plentiful
hou
 
 ___________________________
 
edro was and what was the
divining ape that astonished all the villages with his divinations. he
says, then, that he who has read the first part of this history will
remember well enough the gines de pasamonte whom, with other galley
slaves, don quixote set free in the sierra morena: a kindness for which
he afterwards got poor thanks and worse payment from that evil-minded,
ill-conditioned set. this gines de pasamonte--don ginesillo de parapilla,
don quixote called him--it was that stole dapple from sancho panza;
which, because by the fault of the printers neither the how nor the when
was stated in the first part, has been a puzzle to a good many people,
who attribute to the bad memory of the author what was the error of the
press. in fact, however, gines stole him while sancho panza was asleep on
his back, adopting the plan and device that brunello had recourse to when
he stole sacripante's horse from between his legs at the siege of
albracca; and, as has been told, sancho aft
 
 ___________________________
 
mself to god with all his heart to deliver him out of this
peril, in dread every step of some ball coming in at his back and coming
out at his breast, and every minute drawing his breath to see whether it
had gone from him. the members of the band, however, were satisfied with
seeing him take to flight, and did not fire on him. they put up sancho,
scarcely restored to his senses, on his ass, and let him go after his
master; not that he was sufficiently in his wits to guide the beast, but
dapple followed the footsteps of rocinante, from whom he could not remain
a moment separated. don quixote having got some way off looked back, and
seeing sancho coming, waited for him, as he perceived that no one
followed him. the men of the troop stood their ground till night, and as
the enemy did not come out to battle, they returned to their town
exulting; and had they been aware of the ancient custom of the greeks,
they would have erected a trophy on the spot.




chapter xxviii.

of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ve themselves for better occasions. this proved to be the case with
don quixote, who, giving way before the fury of the townsfolk and the
hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to flight and, without a
thought of sancho or the danger in which he was leaving him, retreated to
such a distance as he thought made him safe. sancho, lying across his
ass, followed him, as has been said, and at length came up, having by
this time recovered his senses, and on joining him let himself drop off
dapple at rocinante's feet, sore, bruised, and belaboured. don quixote
dismounted to examine his wounds, but finding him whole from head to
foot, he said to him, angrily enough, "in an evil hour didst thou take to
braying, sancho! where hast thou learned that it is well done to mention
the rope in the house of the man that has been hanged? to the music of
brays what harmonies couldst thou expect to get but cudgels? give thanks
to god, sancho, that they signed the cross on thee just now with a st
 
 ___________________________
 
rrantry, where hast thou ever seen or read that any
knight-errant's squire made terms with his lord, 'you must give me so
much a month for serving you'? plunge, scoundrel, rogue, monster--for
such i take thee to be--plunge, i say, into the mare magnum of their
histories; and if thou shalt find that any squire ever said or thought
what thou hast said now, i will let thee nail it on my forehead, and give
me, over and above, four sound slaps in the face. turn the rein, or the
halter, of thy dapple, and begone home; for one single step further thou
shalt not make in my company. o bread thanklessly received! o promises
ill-bestowed! o man more beast than human being! now, when i was about to
raise thee to such a position, that, in spite of thy wife, they would
call thee 'my lord,' thou art leaving me? thou art going now when i had a
firm and fixed intention of making thee lord of the best island in the
world? well, as thou thyself hast said before now, honey is not for the
mouth of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had told him that of those things part was true, part
false, he clung more to their truth than to their falsehood, the very
reverse of sancho, who held them all to be downright lies.

as they were thus proceeding, then, they discovered a small boat, without
oars or any other gear, that lay at the water's edge tied to the stem of
a tree growing on the bank. don quixote looked all round, and seeing
nobody, at once, without more ado, dismounted from rocinante and bade
sancho get down from dapple and tie both beasts securely to the trunk of
a poplar or willow that stood there. sancho asked him the reason of this
sudden dismounting and tying. don quixote made answer, "thou must know,
sancho, that this bark is plainly, and without the possibility of any
alternative, calling and inviting me to enter it, and in it go to give
aid to some knight or other person of distinction in need of it, who is
no doubt in some sore strait; for this is the way of the books of
chivalry and of the enc
 
 ___________________________
 
ome difficulty from which he cannot be delivered
save by the hand of another knight, though they may be at a distance of
two or three thousand leagues or more one from the other, they either
take him up on a cloud, or they provide a bark for him to get into, and
in less than the twinkling of an eye they carry him where they will and
where his help is required; and so, sancho, this bark is placed here for
the same purpose; this is as true as that it is now day, and ere this one
passes tie dapple and rocinante together, and then in god's hand be it to
guide us; for i would not hold back from embarking, though barefooted
friars were to beg me."

"as that's the case," said sancho, "and your worship chooses to give in
to these--i don't know if i may call them absurdities--at every turn,
there's nothing for it but to obey and bow the head, bearing in mind the
proverb, 'do as thy master bids thee, and sit down to table with him;'
but for all that, for the sake of easing my conscience
 
 ___________________________
 
or thou art not bound to know latin, like
some who pretend to know it and don't."

"now they are tied," said sancho; "what are we to do next?"

"what?" said don quixote, "cross ourselves and weigh anchor; i mean,
embark and cut the moorings by which the bark is held;" and the bark
began to drift away slowly from the bank. but when sancho saw himself
somewhere about two yards out in the river, he began to tremble and give
himself up for lost; but nothing distressed him more than hearing dapple
bray and seeing rocinante struggling to get loose, and said he to his
master, "dapple is braying in grief at our leaving him, and rocinante is
trying to escape and plunge in after us. o dear friends, peace be with
you, and may this madness that is taking us away from you, turned into
sober sense, bring us back to you." and with this he fell weeping so
bitterly, that don quixote said to him, sharply and angrily, "what art
thou afraid of, cowardly creature? what art thou weeping at, heart 
 
 ___________________________
 
for it; so, sancho,
thou mayest as well pass thy hand down thy thigh, and if thou comest upon
anything alive we shall be no longer in doubt; if not, then we have
crossed."

"i don't believe a bit of it," said sancho; "still, i'll do as your
worship bids me; though i don't know what need there is for trying these
experiments, for i can see with my own eyes that we have not moved five
yards away from the bank, or shifted two yards from where the animals
stand, for there are rocinante and dapple in the very same place where we
left them; and watching a point, as i do now, i swear by all that's good,
we are not stirring or moving at the pace of an ant."

"try the test i told thee of, sancho," said don quixote, "and don't mind
any other, for thou knowest nothing about colures, lines, parallels,
zodiacs, ecliptics, poles, solstices, equinoxes, planets, signs,
bearings, the measures of which the celestial and terrestrial spheres are
composed; if thou wert acquainted with all these 
 
 ___________________________
 
inea," said don quixote, "i
know not that thou hast carried any other, at least in my service."

"that is true," replied sancho; "but pledges don't distress a good payer,
and in a house where there's plenty supper is soon cooked; i mean there's
no need of telling or warning me about anything; for i'm ready for
everything and know a little of everything."

"that i believe, sancho," said don quixote; "go and good luck to thee,
and god speed thee."

sancho went off at top speed, forcing dapple out of his regular pace, and
came to where the fair huntress was standing, and dismounting knelt
before her and said, "fair lady, that knight that you see there, the
knight of the lions by name, is my master, and i am a squire of his, and
at home they call me sancho panza. this same knight of the lions, who was
called not long since the knight of the rueful countenance, sends by me
to say may it please your highness to give him leave that, with your
permission, approbation, and consent, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 awaited him with the greatest delight and anxiety to make his
acquaintance, meaning to fall in with his humour and agree with
everything he said, and, so long as he stayed with them, to treat him as
a knight-errant, with all the ceremonies usual in the books of chivalry
they had read, for they themselves were very fond of them.

don quixote now came up with his visor raised, and as he seemed about to
dismount sancho made haste to go and hold his stirrup for him; but in
getting down off dapple he was so unlucky as to hitch his foot in one of
the ropes of the pack-saddle in such a way that he was unable to free it,
and was left hanging by it with his face and breast on the ground. don
quixote, who was not used to dismount without having the stirrup held,
fancying that sancho had by this time come to hold it for him, threw
himself off with a lurch and brought rocinante's saddle after him, which
was no doubt badly girthed, and saddle and he both came to the ground;
not without di
 
 ___________________________
 
of the household, crying, "welcome, flower and cream of
knight-errantry!" while all or most of them flung pellets filled with
scented water over don quixote and the duke and duchess; at all which don
quixote was greatly astonished, and this was the first time that he
thoroughly felt and believed himself to be a knight-errant in reality and
not merely in fancy, now that he saw himself treated in the same way as
he had read of such knights being treated in days of yore.

sancho, deserting dapple, hung on to the duchess and entered the castle,
but feeling some twinges of conscience at having left the ass alone, he
approached a respectable duenna who had come out with the rest to receive
the duchess, and in a low voice he said to her, "senora gonzalez, or
however your grace may be called-"

"i am called dona rodriguez de grijalba," replied the duenna; "what is
your will, brother?" to which sancho made answer, "i should be glad if
your worship would do me the favour to go out to t
 
 ___________________________
 
ty and custom's sake than because of
her years."

"may all the rest of mine be unlucky," said sancho, "if i meant it that
way; i only spoke because the affection i have for my ass is so great,
and i thought i could not commend him to a more kind-hearted person than
the lady dona rodriguez."

don quixote, who was listening, said to him, "is this proper conversation
for the place, sancho?"

"senor," replied sancho, "every one must mention what he wants wherever
he may be; i thought of dapple here, and i spoke of him here; if i had
thought of him in the stable i would have spoken there."

on which the duke observed, "sancho is quite right, and there is no
reason at all to find fault with him; dapple shall be fed to his heart's
content, and sancho may rest easy, for he shall be treated like himself."

while this conversation, amusing to all except don quixote, was
proceeding, they ascended the staircase and ushered don quixote into a
chamber hung with rich cloth of gold and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing that
modesty became knights-errant just as much as valour. however, he said
they might give the shirt to sancho; and shutting himself in with him in
a room where there was a sumptuous bed, he undressed and put on the
shirt; and then, finding himself alone with sancho, he said to him, "tell
me, thou new-fledged buffoon and old booby, dost thou think it right to
offend and insult a duenna so deserving of reverence and respect as that
one just now? was that a time to bethink thee of thy dapple, or are these
noble personages likely to let the beasts fare badly when they treat
their owners in such elegant style? for god's sake, sancho, restrain
thyself, and don't show the thread so as to let them see what a coarse,
boorish texture thou art of. remember, sinner that thou art, the master
is the more esteemed the more respectable and well-bred his servants are;
and that one of the greatest advantages that princes have over other men
is that they have servants as good as themselves 
 
 ___________________________
 
o knights-errant
mostly drink water, for they are always wandering among woods, forests
and meadows, mountains and crags, without a drop of wine to be had if
they gave their eyes for it."

"so i believe," said the duchess; "and now let sancho go and take his
sleep, and we will talk by-and-by at greater length, and settle how he
may soon go and stick himself into the government, as he says."

sancho once more kissed the duchess's hand, and entreated her to let good
care be taken of his dapple, for he was the light of his eyes.

"what is dapple?" said the duchess.

"my ass," said sancho, "which, not to mention him by that name, i'm
accustomed to call dapple; i begged this lady duenna here to take care of
him when i came into the castle, and she got as angry as if i had said
she was ugly or old, though it ought to be more natural and proper for
duennas to feed asses than to ornament chambers. god bless me! what a
spite a gentleman of my village had against these ladies!"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
he must have been some clown," said dona rodriguez the duenna; "for if
he had been a gentleman and well-born he would have exalted them higher
than the horns of the moon."

"that will do," said the duchess; "no more of this; hush, dona rodriguez,
and let senor panza rest easy and leave the treatment of dapple in my
charge, for as he is a treasure of sancho's, i'll put him on the apple of
my eye."

"it will be enough for him to be in the stable," said sancho, "for
neither he nor i are worthy to rest a moment in the apple of your
highness's eye, and i'd as soon stab myself as consent to it; for though
my master says that in civilities it is better to lose by a card too many
than a card too few, when it comes to civilities to asses we must mind
what we are about and keep within due bounds."

 
 ___________________________
 
of
huntsmen and beaters as a crowned king.

they presented don quixote with a hunting suit, and sancho with another
of the finest green cloth; but don quixote declined to put his on, saying
that he must soon return to the hard pursuit of arms, and could not carry
wardrobes or stores with him. sancho, however, took what they gave him,
meaning to sell it at the first opportunity.

the appointed day having arrived, don quixote armed himself, and sancho
arrayed himself, and mounted on his dapple (for he would not give him up
though they offered him a horse), he placed himself in the midst of the
troop of huntsmen. the duchess came out splendidly attired, and don
quixote, in pure courtesy and politeness, held the rein of her palfrey,
though the duke wanted not to allow him; and at last they reached a wood
that lay between two high mountains, where, after occupying various
posts, ambushes, and paths, and distributing the party in different
positions, the hunt began with great nois
 
 ___________________________
 
e, shouting, and hallooing, so
that, between the baying of the hounds and the blowing of the horns, they
could not hear one another. the duchess dismounted, and with a sharp
boar-spear in her hand posted herself where she knew the wild boars were
in the habit of passing. the duke and don quixote likewise dismounted and
placed themselves one at each side of her. sancho took up a position in
the rear of all without dismounting from dapple, whom he dared not desert
lest some mischief should befall him. scarcely had they taken their stand
in a line with several of their servants, when they saw a huge boar,
closely pressed by the hounds and followed by the huntsmen, making
towards them, grinding his teeth and tusks, and scattering foam from his
mouth. as soon as he saw him don quixote, bracing his shield on his arm,
and drawing his sword, advanced to meet him; the duke with boar-spear did
the same; but the duchess would have
 
 ___________________________
 
 gone in front of them all had not
the duke prevented her. sancho alone, deserting dapple at the sight of
the mighty beast, took to his heels as hard as he could and strove in
vain to mount a tall oak. as he was clinging to a branch, however,
half-way up in his struggle to reach the top, the bough, such was his
ill-luck and hard fate, gave way, and caught in his fall by a broken limb
of the oak, he hung suspended in the air unable to reach the ground.
finding himself in this position, and that the green coat was beginning
to tear, and reflecting that if the fierce animal came
 
 ___________________________
 
 that way he might
be able to get at him, he began to utter such cries, and call for help so
earnestly, that all who heard him and did not see him felt sure he must
be in the teeth of some wild beast. in the end the tusked boar fell
pierced by the blades of the many spears they held in front of him; and
don quixote, turning round at the cries of sancho, for he knew by them
that it was he, saw him hanging from the oak head downwards, with dapple,
who did not forsake him in his distress, close beside him; and cide
hamete observes that he seldom saw sancho panza without seeing dapple, or
dapple without seeing sancho panza; such was their attachment and loyalty
one to the other. don quixote went over and unhooked sancho, who, as soon
as he found himself on the ground, looked at the rent in his huntingcoat
and was grieved to the heart, for he thought he had got a patrimonial
estate in that suit.

meanwhile they had slung the might
 
 ___________________________
 
 to give myself, she
will be left as entirely disenchanted as the mother that bore her. say
nothing of this to anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will
say they are white and others will say they are black. i shall leave this
in a few days for my government, to which i am going with a mighty great
desire to make money, for they tell me all new governors set out with the
same desire; i will feel the pulse of it and will let thee know if thou
art to come and live with me or not. dapple is well and sends many
remembrances to thee; i am not going to leave him behind though they took
me away to be grand turk. my lady the duchess kisses thy hands a thousand
times; do thou make a return with two thousand, for as my master says,
nothing costs less or is cheaper than civility. god has not been pleased
to provide another valise for me with another hundred crowns, like the
one the other day; but never mind, my teresa, the bell-ringer is in safe
quarters, and all will come out i
 
 ___________________________
 
he world; he is here to-day, to-morrow
in france, and the next day in potosi; and the best of it is the said
horse neither eats nor sleeps nor wears out shoes, and goes at an ambling
pace through the air without wings, so that he whom he has mounted upon
him can carry a cup full of water in his hand without spilling a drop, so
smoothly and easily does he go, for which reason the fair magalona
enjoyed riding him greatly."

"for going smoothly and easily," said sancho at this, "give me my dapple,
though he can't go through the air; but on the ground i'll back him
against all the amblers in the world."

they all laughed, and the distressed one continued: "and this same horse,
if so be that malambruno is disposed to put an end to our sufferings,
will be here before us ere the night shall have advanced half an hour;
for he announced to me that the sign he would give me whereby i might
know that i had found the knight i was in quest of, would be to send me
the horse wherever he mi
 
 ___________________________
 
rifaldi, "that it is with a peg, by
turning which to one side or the other the knight who rides him makes him
go as he pleases, either through the upper air, or skimming and almost
sweeping the earth, or else in that middle course that is sought and
followed in all well-regulated proceedings."

"i'd like to see him," said sancho; "but to fancy i'm going to mount him,
either in the saddle or on the croup, is to ask pears of the elm tree. a
good joke indeed! i can hardly keep my seat upon dapple, and on a
pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and here they'd have me hold on upon
haunches of plank without pad or cushion of any sort! gad, i have no
notion of bruising myself to get rid of anyone's beard; let each one
shave himself as best he can; i'm not going to accompany my master on any
such long journey; besides, i can't give any help to the shaving of these
beards as i can to the disenchantment of my lady dulcinea."

"yes, you can, my friend," replied the trifaldi; "and so muc
 
 ___________________________
 
 whole litany of them, which have as much to do with what
we are talking about as 'over the hills of ubeda.' mind, sancho, i do not
say that a proverb aptly brought in is objectionable; but to pile up and
string together proverbs at random makes conversation dull and vulgar.

"when thou ridest on horseback, do not go lolling with thy body on the
back of the saddle, nor carry thy legs stiff or sticking out from the
horse's belly, nor yet sit so loosely that one would suppose thou wert on
dapple; for the seat on a horse makes gentlemen of some and grooms of
others.

"be moderate in thy sleep; for he who does not rise early does not get
the benefit of the day; and remember, sancho, diligence is the mother of
good fortune, and indolence, its opposite, never yet attained the object
of an honest ambition.

"the last counsel i will give thee now, though it does not tend to bodily
improvement, i would have thee carry carefully in thy memory, for i
believe it will be no less useful 
 
 ___________________________
 
n that may be seen to confirm or do away with this
suspicion."

"thou wilt do well, sancho," said don quixote, "and thou wilt let me know
all thou discoverest, and all that befalls thee in thy government."

sancho at last set out attended by a great number of people. he was
dressed in the garb of a lawyer, with a gaban of tawny watered camlet
over all and a montera cap of the same material, and mounted a la gineta
upon a mule. behind him, in accordance with the duke's orders, followed
dapple with brand new ass-trappings and ornaments of silk, and from time
to time sancho turned round to look at his ass, so well pleased to have
him with him that he would not have changed places with the emperor of
germany. on taking leave he kissed the hands of the duke and duchess and
got his master's blessing, which don quixote gave him with tears, and he
received blubbering.

let worthy sancho go in peace, and good luck to him, gentle reader; and
look out for two bushels of laughter, whic
 
 ___________________________
 
s in the
right of it in everything you have said; and i promise you in the name of
all the inhabitants of this island that they will serve your worship with
all zeal, affection, and good-will, for the mild kind of government you
have given a sample of to begin with, leaves them no ground for doing or
thinking anything to your worship's disadvantage."

"that i believe," said sancho; "and they would be great fools if they did
or thought otherwise; once more i say, see to my feeding and my dapple's
for that is the great point and what is most to the purpose; and when the
hour comes let us go the rounds, for it is my intention to purge this
island of all manner of uncleanness and of all idle good-for-nothing
vagabonds; for i would have you know that lazy idlers are the same thing
in a state as the drones in a hive, that eat up the honey the industrious
bees make. i mean to protect the husbandman, to preserve to the gentleman
his privileges, to reward the virtuous, and above all to
 
 ___________________________
 
r, the anxiety his fainting away had
caused them was relieved by his returning to himself. he asked what
o'clock it was; they told him it was just daybreak. he said no more, and
in silence began to dress himself, while all watched him, waiting to see
what the haste with which he was putting on his clothes meant.

he got himself dressed at last, and then, slowly, for he was sorely
bruised and could not go fast, he proceeded to the stable, followed by
all who were present, and going up to dapple embraced him and gave him a
loving kiss on the forehead, and said to him, not without tears in his
eyes, "come along, comrade and friend and partner of my toils and
sorrows; when i was with you and had no cares to trouble me except
mending your harness and feeding your little carcass, happy were my
hours, my days, and my years; but since i left you, and mounted the
towers of ambition and pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand troubles,
and four thousand anxieties have entered into my sou
 
 ___________________________
 
l;" and all the while
he was speaking in this strain he was fixing the pack-saddle on the ass,
without a word from anyone. then having dapple saddled, he, with great
pain and difficulty, got up on him, and addressing himself to the
majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, and pedro recio the doctor and
several others who stood by, he said, "make way, gentlemen, and let me go
back to my old freedom; let me go look for my past life, and raise myself
up from this present death. i was not born to be a governor or protect
islands or cities from the enemies that choose to attack them. ploughing
and digging, vinedressing and prunin
 
 ___________________________
 
exact
one; besides, when i go forth naked as i do, there is no other proof
needed to show that i have governed like an angel."

"by god the great sancho is right," said doctor recio, "and we should let
him go, for the duke will be beyond measure glad to see him."

they all agreed to this, and allowed him to go, first offering to bear
him company and furnish him with all he wanted for his own comfort or for
the journey. sancho said he did not want anything more than a little
barley for dapple, and half a cheese and half a loaf for himself; for the
distance being so short there was no occasion for any better or bulkier
provant. they all embraced him, and he with tears embraced all of them,
and left them filled with admiration not only at his remarks but at his
firm and sensible resolution.




chapter liv.

which deals with matters relating to this history and no other


the duke and duchess resolved that the challenge don quixote had, for the
reason already mentioned,
 
 ___________________________
 
 pleased
at the news, and promised himself to do wonders in the lists, and
reckoned it rare good fortune that an opportunity should have offered for
letting his noble hosts see what the might of his strong arm was capable
of; and so in high spirits and satisfaction he awaited the expiration of
the four days, which measured by his impatience seemed spinning
themselves out into four hundred ages. let us leave them to pass as we do
other things, and go and bear sancho company, as mounted on dapple, half
glad, half sad, he paced along on his road to join his master, in whose
society he was happier than in being governor of all the islands in the
world. well then, it so happened that before he had gone a great way from
the island of his government (and whether it was island, city, town, or
village that he governed he never troubled himself to inquire) he saw
coming along the road he was travelling six pilgrims with staves,
foreigners of that sort that beg for alms singing; who as th
 
 ___________________________
 
hem to
them, explaining to them by signs that he had nothing else to give them.
they received them very gladly, but exclaimed, "geld! geld!"

"i don't understand what you want of me, good people," said sancho.

on this one of them took a purse out of his bosom and showed it to
sancho, by which he comprehended they were asking for money, and putting
his thumb to his throat and spreading his hand upwards he gave them to
understand that he had not the sign of a coin about him, and urging
dapple forward he broke through them. but as he was passing, one of them
who had been examining him very closely rushed towards him, and flinging
his arms round him exclaimed in a loud voice and good spanish, "god bless
me! what's this i see? is it possible that i hold in my arms my dear
friend, my good neighbour sancho panza? but there's no doubt about it,
for i'm not asleep, nor am i drunk just now."

sancho was surprised to hear himself called by his name and find himself
embraced by a fore
 
 ___________________________
 
fancy thought more of being a
christian than of lovemaking, would not trouble herself about the
attentions of this heir."

"god grant it," said sancho, "for it would be a bad business for both of
them; but now let me be off, friend ricote, for i want to reach where my
master don quixote is to-night."

"god be with thee, brother sancho," said ricote; "my comrades are
beginning to stir, and it is time, too, for us to continue our journey;"
and then they both embraced, and sancho mounted dapple, and ricote leant
upon his staff, and so they parted.




chapter lv.

of what befell sancho on the road, and other things that cannot be
surpassed


the length of time he delayed with ricote prevented sancho from reaching
the duke's castle that day, though he was within half a league of it when
night, somewhat dark and cloudy, overtook him. this, however, as it was
summer time, did not give him much uneasiness, and he turned aside out of
the road intending to wait for morning; 
 
 ___________________________
 
but his ill luck and hard fate so
willed it that as he was searching about for a place to make himself as
comfortable as possible, he and dapple fell into a deep dark hole that
lay among some very old buildings. as he fell he commended himself with
all his heart to god, fancying he was not going to stop until he reached
the depths of the bottomless pit; but it did not turn out so, for at
little more than thrice a man's height dapple touched bottom, and he
found himself sitting on him without having received any hurt or damage
whatever. he felt himself all over and held his breath to try whether he
was quite sound or had a hole made in him anywhere, and finding himself
all right and whole and in perfect health he was profuse in his thanks to
god our lord for the mercy that had been shown him, for he made sure he
had been broken into a thousand pieces. he also felt along the sides of
the pit with his hands to see if i
 
 ___________________________
 
t were possible to get out of it
without help, but he found they were quite smooth and afforded no hold
anywhere, at which he was greatly distressed, especially when he heard
how pathetically and dolefully dapple was bemoaning himself, and no
wonder he complained, nor was it from ill-temper, for in truth he was not
in a very good case. "alas," said sancho, "what unexpected accidents
happen at every step to those who live in this miserable world! who would
have said that one who saw himself yesterday sitting on a throne,
governor of an island, giving orders to his servants and his vassals,
would see himself to-day buried in a pit without a soul to help him, or
servant or vassal to come to his reli
 
 ___________________________
 
 he went down into the cave of
that enchanted montesinos, where he found people to make more of him than
if he had been in his own house; for it seems he came in for a table laid
out and a bed ready made. there he saw fair and pleasant visions, but
here i'll see, i imagine, toads and adders. unlucky wretch that i am,
what an end my follies and fancies have come to! they'll take up my bones
out of this, when it is heaven's will that i'm found, picked clean, white
and polished, and my good dapple's with them, and by that, perhaps, it
will be found out who we are, at least by such as have heard that sancho
panza never separated from his ass, nor his ass from sancho panza.
unlucky wretches, i say again, that our hard fate should not let us die
in our own country and among our own people, where if there was no help
for our misfortune, at any rate there would be some one to grieve for it
and to close our eyes as we passed away! o comrade and friend, how ill
have i repaid thy faithful
 
 ___________________________
 
 the poor
beast found himself in. at length, after a night spent in bitter moanings
and lamentations, day came, and by its light sancho perceived that it was
wholly impossible to escape out of that pit without help, and he fell to
bemoaning his fate and uttering loud shouts to find out if there was
anyone within hearing; but all his shouting was only crying in the
wilderness, for there was not a soul anywhere in the neighbourhood to
hear him, and then at last he gave himself up for dead. dapple was lying
on his back, and sancho helped him to his feet, which he was scarcely
able to keep; and then taking a piece of bread out of his alforjas which
had shared their fortunes in the fall, he gave it to the ass, to whom it
was not unwelcome, saying to him as if he understood him, "with bread all
sorrows are less."

and now he perceived on one side of the pit a hole large enough to admit
a person if he stooped and squeezed himself into a small compass. sancho
made for it, and entered
 
 ___________________________
 
ead
with her to that end, so far as my substance will go; without further
delay, therefore, declare thyself, and tell me who thou art."

"by all that's good," was the answer, "and by the birth of whomsoever
your worship chooses, i swear, senor don quixote of la mancha, that i am
your squire sancho panza, and that i have never died all my life; but
that, having given up my government for reasons that would require more
time to explain, i fell last night into this pit where i am now, and
dapple is witness and won't let me lie, for more by token he is here with
me."

nor was this all; one would have fancied the ass understood what sancho
said, because that moment he began to bray so loudly that the whole cave
rang again.

"famous testimony!" exclaimed don quixote; "i know that bray as well as
if i was its mother, and thy voice too, my sancho. wait while i go to the
duke's castle, which is close by, and i will bring some one to take thee
out of this pit into which thy sins no 
 
 ___________________________
 
he castle to tell the duke and
duchess what had happened sancho, and they were not a little astonished
at it; they could easily understand his having fallen, from the
confirmatory circumstance of the cave which had been in existence there
from time immemorial; but they could not imagine how he had quitted the
government without their receiving any intimation of his coming. to be
brief, they fetched ropes and tackle, as the saying is, and by dint of
many hands and much labour they drew up dapple and sancho panza out of
the darkness into the light of day. a student who saw him remarked,
"that's the way all bad governors should come out of their governments,
as this sinner comes out of the depths of the pit, dead with hunger,
pale, and i suppose without a farthing."

sancho overheard him and said, "it is eight or ten days, brother growler,
since i entered upon the government of the island they gave me, and all
that time i never had a bellyful of victuals, no not for an hour; doct
 
 ___________________________
 
 open plain. if a governor comes out of his government
rich, they say he has been a thief; and if he comes out poor, that he has
been a noodle and a blockhead."

"they'll be pretty sure this time," said sancho, "to set me down for a
fool rather than a thief."

thus talking, and surrounded by boys and a crowd of people, they reached
the castle, where in one of the corridors the duke and duchess stood
waiting for them; but sancho would not go up to see the duke until he had
first put up dapple in the stable, for he said he had passed a very bad
night in his last quarters; then he went upstairs to see his lord and
lady, and kneeling before them he said, "because it was your highnesses'
pleasure, not because of any desert of my own, i went to govern your
island of barataria, which 'i entered naked, and naked i find myself; i
neither lose nor gain.' whether i have governed well or ill, i have had
witnesses who will say what they think fit. i have answered questions, i
have decide
 
 ___________________________
 
e conscience--and that's no small matter--'naked i was born,
naked i find myself, i neither lose nor gain.'"

thus did sancho soliloquise on the day of their departure, as don
quixote, who had the night before taken leave of the duke and duchess,
coming out made his appearance at an early hour in full armour in the
courtyard of the castle. the whole household of the castle were watching
him from the corridors, and the duke and duchess, too, came out to see
him. sancho was mounted on his dapple, with his alforjas, valise, and
proven, supremely happy because the duke's majordomo, the same that had
acted the part of the trifaldi, had given him a little purse with two
hundred gold crowns to meet the necessary expenses of the road, but of
this don quixote knew nothing as yet. while all were, as has been said,
observing him, suddenly from among the duennas and handmaidens the
impudent and witty altisidora lifted up her voice and said in pathetic
tones:

give ear, cruel knight;
  
 
 ___________________________
 
out the theft of the
garters; for by god and upon my soul i have got them on, and i have
fallen into the same blunder as he did who went looking for his ass being
all the while mounted on it."

"didn't i say so?" said sancho. "i'm a likely one to hide thefts! why if
i wanted to deal in them, opportunities came ready enough to me in my
government."

don quixote bowed his head, and saluted the duke and duchess and all the
bystanders, and wheeling rocinante round, sancho following him on dapple,
he rode out of the castle, shaping his course for saragossa.




chapter lviii.

which tells how adventures came crowding on don quixote in such numbers
that they gave one another no breathing-time


when don quixote saw himself in open country, free, and relieved from the
attentions of altisidora, he felt at his ease, and in fresh spirits to
take up the pursuit of chivalry once more; and turning to sancho he said,
"freedom, sancho, is one of the most precious gifts that heaven 
 
 ___________________________
 
 sought to dissuade him from involving
himself in such a challenge, assuring him they admitted his gratitude as
fully established, and needed no fresh proofs to be convinced of his
valiant spirit, as those related in the history of his exploits were
sufficient, still don quixote persisted in his resolve; and mounted on
rocinante, bracing his buckler on his arm and grasping his lance, he
posted himself in the middle of a high road that was not far from the
green meadow. sancho followed on dapple, together with all the members of
the pastoral gathering, eager to see what would be the upshot of his
vainglorious and extraordinary proposal.

don quixote, then, having, as has been said, planted himself in the
middle of the road, made the welkin ring with words to this effect: "ho
ye travellers and wayfarers, knights, squires, folk on foot or on
horseback, who pass this way or shall pass in the course of the next two
days! know that don quixote of la mancha, knight-errant, is posted 
 
 ___________________________
 
 be they the
fiercest jarama breeds on its banks. confess at once, scoundrels, that
what i have declared is true; else ye have to deal with me in combat."

the herdsman had no time to reply, nor don quixote to get out of the way
even if he wished; and so the drove of fierce bulls and tame bullocks,
together with the crowd of herdsmen and others who were taking them to be
penned up in a village where they were to be run the next day, passed
over don quixote and over sancho, rocinante and dapple, hurling them all
to the earth and rolling them over on the ground. sancho was left
crushed, don quixote scared, dapple belaboured and rocinante in no very
sound condition.

they all got up, however, at length, and don quixote in great haste,
stumbling here and falling there, started off running after the drove,
shouting out, "hold! stay! ye rascally rabble, a single knight awaits
you, and he is not of the temper or opinion of those who say, 'for a
flying enemy make a bridge of silver.
 
 ___________________________
 
'" the retreating party in their
haste, however, did not stop for that, or heed his menaces any more than
last year's clouds. weariness brought don quixote to a halt, and more
enraged than avenged he sat down on the road to wait until sancho,
rocinante and dapple came up. when they reached him master and man
mounted once more, and without going back to bid farewell to the mock or
imitation arcadia, and more in humiliation than contentment, they
continued their journey.




chapter lix.

wherein is related the strange thing, which may be regarded as an
adventure, that happened don quixote


a clear limpid spring which they discovered in a cool grove relieved don
quixote and sancho of the dust and fatigue due to the unpolite behaviour
of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he bulls, and by the side of this, having turned dapple and rocinante
loose without headstall or bridle, the forlorn pair, master and man,
seated themselves. sancho had recourse to the larder of his alforjas and
took out of them what he called the prog; don quixote rinsed his mouth
and bathed his face, by which cooling process his flagging energies were
revived. out of pure vexation he remained without eating, and out of pure
politeness sancho did not venture to touch a morsel of what was before
him, but waited for his master to act as taster
 
 ___________________________
 
hing, especially if the stripes fall upon an ill-nourished and
worse-fed body. let my lady dulcinea have patience, and when she is least
expecting it, she will see me made a riddle of with whipping, and 'until
death it's all life;' i mean that i have still life in me, and the desire
to make good what i have promised."

don quixote thanked him, and ate a little, and sancho a good deal, and
then they both lay down to sleep, leaving those two inseparable friends
and comrades, rocinante and dapple, to their own devices and to feed
unrestrained upon the abundant grass with which the meadow was furnished.
they woke up rather late, mounted once more and resumed their journey,
pushing on to reach an inn which was in sight, apparently a league off. i
say an inn, because don quixote called it so, contrary to his usual
practice of calling all inns castles. they reached it, and asked the
landlord if they could put up there. he said yes, with as much comfort
and as good fare as they could 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs had scared them, their
hearts were no less troubled by upwards of forty living ones, who all of
a sudden surrounded them, and in the catalan tongue bade them stand and
wait until their captain came up. don quixote was on foot with his horse
unbridled and his lance leaning against a tree, and in short completely
defenceless; he thought it best therefore to fold his arms and bow his
head and reserve himself for a more favourable occasion and opportunity.
the robbers made haste to search dapple, and did not leave him a single
thing of all he carried in the alforjas and in the valise; and lucky it
was for sancho that the duke's crowns and those he brought from home were
in a girdle that he wore round him; but for all that these good folk
would have stripped him, and even looked to see what he had hidden
between the skin and flesh, but for the arrival at that moment of their
captain, who was about thirty-four years of age apparently, strongly
built, above the middle height, of st
 
 ___________________________
 
of matchmaking; it's not many days since he forced
another man to marry, who in the same way backed out of his promise to
another maiden; and if it had not been for his persecutors the enchanters
changing the man's proper shape into a lacquey's the said maiden would
not be one this minute."

roque, who was paying more attention to the fair claudia's adventure than
to the words of master or man, did not hear them; and ordering his
squires to restore to sancho everything they had stripped dapple of, he
directed them to return to the place where they had been quartered during
the night, and then set off with claudia at full speed in search of the
wounded or slain don vicente. they reached the spot where claudia met
him, but found nothing there save freshly spilt blood; looking all round,
however, they descried some people on the slope of a hill above them, and
concluded, as indeed it proved to be, that it was don vicente, whom
either dead or alive his servants were removing to at
 
 ___________________________
 
ry?

roque guinart found his squires at the place to which he had ordered
them, and don quixote on rocinante in the midst of them delivering a
harangue to them in which he urged them to give up a mode of life so full
of peril, as well to the soul as to the body; but as most of them were
gascons, rough lawless fellows, his speech did not make much impression
on them. roque on coming up asked sancho if his men had returned and
restored to him the treasures and jewels they had stripped off dapple.
sancho said they had, but that three kerchiefs that were worth three
cities were missing.

"what are you talking about, man?" said one of the bystanders; "i have
got them, and they are not worth three reals."

"that is true," said don quixote; "but my squire values them at the rate
he says, as having been given me by the person who gave them."

roque guinart ordered them to be restored at once; and making his men
fall in in line he directed all the clothing, jewellery, and money tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 yours, especially if you deign to employ it in your service."

the cavalier replied with words no less polite, and then, all closing in
around him, they set out with him for the city, to the music of the
clarions and the drums. as they were entering it, the wicked one, who is
the author of all mischief, and the boys who are wickeder than the wicked
one, contrived that a couple of these audacious irrepressible urchins
should force their way through the crowd, and lifting up, one of them
dapple's tail and the other rocinante's, insert a bunch of furze under
each. the poor beasts felt the strange spurs and added to their anguish
by pressing their tails tight, so much so that, cutting a multitude of
capers, they flung their masters to the ground. don quixote, covered with
shame and out of countenance, ran to pluck the plume from his poor jade's
tail, while sancho did the same for dapple. his conductors tried to
punish the audacity of the boys, but there was no possibility of doing
 
 ___________________________
 
not suffer him to take
the road sooner. there were tears and sighs, swoonings and sobs, at the
parting between don gregorio and ana felix. ricote offered don gregorio a
thousand crowns if he would have them, but he would not take any save
five which don antonio lent him and he promised to repay at the capital.
so the two of them took their departure, and don quixote and sancho
afterwards, as has been already said, don quixote without his armour and
in travelling gear, and sancho on foot, dapple being loaded with the
armour.




chapter lxvi.

which treats of what he who reads will see, or what he who has it read to
him will hear


as he left barcelona, don quixote turned gaze upon the spot where he had
fallen. "here troy was," said he; "here my ill-luck, not my cowardice,
robbed me of all the glory i had won; here fortune made me the victim of
her caprices; here the lustre of my achievements was dimmed; here, in a
word, fell my happiness never to rise again."

"senor
 
 ___________________________
 
y keeping the promise i have given.
forward then, sancho my friend, let us go to keep the year of the
novitiate in our own country, and in that seclusion we shall pick up
fresh strength to return to the by me never-forgotten calling of arms."

"senor," returned sancho, "travelling on foot is not such a pleasant
thing that it makes me feel disposed or tempted to make long marches. let
us leave this armour hung up on some tree, instead of some one that has
been hanged; and then with me on dapple's back and my feet off the ground
we will arrange the stages as your worship pleases to measure them out;
but to suppose that i am going to travel on foot, and make long ones, is
to suppose nonsense."

"thou sayest well, sancho," said don quixote; "let my armour be hung up
for a trophy, and under it or round it we will carve on the trees what
was inscribed on the trophy of roland's armour--

these let none move
who dareth not his might with roland prove."

"that's the very thing," s
 
 ___________________________
 
 i see it plain enough, and i tell
him so plain enough; but what's the use? especially now that it is all
over with him, for here he is beaten by the knight of the white moon."

tosilos begged him to explain what had happened him, but sancho replied
that it would not be good manners to leave his master waiting for him;
and that some other day if they met there would be time enough for that;
and then getting up, after shaking his doublet and brushing the crumbs
out of his beard, he drove dapple on before him, and bidding adieu to
tosilos left him and rejoined his master, who was waiting for him under
the shade of a tree.




chapter lxvii.

of the resolution don quixote formed to turn shepherd and take to a life
in the fields while the year for which he had given his word was running
its course; with other events truly delectable and happy


if a multitude of reflections used to harass don quixote before he had
been overthrown, a great many more harassed him since his f
 
 ___________________________
 
ife, master mine," said sancho, "it's not i that am stringing
proverbs now, for they drop in pairs from your worship's mouth faster
than from mine; only there is this difference between mine and yours,
that yours are well-timed and mine are untimely; but anyhow, they are all
proverbs."

at this point they became aware of a harsh indistinct noise that seemed
to spread through all the valleys around. don quixote stood up and laid
his hand upon his sword, and sancho ensconced himself under dapple and
put the bundle of armour on one side of him and the ass's pack-saddle on
the other, in fear and trembling as great as don quixote's perturbation.
each instant the noise increased and came nearer to the two terrified
men, or at least to one, for as to the other, his courage is known to
all. the fact of the matter was that some men were taking above six
hundred pigs to sell at a fair, and were on their way with them at that
hour, and so great was the noise they made and their grunting 
 
 ___________________________
 
fened the ears of don quixote and sancho panza, and
they could not make out what it was. the wide-spread grunting drove came
on in a surging mass, and without showing any respect for don quixote's
dignity or sancho's, passed right over the pair of them, demolishing
sancho's entrenchments, and not only upsetting don quixote but sweeping
rocinante off his feet into the bargain; and what with the trampling and
the grunting, and the pace at which the unclean beasts went, pack-saddle,
armour, dapple and rocinante were left scattered on the ground and sancho
and don quixote at their wits' end.

sancho got up as well as he could and begged his master to give him his
sword, saying he wanted to kill half a dozen of those dirty unmannerly
pigs, for he had by this time found out that that was what they were.

"let them be, my friend," said don quixote; "this insult is the penalty
of my sin; and it is the righteous chastisement of heaven that jackals
should devour a vanquished knight, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 tied
my hands, i would count this host that comes against us but cakes and
fancy bread; but perhaps it may prove something different from what we
apprehend." the men on horseback now came up, and raising their lances
surrounded don quixote in silence, and pointed them at his back and
breast, menacing him with death. one of those on foot, putting his finger
to his lips as a sign to him to be silent, seized rocinante's bridle and
drew him out of the road, and the others driving sancho and dapple before
them, and all maintaining a strange silence, followed in the steps of the
one who led don quixote. the latter two or three times attempted to ask
where they were taking him to and what they wanted, but the instant he
began to open his lips they threatened to close them with the points of
their lances; and sancho fared the same way, for the moment he seemed
about to speak one of those on foot punched him with a goad, and dapple
likewise, as if he too wanted to talk. night set in, t
 
 ___________________________
 
ir, and i'll scarify
myself."

night, longed for by don quixote with the greatest anxiety in the world,
came at last, though it seemed to him that the wheels of apollo's car had
broken down, and that the day was drawing itself out longer than usual,
just as is the case with lovers, who never make the reckoning of their
desires agree with time. they made their way at length in among some
pleasant trees that stood a little distance from the road, and there
vacating rocinante's saddle and dapple's pack-saddle, they stretched
themselves on the green grass and made their supper off sancho's stores,
and he making a powerful and flexible whip out of dapple's halter and
headstall retreated about twenty paces from his master among some beech
trees. don quixote seeing him march off with such resolution and spirit,
said to him, "take care, my friend, not to cut thyself to pieces; allow
the lashes to wait for one another, and do not be in so great a hurry as
to run thyself out of breath 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat boy said, 'thou shalt never see it again as long as
thou livest'?"

"well," said sancho, "what does it matter if the boy said so?"

"what!" said don quixote, "dost thou not see that, applied to the object
of my desires, the words mean that i am never to see dulcinea more?"

sancho was about to answer, when his attention was diverted by seeing a
hare come flying across the plain pursued by several greyhounds and
sportsmen. in its terror it ran to take shelter and hide itself under
dapple. sancho caught it alive and presented it to don quixote, who was
saying, "malum signum, malum signum! a hare flies, greyhounds chase it,
dulcinea appears not."

"your worship's a strange man," said sancho; "let's take it for granted
that this hare is dulcinea, and these greyhounds chasing it the malignant
enchanters who turned her into a country wench; she flies, and i catch
her and put her into your worship's hands, and you hold her in your arms
and cherish her; what bad sign is that, 
 
 ___________________________
 
aid the same to me some time ago,
telling me that all christians who minded omens were fools; but there's
no need of making words about it; let us push on and go into our
village."

the sportsmen came up and asked for their hare, which don quixote gave
them. they then went on, and upon the green at the entrance of the town
they came upon the curate and the bachelor samson carrasco busy with
their breviaries. it should be mentioned that sancho had thrown, by way
of a sumpter-cloth, over dapple and over the bundle of armour, the
buckram robe painted with flames which they had put upon him at the
duke's castle the night altisidora came back to life. he had also fixed
the mitre on dapple's head, the oddest transformation and decoration that
ever ass in the world underwent. they were at once recognised by both the
curate and the bachelor, who came towards them with open arms. don
quixote dismounted and received them with a close embrace; and the boys,
who are lynxes that nothing e
 
 ___________________________
 
g, got by my own
industry without wronging anybody."

"you bring the money, my good husband," said teresa, "and no matter
whether it was got this way or that; for, however you may have got it,
you'll not have brought any new practice into the world."

sanchica embraced her father and asked him if he brought her anything,
for she had been looking out for him as for the showers of may; and she
taking hold of him by the girdle on one side, and his wife by the hand,
while the daughter led dapple, they made for their house, leaving don
quixote in his, in the hands of his niece and housekeeper, and in the
company of the curate and the bachelor.

don quixote at once, without any regard to time or season, withdrew in
private with the bachelor and the curate, and in a few words told them of
his defeat, and of the engagement he was under not to quit his village
for a year, which he meant to keep to the letter without departing a
hair's breadth from it, as became a knight-errant bound