res (for so they call those who follow that trade) were
about to rifle sancho panza, but he ordered them to desist and was at
once obeyed, so the girdle escaped. he wondered to see the lance leaning
against the tree, the shield on the ground, and don quixote in armour and
dejected, with the saddest and most melancholy face that sadness itself
could produce; and going up to him he said, "be not so cast down, good
man, for you have not fallen into the hands of any inhuman busiris, but
into roque guinart's, which are more merciful than cruel."

"the cause of my dejection," returned don quixote, "is not that i have
fallen into thy hands, o valiant roque, whose fame is bounded by no
limits on earth, but that my carelessness should have been so great that
thy soldiers should have caught me unbridled, when it is my duty,
according to the rule of knight-errantry which i profess, to be always on
the alert and at all times my own sentinel; for let me tell thee, great
roque, had they found me o
 
 ___________________________
 
n my horse, with my lance and shield, it would
not have been very easy for them to reduce me to submission, for i am don
quixote of la mancha, he who hath filled the whole world with his
achievements."

roque guinart at once perceived that don quixote's weakness was more akin
to madness than to swagger; and though he had sometimes heard him spoken
of, he never regarded the things attributed to him as true, nor could he
persuade himself that such a humour could become dominant in the heart of
man; he was extremely glad, therefore, to meet him and test at close
quarters what he had heard of him at a distance; so he said to him,
"despair not, valiant knight, nor regard as an untoward fate the position
i
 
 ___________________________
 
ere i have
relatives with whom i can live; and also to implore thee to protect my
father, so that don vicente's numerous kinsmen may not venture to wreak
their lawless vengeance upon him."

roque, filled with admiration at the gallant bearing, high spirit, comely
figure, and adventure of the fair claudia, said to her, "come, senora,
let us go and see if thy enemy is dead; and then we will consider what
will be best for thee." don quixote, who had been listening to what
claudia said and roque guinart said in reply to her, exclaimed, "nobody
need trouble himself with the defence of this lady, for i take it upon
myself. give me my horse and arms, and wait for me here; i will go in
quest of this knight, and dead or alive i will make him keep his word
plighted to so great beauty."

"nobody need have any doubt about that," said sancho, "for my master has
a very happy knack of matchmaking; it's not many days since he forced
another man to marry, who in the same way backed out of his promi
 
 ___________________________
 
e of jealousy,
to what desperate lengths dost thou lead those that give thee lodging in
their bosoms! o husband, whose unhappy fate in being mine hath borne thee
from the marriage bed to the grave!"

so vehement and so piteous were the lamentations of claudia that they
drew tears from roque's eyes, unused as they were to shed them on any
occasion. the servants wept, claudia swooned away again and again, and
the whole place seemed a field of sorrow and an abode of misfortune. in
the end roque guinart directed don vicente's servants to carry his body
to his father's village, which was close by, for burial. claudia told him
she meant to go to a monastery of which an aunt of hers was abbess, where
she intended to pass her life with a better and everlasting spouse. he
applauded her pious resolution, and offered to accompany her
whithersoever she wished, and to protect her father against the kinsmen
of don vicente and all the world, should they seek to injure him. claudia
would not on any
 
 ___________________________
 
 account allow him to accompany her; and thanking him for
his offers as well as she could, took leave of him in tears. the servants
of don vicente carried away his body, and roque returned to his comrades,
and so ended the love of claudia jeronima; but what wonder, when it was
the insuperable and cruel might of jealousy that wove the web of her sad
story?

roque guinart found his squires at the place to which he had ordered
them, and don quixote on rocinante in the midst of them delivering a
harangue to them in which he urged them to give up a mode of life so full
of peril, as well to the soul as to the body; but as most of them were
gascons, rough lawless fellows, his speech did not make much impression
on them. roque on coming up asked sancho if his men had returned and
restored to him the treasures and jewels they had stripped off dapple.
sancho said
 
 ___________________________
 
 they had, but that three kerchiefs that were worth three
cities were missing.

"what are you talking about, man?" said one of the bystanders; "i have
got them, and they are not worth three reals."

"that is true," said don quixote; "but my squire values them at the rate
he says, as having been given me by the person who gave them."

roque guinart ordered them to be restored at once; and making his men
fall in in line he directed all the clothing, jewellery, and money that
they had taken since the last distribution to be produced; and making a
hasty valuation, and reducing what could not be divided into money, he
made shares for the whole band so equitably and carefully, that in no
case did he exceed or fall short of strict distributive justice.

when this had been done, and all left satisfied, roque observed to don
quixote, "if 
 
 ___________________________
 
this scrupulous exactness were not observed with these
fellows there would be no living with them."

upon this sancho remarked, "from what i have seen here, justice is such a
good thing that there is no doing without it, even among the thieves
themselves."

one of the squires heard this, and raising the butt-end of his harquebuss
would no doubt have broken sancho's head with it had not roque guinart
called out to him to hold his hand. sancho was frightened out of his
wits, and vowed not to open his lips so long as he was in the company of
these people.

at this instant one or two of those squires who were posted as sentinels
on the roads, to watch who came along them and report what passed to
their chief, came up and said, "senor, there is a great troop of people
not far off coming along the road to barcelona."

to which roque replied, "hast thou made out whether they are of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
grieved; for he had not found the young woman's beauty,
boldness, and spirit at all amiss.

and now the squires despatched to make the prize came up, bringing with
them two gentlemen on horseback, two pilgrims on foot, and a coach full
of women with some six servants on foot and on horseback in attendance on
them, and a couple of muleteers whom the gentlemen had with them. the
squires made a ring round them, both victors and vanquished maintaining
profound silence, waiting for the great roque guinart to speak. he asked
the gentlemen who they were, whither they were going, and what money they
carried with them; "senor," replied one of them, "we are two captains of
spanish infantry; our companies are at naples, and we are on our way to
embark in four galleys which they say are at barcelona under orders for
sicily; and we have about two or three hundred crowns, with which we are,
according to our notions, rich and contented, for a soldier's poverty
does not allow a more extensive hoard.
 
 ___________________________
 
ed that they were going to take ship for rome, and that
between them they might have about sixty reals. he asked also who was in
the coach, whither they were bound and what money they had, and one of
the men on horseback replied, "the persons in the coach are my lady dona
guiomar de quinones, wife of the regent of the vicaria at naples, her
little daughter, a handmaid and a duenna; we six servants are in
attendance upon her, and the money amounts to six hundred crowns."

"so then," said roque guinart, "we have got here nine hundred crowns and
sixty reals; my soldiers must number some sixty; see how much there falls
to each, for i am a bad arithmetician." as soon as the robbers heard this
they raised a shout of "long life to roque guinart, in spite of the
lladres that seek his ruin!"

the captains showed plainly the concern they felt, the regent's lady was
downcast, and the pilgrims did not at all enjoy seeing their property
confiscated. roque kept them in suspense in this way for a 
 
 ___________________________
 
to us!"

don quixote made no answer, nor did the horsemen wait for one, but
wheeling again with all their followers, they began curvetting round don
quixote, who, turning to sancho, said, "these gentlemen have plainly
recognised us; i will wager they have read our history, and even that
newly printed one by the aragonese."

the cavalier who had addressed don quixote again approached him and said,
"come with us, senor don quixote, for we are all of us your servants and
great friends of roque guinart's;" to which don quixote returned, "if
courtesy breeds courtesy, yours, sir knight, is daughter or very nearly
akin to the great roque's; carry me where you please; i will have no will
but yours, especially if you deign to employ it in your service."

the cavalier replied with words no less polite, and then, all closing in
around him, they set out with him for the city, to the music of the
clarions and the drums. as they were entering it, the wicked one, who is
the author of all mischie