en on so great a knight. at length
the duke came out to take her down, and as they entered a spacious court
two fair damsels came forward and threw over don quixote's shoulders a
large mantle of the finest scarlet cloth, and at the same instant all the
galleries of the court were lined with the men-servants and
women-servants of the household, crying, "welcome, flower and cream of
knight-errantry!" while all or most of them flung pellets filled with
scented water over don quixote and the duke and duchess; at all which don
quixote was greatly astonished, and this was the first time that he
thoroughly felt and believed himself to be a knight-errant in reality and
not merely in fancy, now that he saw himself treated in the same way as
he had read of such knights being treated in days of yore.

sancho, deserting dapple, hung on to the duchess and entered the castle,
but feeling some twinges of conscience at having left the ass alone, he
approached a respectable duenna who had come out with 
 
 ___________________________
 
erved, "sancho is quite right, and there is no
reason at all to find fault with him; dapple shall be fed to his heart's
content, and sancho may rest easy, for he shall be treated like himself."

while this conversation, amusing to all except don quixote, was
proceeding, they ascended the staircase and ushered don quixote into a
chamber hung with rich cloth of gold and brocade; six damsels relieved
him of his armour and waited on him like pages, all of them prepared and
instructed by the duke and duchess as to what they were to do, and how
they were to treat don quixote, so that he might see and believe they
were treating him like a knight-errant. when his armour was removed,
there stood don quixote in his tight-fitting breeches and chamois
doublet, lean, lanky, and long, with cheeks that seemed to be kissing
each other inside; such a figure, that if the damsels waiting on him had
not taken care to check their merriment (which was one of the particular
directions their master and mistres
 
 ___________________________
 
o receive him, and
with them a grave ecclesiastic, one of those who rule noblemen's houses;
one of those who, not being born magnates themselves, never know how to
teach those who are how to behave as such; one of those who would have
the greatness of great folk measured by their own narrowness of mind; one
of those who, when they try to introduce economy into the household they
rule, lead it into meanness. one of this sort, i say, must have been the
grave churchman who came out with the duke and duchess to receive don
quixote.

a vast number of polite speeches were exchanged, and at length, taking
don quixote between them, they proceeded to sit down to table. the duke
pressed don quixote to take the head of the table, and, though he
refused, the entreaties of the duke were so urgent that he had to accept
it.

the ecclesiastic took his seat opposite to him, and the duke and duchess
those at the sides. all this time sancho stood by, gaping with amazement
at the honour he saw shown to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 more by token he died the
death of an angel, so they say; for i was not there, for just at that
time i had gone to reap at tembleque-"

"as you live, my son," said the churchman, "make haste back from
tembleque, and finish your story without burying the gentleman, unless
you want to make more funerals."

"well then, it so happened," said sancho, "that as the pair of them were
going to sit down to table--and i think i can see them now plainer than
ever-"

great was the enjoyment the duke and duchess derived from the irritation
the worthy churchman showed at the long-winded, halting way sancho had of
telling his story, while don quixote was chafing with rage and vexation.

"so, as i was saying," continued sancho, "as the pair of them were going
to sit down to table, as i said, the labourer insisted upon the
gentleman's taking the head of the table, and the gentleman insisted upon
the labourer's taking it, as his orders should be obeyed in his house;
but the labourer, who plumed hims
 
 ___________________________
 
elf on his politeness and good breeding,
would not on any account, until the gentleman, out of patience, putting
his hands on his shoulders, compelled him by force to sit down, saying,
'sit down, you stupid lout, for wherever i sit will be the head to you;
and that's the story, and, troth, i think it hasn't been brought in amiss
here."

don quixote turned all colours, which, on his sunburnt face, mottled it
till it looked like jasper. the duke and duchess suppressed their
laughter so as not altogether to mortify don quixote, for they saw
through sancho's impertinence; and to change the conversation, and keep
sancho from uttering more absurdities, the duchess asked don quixote what
news he had of the lady dulcinea, and if he had sent her any presents of
giants or miscreants lately, for he could not but have vanquished a good
many.

to which don quixote replied, "senora, my misfortunes, though they had a
beginning, will never have an end.
 
 ___________________________
 
ing about the world, gaping and making a
laughing-stock of yourself to all who know you and all who don't. where,
in heaven's name, have you discovered that there are or ever were
knights-errant? where are there giants in spain or miscreants in la
mancha, or enchanted dulcineas, or all the rest of the silly things they
tell about you?"

don quixote listened attentively to the reverend gentleman's words, and
as soon as he perceived he had done speaking, regardless of the presence
of the duke and duchess, he sprang to his feet with angry looks and an
agitated countenance, and said--but the reply deserves a chapter to
itself.




chapter xxxii.

of the reply don quixote gave his censurer, with other incidents, grave
and droll


don quixote, then, having risen to his feet, trembling from head to foot
like a man dosed with mercury, said in a hurried, agitated voice, "the
place i am in, the presence in which i stand, and the respect i have and
always have had for the profession to w
 
 ___________________________
 
 injuries, righted wrongs, punished insolences,
vanquished giants, and crushed monsters; i am in love, for no other
reason than that it is incumbent on knights-errant to be so; but though i
am, i am no carnal-minded lover, but one of the chaste, platonic sort. my
intentions are always directed to worthy ends, to do good to all and evil
to none; and if he who means this, does this, and makes this his practice
deserves to be called a fool, it is for your highnesses to say, o most
excellent duke and duchess."

"good, by god!" cried sancho; "say no more in your own defence, master
mine, for there's nothing more in the world to be said, thought, or
insisted on; and besides, when this gentleman denies, as he has, that
there are or ever have been any knights-errant in the world, is it any
wonder if he knows nothing of what he has been talking about?"

"perhaps, brother," said the ecclesiastic, "you are that sancho panza
that is mentioned, to whom your master has promised an island?"

"yes, 
 
 ___________________________
 
n, who, wondering at such a
ceremony, said never a word, supposing it to be the custom of that
country to wash beards instead of hands; he therefore stretched his out
as far as he could, and at the same instant the jug began to pour and the
damsel with the soap rubbed his beard briskly, raising snow-flakes, for
the soap lather was no less white, not only over the beard, but all over
the face, and over the eyes of the submissive knight, so that they were
perforce obliged to keep shut. the duke and duchess, who had not known
anything about this, waited to see what came of this strange washing. the
barber damsel, when she had him a hand's breadth deep in lather,
pretended that there was no more water, and bade the one with the jug go
and fetch some, while senor don quixote waited. she did so, and don
quixote was left the strangest and most ludicrous figure that could be
imagined. all those present, and there were a good many, were watching
him, and as they saw him there with half a yard of 
 
 ___________________________
 
aid the duchess; "i will take care
that my damsels wash you, and even put you in the tub if necessary."

"i'll be content with the beard," said sancho, "at any rate for the
present; and as for the future, god has decreed what is to be."

"attend to worthy sancho's request, seneschal," said the duchess, "and do
exactly what he wishes."

the seneschal replied that senor sancho should be obeyed in everything;
and with that he went away to dinner and took sancho along with him,
while the duke and duchess and don quixote remained at table discussing a
great variety of things, but all bearing on the calling of arms and
knight-errantry.

the duchess begged don quixote, as he seemed to have a retentive memory,
to describe and portray to her the beauty and features of the lady
dulcinea del toboso, for, judging by what fame trumpeted abroad of her
beauty, she felt sure she must be the fairest creature in the world, nay,
in all la mancha.

don quixote sighed on hearing the duchess's request,
 
 ___________________________
 
n to say my beard, with
all due respect be it said, i'll give him a punch that will leave my fist
sunk in his skull; for cirimonies and soapings of this sort are more like
jokes than the polite attentions of one's host."

the duchess was ready to die with laughter when she saw sancho's rage and
heard his words; but it was no pleasure to don quixote to see him in such
a sorry trim, with the dingy towel about him, and the hangers-on of the
kitchen all round him; so making a low bow to the duke and duchess, as if
to ask their permission to speak, he addressed the rout in a dignified
tone: "holloa, gentlemen! you let that youth alone, and go back to where
you came from, or anywhere else if you like; my squire is as clean as any
other person, and those troughs are as bad as narrow thin-necked jars to
him; take my advice and leave him alone, for neither he nor i understand
joking."

sancho took the word out of his mouth and went on, "nay, let them come
and try their jokes on the country bum
 
 ___________________________
 
m they plotted and
arranged to play a joke upon don quixote that was to be a rare one and
entirely in knight-errantry style, and in that same style they practised
several upon him, so much in keeping and so clever that they form the
best adventures this great history contains.




chapter xxxiv.

which relates how they learned the way in which they were to disenchant
the peerless dulcinea del toboso, which is one of the rarest adventures
in this book


great was the pleasure the duke and duchess took in the conversation of
don quixote and sancho panza; and, more bent than ever upon the plan they
had of practising some jokes upon them that should have the look and
appearance of adventures, they took as their basis of action what don
quixote had already told them about the cave of montesinos, in order to
play him a famous one. but what the duchess marvelled at above all was
that sancho's simplicity could be so great as to make him believe as
absolute truth that dulcinea had been e
 
 ___________________________
 
my own part, i can say they give me more
pleasure than others that may be better brought in and more seasonably
introduced."

in pleasant conversation of this sort they passed out of the tent into
the wood, and the day was spent in visiting some of the posts and
hiding-places, and then night closed in, not, however, as brilliantly or
tranquilly as might have been expected at the season, for it was then
midsummer; but bringing with it a kind of haze that greatly aided the
project of the duke and duchess; and thus, as night began to fall, and a
little after twilight set in, suddenly the whole wood on all four sides
seemed to be on fire, and shortly after, here, there, on all sides, a
vast number of trumpets and other military instruments were heard, as if
several troops of cavalry were passing through the wood. the blaze of the
fire and the noise of the warlike instruments almost blinded the eyes and
deafened the ears of those that stood by, and indeed of all who were in
the wood. then t
 
 ___________________________
 
od's hands be it," said sancho; "in the hard case i'm in
i give in; i say i accept the penance on the conditions laid down."

the instant sancho uttered these last words the music of the clarions
struck up once more, and again a host of muskets were discharged, and don
quixote hung on sancho's neck kissing him again and again on the forehead
and cheeks. the duchess and the duke expressed the greatest satisfaction,
the car began to move on, and as it passed the fair dulcinea bowed to the
duke and duchess and made a low curtsey to sancho.

and now bright smiling dawn came on apace; the flowers of the field,
revived, raised up their heads, and the crystal waters of the brooks,
murmuring over the grey and white pebbles, hastened to pay their tribute
to the expectant rivers; the glad earth, the unclouded sky, the fresh
breeze, the clear light, each and all showed that the day that came
treading on the skirts of morning would be calm and bright. the duke and
duchess, pleased with their hunt 
 
 ___________________________
 
to be found in no sort of persons better than in
knights-errant; and i give unceasing thanks to heaven that i am one, and
regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in the pursuit of
so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. let this duenna come
and ask what she will, for i will effect her relief by the might of my
arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart."




chapter xxxvii.

wherein is continued the notable adventure of the distressed duenna


the duke and duchess were extremely glad to see how readily don quixote
fell in with their scheme; but at this moment sancho observed, "i hope
this senora duenna won't be putting any difficulties in the way of the
promise of my government; for i have heard a toledo apothecary, who
talked like a goldfinch, say that where duennas were mixed up nothing
good could happen. god bless me, how he hated them, that same apothecary!
and so what i'm thinking is, if all duennas, of whatever sort or
condition they may be,
 
 ___________________________
 
matters very little to me; may i have
my soul well bearded and moustached when it comes to quit this life,
that's the point; about beards here below i care little or nothing; but
without all these blandishments and prayers, i will beg my master (for i
know he loves me, and, besides, he has need of me just now for a certain
business) to help and aid your worship as far as he can; unpack your woes
and lay them before us, and leave us to deal with them, for we'll be all
of one mind."

the duke and duchess, as it was they who had made the experiment of this
adventure, were ready to burst with laughter at all this, and between
themselves they commended the clever acting of the trifaldi, who,
returning to her seat, said, "queen dona maguncia reigned over the famous
kingdom of kandy, which lies between the great trapobana and the southern
sea, two leagues beyond cape comorin. she was the widow of king
archipiela, her lord and husband, and of their marriage they had issue
the princess antonoma
 
 ___________________________
 
ich would be in effect civil death for ever; and the very instant he
ceased speaking we all felt the pores of our faces opening, and pricking
us, as if with the points of needles. we at once put our hands up to our
faces and found ourselves in the state you now see."

here the distressed one and the other duennas raised the veils with which
they were covered, and disclosed countenances all bristling with beards,
some red, some black, some white, and some grizzled, at which spectacle
the duke and duchess made a show of being filled with wonder. don quixote
and sancho were overwhelmed with amazement, and the bystanders lost in
astonishment, while the trifaldi went on to say: "thus did that
malevolent villain malambruno punish us, covering the tenderness and
softness of our faces with these rough bristles! would to heaven that he
had swept off our heads with his enormous scimitar instead of obscuring
the light of our countenances with these wool-combings that cover us! for
if we look into 
 
 ___________________________
 

"tell me, sancho," said the duke, "did you see any he-goat among those
goats?"

"no, senor," said sancho; "but i have heard say that none ever passed the
horns of the moon."

they did not care to ask him anything more about his journey, for they
saw he was in the vein to go rambling all over the heavens giving an
account of everything that went on there, without having ever stirred
from the garden. such, in short, was the end of the adventure of the
distressed duenna, which gave the duke and duchess laughing matter not
only for the time being, but for all their lives, and sancho something to
talk about for ages, if he lived so long; but don quixote, coming close
to his ear, said to him, "sancho, as you would have us believe what you
saw in heaven, i require you to believe me as to what i saw in the cave
of montesinos; i say no more."




chapter xlii.

of the counsels which don quixote gave sancho panza before he set out to
govern the island, together with other well-considere
 
 ___________________________
 
d matters


the duke and duchess were so well pleased with the successful and droll
result of the adventure of the distressed one, that they resolved to
carry on the joke, seeing what a fit subject they had to deal with for
making it all pass for reality. so having laid their plans and given
instructions to their servants and vassals how to behave to sancho in his
government of the promised island, the next day, that following
clavileno's flight, the duke told sancho to prepare and get ready to go
and be governor, for h
 
 ___________________________
 
e. he was
dressed in the garb of a lawyer, with a gaban of tawny watered camlet
over all and a montera cap of the same material, and mounted a la gineta
upon a mule. behind him, in accordance with the duke's orders, followed
dapple with brand new ass-trappings and ornaments of silk, and from time
to time sancho turned round to look at his ass, so well pleased to have
him with him that he would not have changed places with the emperor of
germany. on taking leave he kissed the hands of the duke and duchess and
got his master's blessing, which don quixote gave him with tears, and he
received blubbering.

let worthy sancho go in peace, and good luck to him, gentle reader; and
look out for two bushels of laughter, which the account of how he behaved
himself in office will give thee. in the meantime turn thy attention to
what happened his master the same night, and if thou dost not laugh
thereat, at any rate thou wilt stretch thy mouth with a grin; for don
quixote's adventures must be honour
 
 ___________________________
 
ing which don quixote quitted the soft
down, and, nowise slothful, dressed himself in his chamois suit and put
on his travelling boots to hide the disaster to his stockings. he threw
over him his scarlet mantle, put on his head a montera of green velvet
trimmed with silver edging, flung across his shoulder the baldric with
his good trenchant sword, took up a large rosary that he always carried
with him, and with great solemnity and precision of gait proceeded to the
antechamber where the duke and duchess were already dressed and waiting
for him. but as he passed through a gallery, altisidora and the other
damsel, her friend, were lying in wait for him, and the instant
altisidora saw him she pretended to faint, while her friend caught her in
her lap, and began hastily unlacing the bosom of her dress.

don quixote observed it, and approaching them said, "i know very well
what this seizure arises from."

"i know not from what," replied the friend, "for altisidora is the
healthiest damsel
 
 ___________________________
 
om her swoon,
said to her companion, "the lute must be left, for no doubt don quixote
intends to give us some music; and being his it will not be bad."

they went at once to inform the duchess of what was going on, and of the
lute don quixote asked for, and she, delighted beyond measure, plotted
with the duke and her two damsels to play him a trick that should be
amusing but harmless; and in high glee they waited for night, which came
quickly as the day had come; and as for the day, the duke and duchess
spent it in charming conversation with don quixote.

when eleven o'clock came, don quixote found a guitar in his chamber; he
tried it, opened the window, and perceived that some persons were walking
in the garden; and having passed his fingers over the frets of the guitar
and tuned it as well as he could, he spat and cleared his chest, and then
with a voice a little hoarse but full-toned, he sang the following
ballad, which he had himself that day composed:

mighty love the hearts of 
 
 ___________________________
 
she said to him in a low voice. "all these mishaps have befallen thee,
hardhearted knight, for the sin of thy insensibility and obstinacy; and
god grant thy squire sancho may forget to whip himself, so that that
dearly beloved dulcinea of thine may never be released from her
enchantment, that thou mayest never come to her bed, at least while i who
adore thee am alive."

to all this don quixote made no answer except to heave deep sighs, and
then stretched himself on his bed, thanking the duke and duchess for
their kindness, not because he stood in any fear of that bell-ringing
rabble of enchanters in cat shape, but because he recognised their good
intentions in coming to his rescue. the duke and duchess left him to
repose and withdrew greatly grieved at the unfortunate result of the
joke; as they never thought the adventure would have fallen so heavy on
don quixote or cost him so dear, for it cost him five days of confinement
to his bed, during which he had another adventure, pleasanter 
 
 ___________________________
 
don't believe it and suspect it
to be something in the line of our fellow-townsman don quixote, who
fancies that everything is done by enchantment; and for this reason i am
almost ready to say that i'd like to touch and feel your worship to see
whether you are a mere ambassador of the imagination or a man of flesh
and blood."

"all i know, sirs," replied the page, "is that i am a real ambassador,
and that senor sancho panza is governor as a matter of fact, and that my
lord and lady the duke and duchess can give, and have given him this same
government, and that i have heard it said sancho panza bears himself
very stoutly therein; whether there be any enchantment in all this or
not, it is for your worships to settle between you; for that's all i know
by the oath i swear, and that is by the life of my parents whom i have
still alive, and love dearly."

"it may be so," said the bachelor; "but dubitat augustinus."

"doubt who will," said the page; "what i have told you is the truth, and
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing; for if there
are enchanters who maltreat me, there are also some who defend me. let me
know if the majordomo who is with thee had any share in the trifaldi
performance, as thou didst suspect; and keep me informed of everything
that happens thee, as the distance is so short; all the more as i am
thinking of giving over very shortly this idle life i am now leading, for
i was not born for it. a thing has occurred to me which i am inclined to
think will put me out of favour with the duke and duchess; but though i
am sorry for it i do not care, for after all i must obey my calling
rather than their pleasure, in accordance with the common saying, amicus
plato, sed magis amica veritas. i quote this latin to thee because i
conclude that since thou hast been a governor thou wilt have learned it.
adieu; god keep thee from being an object of pity to anyone.

thy friend, don quixote of la mancha.


sancho listened to the letter with great attention, and it was praised
and considered wis
 
 ___________________________
 
enna, otherwise called dona rodriguez


cide hamete relates that don quixote being now cured of his scratches
felt that the life he was leading in the castle was entirely inconsistent
with the order of chivalry he professed, so he determined to ask the duke
and duchess to permit him to take his departure for saragossa, as the
time of the festival was now drawing near, and he hoped to win there the
suit of armour which is the prize at festivals of the sort. but one day
at table with the duke and duchess, just as he was about to carry his
resolution into effect and ask for their permission, lo and behold
suddenly there came in through the door of the great hall two women, as
they afterwards proved to be, draped in mourning from head to foot, one
of whom approaching don quixote flung herself at full length at his feet,
pressing her lips to them, and uttering moans so sad, so deep, and so
doleful that she put all who heard and saw her into a state of
perplexity; and though the duke and duc
 
 ___________________________
 
aned and wept puzzled them and made them feel
uncertain, until don quixote, touched with compassion, raised her up and
made her unveil herself and remove the mantle from her tearful face. she
complied and disclosed what no one could have ever anticipated, for she
disclosed the countenance of dona rodriguez, the duenna of the house; the
other female in mourning being her daughter, who had been made a fool of
by the rich farmer's son. all who knew her were filled with astonishment,
and the duke and duchess more than any; for though they thought her a
simpleton and a weak creature, they did not think her capable of crazy
pranks. dona rodriguez, at length, turning to her master and mistress
said to them, "will your excellences be pleased to permit me to speak to
this gentleman for a moment, for it is requisite i should do so in order
to get successfully out of the business in which the boldness of an
evil-minded clown has involved me?"

the duke said that for his part he gave her leave, and
 
 ___________________________
 
to
demand justice; so they gave them a room to themselves and waited on them
as they would on strangers, to the consternation of the other
women-servants, who did not know where the folly and imprudence of dona
rodriguez and her unlucky daughter would stop.

and now, to complete the enjoyment of the feast and bring the dinner to a
satisfactory end, lo and behold the page who had carried the letters and
presents to teresa panza, the wife of the governor sancho, entered the
hall; and the duke and duchess were very well pleased to see him, being
anxious to know the result of his journey; but when they asked him the
page said in reply that he could not give it before so many people or in
a few words, and begged their excellences to be pleased to let it wait
for a private opportunity, and in the meantime amuse themselves with
these letters; and taking out the letters he placed them in the duchess's
hand. one bore by way of address, letter for my lady the duchess
so-and-so, of i don't know w
 
 ___________________________
 
rich eggs.

let not your high mightiness forget to write to me; and i will take care
to answer, and let you know how i am, and whatever news there may be in
this place, where i remain, praying our lord to have your highness in his
keeping and not to forget me.

sancha my daughter, and my son, kiss your worship's hands.

she who would rather see your ladyship than write to you,

your servant,

teresa panza.


all were greatly amused by teresa panza's letter, but particularly the
duke and duchess; and the duchess asked don quixote's opinion whether
they might open the letter that had come for the governor, which she
suspected must be very good. don quixote said that to gratify them he
would open it, and did so, and found that it ran as follows.


teresa panza's letter to her husband sancho panza.

i got thy letter, sancho of my soul, and i promise thee and swear as a
catholic christian that i was within two fingers' breadth of going mad i
was so happy. i can tell thee, brother
 
 ___________________________
 
 or for
the journey. sancho said he did not want anything more than a little
barley for dapple, and half a cheese and half a loaf for himself; for the
distance being so short there was no occasion for any better or bulkier
provant. they all embraced him, and he with tears embraced all of them,
and left them filled with admiration not only at his remarks but at his
firm and sensible resolution.




chapter liv.

which deals with matters relating to this history and no other


the duke and duchess resolved that the challenge don quixote had, for the
reason already mentioned, given their vassal, should be proceeded with;
and as the young man was in flanders, whither he had fled to escape
having dona rodriguez for a mother-in-law, they arranged to substitute
for him a gascon lacquey, named tosilos, first of all carefully
instructing him in all he had to do. two days later the duke told don
quixote that in four days from that time his opponent would present
himself on the field of ba
 
 ___________________________
 
nce and let them
say what they like; for trying to stop slanderers' tongues is like trying
to put gates to the open plain. if a governor comes out of his government
rich, they say he has been a thief; and if he comes out poor, that he has
been a noodle and a blockhead."

"they'll be pretty sure this time," said sancho, "to set me down for a
fool rather than a thief."

thus talking, and surrounded by boys and a crowd of people, they reached
the castle, where in one of the corridors the duke and duchess stood
waiting for them; but sancho would not go up to see the duke until he had
first put up dapple in the stable, for he said he had passed a very bad
night in his last quarters; then he went upstairs to see his lord and
lady, and kneeling before them he said, "because it was your highnesses'
pleasure, not because of any desert of my own, i went to govern your
island of barataria, which 'i entered naked, and naked i find myself; i
neither lose nor gain.' whether i have governed well or 
 
 ___________________________
 
 given up
the government so soon, but that he would see that he was provided with
some other post on his estate less onerous and more profitable. the
duchess also embraced him, and gave orders that he should be taken good
care of, as it was plain to see he had been badly treated and worse
bruised.




chapter lvi.

of the prodigious and unparalleled battle that took place between don
quixote of la mancha and the lacquey tosilos in defence of the daughter
of dona rodriguez


the duke and duchess had no reason to regret the joke that had been
played upon sancho panza in giving him the government; especially as
their majordomo returned the same day, and gave them a minute account of
almost every word and deed that sancho uttered or did during the time;
and to wind up with, eloquently described to them the attack upon the
island and sancho's fright and departure, with which they were not a
little amused. after this the history goes on to say that the day fixed
for the battle arrive
 
 ___________________________
 
a walk, and coming to where the duennas were
placed stopped to look at her who demanded him for a husband; the marshal
of the field summoned don quixote, who had already presented himself in
the courtyard, and standing by the side of tosilos he addressed the
duennas, and asked them if they consented that don quixote of la mancha
should do battle for their right. they said they did, and that whatever
he should do in that behalf they declared rightly done, final and valid.
by this time the duke and duchess had taken their places in a gallery
commanding the enclosure, which was filled to overflowing with a
multitude of people eager to see this perilous and unparalleled
encounter. the conditions of the combat were that if don quixote proved
the victor his antagonist was to marry the daughter of dona rodriguez;
but if he should be vanquished his opponent was released from the promise
that was claimed against him and from all obligations to give
satisfaction. the master of the ceremonies appor
 
 ___________________________
 
e government already when she sent
them, and it's but reasonable that those who have had a good turn done
them should show their gratitude, if it's only with a trifle. after all i
went into the government naked, and i come out of it naked; so i can say
with a safe conscience--and that's no small matter--'naked i was born,
naked i find myself, i neither lose nor gain.'"

thus did sancho soliloquise on the day of their departure, as don
quixote, who had the night before taken leave of the duke and duchess,
coming out made his appearance at an early hour in full armour in the
courtyard of the castle. the whole household of the castle were watching
him from the corridors, and the duke and duchess, too, came out to see
him. sancho was mounted on his dapple, with his alforjas, valise, and
proven, supremely happy because the duke's majordomo, the same that had
acted the part of the trifaldi, had given him a little purse with two
hundred gold crowns to meet the necessary expenses of the road, b
 
 ___________________________
 
aliant don quixote, i ask you to hear," said
altisidora, "and that is that i beg your pardon about the theft of the
garters; for by god and upon my soul i have got them on, and i have
fallen into the same blunder as he did who went looking for his ass being
all the while mounted on it."

"didn't i say so?" said sancho. "i'm a likely one to hide thefts! why if
i wanted to deal in them, opportunities came ready enough to me in my
government."

don quixote bowed his head, and saluted the duke and duchess and all the
bystanders, and wheeling rocinante round, sancho following him on dapple,
he rode out of the castle, shaping his course for saragossa.




chapter lviii.

which tells how adventures came crowding on don quixote in such numbers
that they gave one another no breathing-time


when don quixote saw himself in open country, free, and relieved from the
attentions of altisidora, he felt at his ease, and in fresh spirits to
take up the pursuit of chivalry once more; and turnin
 
 ___________________________
 
ings of some sort, whether real or mock ones. by the side
of this stage, which was reached by steps, were two other chairs on which
the men carrying the prisoners seated don quixote and sancho, all in
silence, and by signs giving them to understand that they too were to be
silent; which, however, they would have been without any signs, for their
amazement at all they saw held them tongue-tied. and now two persons of
distinction, who were at once recognised by don quixote as his hosts the
duke and duchess, ascended the stage attended by a numerous suite, and
seated themselves on two gorgeous chairs close to the two kings, as they
seemed to be. who would not have been amazed at this? nor was this all,
for don quixote had perceived that the dead body on the catafalque was
that of the fair altisidora. as the duke and duchess mounted the stage
don quixote and sancho rose and made them a profound obeisance, which
they returned by bowing their heads slightly. at this moment an official
crossed 
 
 ___________________________
 
a
big stone and tie it round my neck, and pitch me into a well; i should
not mind it much, if i'm to be always made the cow of the wedding for the
cure of other people's ailments. leave me alone; or else by god i'll
fling the whole thing to the dogs, let come what may."

altisidora had by this time sat up on the catafalque, and as she did so
the clarions sounded, accompanied by the flutes, and the voices of all
present exclaiming, "long life to altisidora! long life to altisidora!"
the duke and duchess and the kings minos and rhadamanthus stood up, and
all, together with don quixote and sancho, advanced to receive her and
take her down from the catafalque; and she, making as though she were
recovering from a swoon, bowed her head to the duke and duchess and to
the kings, and looking sideways at don quixote, said to him, "god forgive
thee, insensible knight, for through thy cruelty i have been, to me it
seems, more than a thousand years in the other world; and to thee, the
most compassi
 
 ___________________________
 
let
thee."

"no pain came up to the insult of the smacks," said sancho, "for the
simple reason that it was duennas, confound them, that gave them to me;
but once more i entreat your worship to let me sleep, for sleep is relief
from misery to those who are miserable when awake."

"be it so, and god be with thee," said don quixote.

they fell asleep, both of them, and cide hamete, the author of this great
history, took this opportunity to record and relate what it was that
induced the duke and duchess to get up the elaborate plot that has been
described. the bachelor samson carrasco, he says, not forgetting how he
as the knight of the mirrors had been vanquished and overthrown by don
quixote, which defeat and overthrow upset all his plans, resolved to try
his hand again, hoping for better luck than he had before; and so, having
learned where don quixote was from the page who brought the letter and
present to sancho's wife, teresa panza, he got himself new armour and
another horse, and
 
 ___________________________
 
and sent word to the
duke, who, having already settled what was to be done, as soon as he
heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and lamps in the court to be
lit and altisidora to be placed on the catafalque with all the pomp and
ceremony that has been described, the whole affair being so well arranged
and acted that it differed but little from reality. and cide hamete says,
moreover, that for his part he considers the concocters of the joke as
crazy as the victims of it, and that the duke and duchess were not two
fingers' breadth removed from being something like fools themselves when
they took such pains to make game of a pair of fools.

as for the latter, one was sleeping soundly and the other lying awake
occupied with his desultory thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing
with it the desire to rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to don
quixote, victor or vanquished. altisidora, come back from death to life
as don quixote fancied, following up the freak of her lord an
 
 ___________________________
 
s of our day the way is for every one to write as he pleases and
pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the matter or not, and
now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can sing or write that is
not set down to poetic licence."

don quixote was about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and
duchess, who came in to see him, and with them there followed a long and
delightful conversation, in the course of which sancho said so many droll
and saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not only at
his simplicity but at his sharpness. don quixote begged their permission
to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a vanquished knight
like himself it was fitter he should live in a pig-sty than in a royal
palace. they gave it very readily, and the duchess asked him if
altisidora was in his good graces.

he replied, "senora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel's ailment
comes entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant
employ
 
 ___________________________
 
rails is ready to forgive,'" said the duke.

altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her tears with a handkerchief,
made an obeisance to her master and mistress and quitted the room.

"ill luck betide thee, poor damsel," said sancho, "ill luck betide thee!
thou hast fallen in with a soul as dry as a rush and a heart as hard as
oak; had it been me, i'faith 'another cock would have crowed to thee.'"

so the conversation came to an end, and don quixote dressed himself and
dined with the duke and duchess, and set out the same evening.




chapter lxxi.

of what passed between don quixote and his squire sancho on the way to
their village


the vanquished and afflicted don quixote went along very downcast in one
respect and very happy in another. his sadness arose from his defeat, and
his satisfaction from the thought of the virtue that lay in sancho, as
had been proved by the resurrection of altisidora; though it was with
difficulty he could persuade himself that the love-smitten 