 as well as the madness of don quixote.
he, on his part, resolved to go in quest of the shepherdess marcela, and
make offer to her of all the service he could render her; but things did
not fall out with him as he expected, according to what is related in the
course of this veracious history, of which the second part ends here.




chapter xv.

in which is related the unfortunate adventure that don quixote fell in
with when he fell out with certain heartless yanguesans


the sage cide hamete benengeli relates that as soon as don quixote took
leave of his hosts and all who had been present at the burial of
chrysostom, he and his squire passed into the same wood which they had
seen the shepherdess marcela enter, and after having wandered for more
than two hours in all directions in search of her without finding her,
they came to a halt in a glade covered with tender grass, beside which
ran a pleasant cool stream that invited and compelled them to pass there
the hours of the noontide hea
 
 ___________________________
 
as of threadbare canvas
rather than of wool. next to these two beds was that of the carrier, made
up, as has been said, of the pack-saddles and all the trappings of the
two best mules he had, though there were twelve of them, sleek, plump,
and in prime condition, for he was one of the rich carriers of arevalo,
according to the author of this history, who particularly mentions this
carrier because he knew him very well, and they even say was in some
degree a relation of his; besides which cide hamete benengeli was a
historian of great research and accuracy in all things, as is very
evident since he would not pass over in silence those that have been
already mentioned, however trifling and insignificant they might be, an
example that might be followed by those grave historians who relate
transactions so curtly and briefly that we hardly get a taste of them,
all the substance of the work being left in the inkstand from
carelessness, perverseness, or ignorance. a thousand blessings on the
author
 
 ___________________________
 
im; and, indeed, shaving one's
beard is a greater trust than saddling one's horse."

"let the barber business be my look-out," said sancho; "and your
worship's be it to strive to become a king, and make me a count."

"so it shall be," answered don quixote, and raising his eyes he saw what
will be told in the following chapter.




chapter xxii.

of the freedom don quixote conferred on several unfortunates who against
their will were being carried where they had no wish to go


cide hamete benengeli, the arab and manchegan author, relates in this
most grave, high-sounding, minute, delightful, and original history that
after the discussion between the famous don quixote of la mancha and his
squire sancho panza which is set down at the end of chapter twenty-one,
don quixote raised his eyes and saw coming along the road he was
following some dozen men on foot strung together by the neck, like beads,
on a great iron chain, and all with manacles on their hands. with them
there came also 
 
 ___________________________
 
person should have given an account of all these shrewd
lunacies of his without going into the matter again; for abundance, even
of good things, prevents them from being valued; and scarcity, even in
the case of what is bad, confers a certain value. i was forgetting to
tell thee that thou mayest expect the "persiles," which i am now
finishing, and also the second part of "galatea."




chapter i.

of the interview the curate and the barber had with don quixote about his
malady


cide hamete benengeli, in the second part of this history, and third
sally of don quixote, says that the curate and the barber remained nearly
a month without seeing him, lest they should recall or bring back to his
recollection what had taken place. they did not, however, omit to visit
his niece and housekeeper, and charge them to be careful to treat him
with attention, and give him comforting things to eat, and such as were
good for the heart and the brain, whence, it was plain to see, all his
misfortune pr
 
 ___________________________
 
at nose, and a large mouth, all indications of a mischievous
disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this he gave a sample as
soon as he saw don quixote, by falling on his knees before him and
saying, "let me kiss your mightiness's hand, senor don quixote of la
mancha, for, by the habit of st. peter that i wear, though i have no more
than the first four orders, your worship is one of the most famous
knights-errant that have ever been, or will be, all the world over. a
blessing on cide hamete benengeli, who has written the history of your
great deeds, and a double blessing on that connoisseur who took the
trouble of having it translated out of the arabic into our castilian
vulgar tongue for the universal entertainment of the people!"

don quixote made him rise, and said, "so, then, it is true that there is
a history of me, and that it was a moor and a sage who wrote it?"

"so true is it, senor," said samson, "that my belief is there are more
than twelve thousand volumes of the said h
 
 ___________________________
 
iculty about it seems to thee impossible;
but time will pass, as i said before, and i will tell thee some of the
things i saw down there which will make thee believe what i have related
now, the truth of which admits of neither reply nor question."




chapter xxiv.

wherein are related a thousand trifling matters, as trivial as they are
necessary to the right understanding of this great history


he who translated this great history from the original written by its
first author, cide hamete benengeli, says that on coming to the chapter
giving the adventures of the cave of montesinos he found written on the
margin of it, in hamete's own hand, these exact words:

"i cannot convince or persuade myself that everything that is written in
the preceding chapter could have precisely happened to the valiant don
quixote; and for this reason, that all the adventures that have occurred
up to the present have been possible and probable; but as for this one of
the cave, i see no way of accepting 
 
 ___________________________
 
y came galloping up with shouts and
outlandish cries and cheers to where don quixote stood amazed and
wondering; and one of them, he to whom roque had sent word, addressing
him exclaimed, "welcome to our city, mirror, beacon, star and cynosure of
all knight-errantry in its widest extent! welcome, i say, valiant don
quixote of la mancha; not the false, the fictitious, the apocryphal, that
these latter days have offered us in lying histories, but the true, the
legitimate, the real one that cide hamete benengeli, flower of
historians, has described to us!"

don quixote made no answer, nor did the horsemen wait for one, but
wheeling again with all their followers, they began curvetting round don
quixote, who, turning to sancho, said, "these gentlemen have plainly
recognised us; i will wager they have read our history, and even that
newly printed one by the aragonese."

the cavalier who had addressed don quixote again approached him and said,
"come with us, senor don quixote, for we are all of 
 
 ___________________________
 
uld have told myself that; the
prophet perogrullo could have said no more."

"what answer wouldst thou have, beast?" said don quixote; "is it not
enough that the replies this head has given suit the questions put to
it?"

"yes, it is enough," said sancho; "but i should have liked it to have
made itself plainer and told me more."

the questions and answers came to an end here, but not the wonder with
which all were filled, except don antonio's two friends who were in the
secret. this cide hamete benengeli thought fit to reveal at once, not to
keep the world in suspense, fancying that the head had some strange
magical mystery in it. he says, therefore, that on the model of another
head, the work of an image maker, which he had seen at madrid, don
antonio made this one at home for his own amusement and to astonish
ignorant people; and its mechanism was as follows. the table was of wood
painted and varnished to imitate jasper, and the pedestal on which it
stood was of the same material, with
 
 ___________________________
 
lry had he ever read of any knight-errant dying in his bed so
calmly and so like a christian as don quixote, who amid the tears and
lamentations of all present yielded up his spirit, that is to say died.
on perceiving it the curate begged the notary to bear witness that alonso
quixano the good, commonly called don quixote of la mancha, had passed
away from this present life, and died naturally; and said he desired this
testimony in order to remove the possibility of any other author save
cide hamete benengeli bringing him to life again falsely and making
interminable stories out of his achievements.

such was the end of the ingenious gentleman of la mancha, whose village
cide hamete would not indicate precisely, in order to leave all the towns
and villages of la mancha to contend among themselves for the right to
adopt him and claim him as a son, as the seven cities of greece contended
for homer. the lamentations of sancho and the niece and housekeeper are
omitted here, as well as the new ep