 and arphaxad, and lud,
and aram.

10:23 and the children of aram; uz, and hul, and gether, and mash.

10:24 and arphaxad begat salah; and salah begat eber.

10:25 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of one was peleg; for
in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was joktan.

10:26 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 10:27 and hadoram, and uzal, and diklah, 10:28 and obal, and
abimael, and sheba, 10:29 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab: all these
were the sons of joktan.

10:30 and their dwelling was from mesha, as thou goest unto sephar a
mount of the east.

10:31 these are the sons of shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32 these are the families of the sons of noah, after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided
in the earth after the flood.

11:1 and the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

11:2 and it c
 
 ___________________________
 
 are these; uz, and aran.

36:29 these are the dukes that came of the horites; duke lotan, duke
shobal, duke zibeon, duke anah, 36:30 duke dishon, duke ezer, duke
dishan: these are the dukes that came of hori, among their dukes in
the land of seir.

36:31 and these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom, before
there reigned any king over the children of israel.

36:32 and bela the son of beor reigned in edom: and the name of his
city was dinhabah.

36:33 and bela died, and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned in
his stead.

36:34 and jobab died, and husham of the land of temani reigned in his
stead.

36:35 and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in
the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was
avith.

36:36 and hadad died, and samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead.

36:37 and samlah died, and saul of rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.

36:38 and saul died, and baalhanan the son of achbor reig
 
 ___________________________
 
born.

46:9 and the sons of reuben; hanoch, and phallu, and hezron, and
carmi.

46:10 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman.

46:11 and the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

46:12 and the sons of judah; er, and onan, and shelah, and pharez, and
zarah: but er and onan died in the land of canaan. and the sons of
pharez were hezron and hamul.

46:13 and the sons of issachar; tola, and phuvah, and job, and
shimron.

46:14 and the sons of zebulun; sered, and elon, and jahleel.

46:15 these be the sons of leah, which she bare unto jacob in
padanaram, with his daughter dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty and three.

46:16 and the sons of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri,
and arodi, and areli.

46:17 and the sons of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah,
and serah their sister: and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel.

46:18 t
 
 ___________________________
 
ning, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the lord god of
israel commanded.

10:41 and joshua smote them from kadeshbarnea even unto gaza, and all
the country of goshen, even unto gibeon.

10:42 and all these kings and their land did joshua take at one time,
because the lord god of israel fought for israel.

10:43 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jabin king of hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to jobab king of madon, and to the king of
shimron, and to the king of achshaph, 11:2 and to the kings that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of dor on the west, 11:3 and to
the canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, and the jebusite in the mountains, and to
the hivite under hermon in the land of mizpeh.

11:4 and they went out, they and all their hosts with th
 
 ___________________________
 
hem; elam, and asshur, and arphaxad, and lud, and
aram, and uz, and hul, and gether, and meshech.

1:18 and arphaxad begat shelah, and shelah begat eber.

1:19 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of the one was peleg;
because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother's name was
joktan.

1:20 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 1:21 hadoram also, and uzal, and diklah, 1:22 and ebal, and
abimael, and sheba, 1:23 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab. all these
were the sons of joktan.

1:24 shem, arphaxad, shelah, 1:25 eber, peleg, reu, 1:26 serug, nahor,
terah, 1:27 abram; the same is abraham.

1:28 the sons of abraham; isaac, and ishmael.

1:29 these are their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebaioth;
then kedar, and adbeel, and mibsam, 1:30 mishma, and dumah, massa,
hadad, and tema, 1:31 jetur, naphish, and kedemah. these are the sons
of ishmael.

1:32 now the sons of keturah, abraham's concubine: she bare zimran,
 
 ___________________________
 
 alian, and manahath, and ebal, shephi, and
onam.

and the sons of zibeon; aiah, and anah.

1:41 the sons of anah; dishon. and the sons of dishon; amram, and
eshban, and ithran, and cheran.

1:42 the sons of ezer; bilhan, and zavan, and jakan. the sons of
dishan; uz, and aran.

1:43 now these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom before
any king reigned over the children of israel; bela the son of beor:
and the name of his city was dinhabah.

1:44 and when bela was dead, jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned
in his stead.

1:45 and when jobab was dead, husham of the land of the temanites
reigned in his stead.

1:46 and when husham was dead, hadad the son of bedad, which smote
midian in the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his
city was avith.

1:47 and when hadad was dead, samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead.

1:48 and when samlah was dead, shaul of rehoboth by the river reigned
in his stead.

1:49 and when shaul was dead, b
 
 ___________________________
 
e, addar, and gera, and abihud, 8:4 and
abishua, and naaman, and ahoah, 8:5 and gera, and shephuphan, and
huram.

8:6 and these are the sons of ehud: these are the heads of the fathers
of the inhabitants of geba, and they removed them to manahath: 8:7 and
naaman, and ahiah, and gera, he removed them, and begat uzza, and
ahihud.

8:8 and shaharaim begat children in the country of moab, after he had
sent them away; hushim and baara were his wives.

8:9 and he begat of hodesh his wife, jobab, and zibia, and mesha, and
malcham, 8:10 and jeuz, and shachia, and mirma. these were his sons,
heads of the fathers.

8:11 and of hushim he begat abitub, and elpaal.

8:12 the sons of elpaal; eber, and misham, and shamed, who built ono,
and lod, with the towns thereof: 8:13 beriah also, and shema, who were
heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of aijalon, who drove away the
inhabitants of gath: 8:14 and ahio, shashak, and jeremoth, 8:15 and
zebadiah, and arad, and ader, 8:16 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
michael, and ispah, and joha,
the sons of beriah; 8:17 and zebadiah, and meshullam, and hezeki, and
heber, 8:18 ishmerai also, and jezliah, and jobab, the sons of elpaal;
8:19 and jakim, and zichri, and zabdi, 8:20 and elienai, and zilthai,
and eliel, 8:21 and adaiah, and beraiah, and shimrath, the sons of
shimhi; 8:22 and ishpan, and heber, and eliel, 8:23 and abdon, and
zichri, and hanan, 8:24 and hananiah, and elam, and antothijah, 8:25
and iphedeiah, and penuel, the sons of shashak; 8:26 and shamsherai,
and shehariah, and athaliah, 8:27 and jaresiah, and eliah, and zichri,
the sons of jeroham.

8:28 these were heads of the fat
 
 ___________________________
 
e upon the land, and upon the
isles of the sea.

10:2 and all the acts of his power and of his might, and the
declaration of the greatness of mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of media and persia?  10:3 for mordecai the jew was next unto king
ahasuerus, and great among the jews, and accepted of the multitude of
his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to
all his seed.




the book of job


1:1 there was a man in the land of uz, whose name was job; and that
man was perfect and upright, and one that feared god, and eschewed evil.

1:2 and there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.

1:3 his substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the
men of the east.

1:4 and his sons went and feasted in their houses,
 
 ___________________________
 
 every one his day;
and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them.

1:5 and it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about,
that job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for
job said, it may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed god in their
hearts. thus did job continually.

1:6 now there was a day when the sons of god came to present
themselves before the lord, and satan came also among them.

1:7 and the lord said unto satan, whence comest thou? then satan
answered the lord, and said, from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it.

1:8 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil? 
 
 ___________________________
 
 1:9 then satan
answered the lord, and said, doth job fear god for nought?  1:10 hast
not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands,
and his substance is increased in the land.

1:11 but put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he
will curse thee to thy face.

1:12 and the lord said unto satan, behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. so satan went forth
from the presence of the lord.

 
 ___________________________
 

1:13 and there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating
and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 1:14 and there came
a messenger unto job, and said, the oxen were plowing, and the asses
feeding beside them: 1:15 and the sabeans fell upon them, and took
them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and i only am escaped alone to tell thee.

1:16 while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the
fire of god is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
the servants, and consumed them; and i only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

1:17 while he was yet speaking, there came
 
 ___________________________
 
 have
carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and i only am escaped alone to tell thee.

1:18 while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, thy
sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother's house: 1:19 and, behold, there came a great wind from the
wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon
the young men, and they are dead; and i only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

1:20 then job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and
fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, 1:21 and said, naked came i
out of my mother's womb, and naked shall i return thither: the lord
gave, and the lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the lord.

1:22 in all this job sinned not, nor charged god foolishly.

2:1 again there was a day when the sons of god came to present
themselves before the lord, and satan came also among them to present
himself before the lord.

2:2 an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the lord said unto satan, from whence comest thou? and satan
answered the lord, and said, from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it.

2:3 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause.

2:4 and satan answered the lord, and said, skin for skin, yea, all
that a man hath will he give for his life.

2:5 but put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face.

2:6 and the lord said unto satan, behold, he i
 
 ___________________________
 
s in thine hand; but
save his life.

2:7 so went satan forth from the presence of the lord, and smote job
with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.

2:8 and he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes.

2:9 then said his wife unto him, dost thou still retain thine
integrity?  curse god, and die.

2:10 but he said unto her, thou speakest as one of the foolish women
speaketh. what? shall we receive good at the hand of god, and shall we
not receive evil? in all this did not job sin with his lips.

2:11 now when job's three friends heard
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and zophar the naamathite: for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to
comfort him.

2:12 and when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not,
they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.

2:13 so they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief
was very great.

3:1 after this opened job his mouth, and cursed his day.

3:2 and job spake, and said, 3:3 let the day perish wherein i was
born, and the night in which it was said, there is a man child
conceived.

3:4 let that day be darkness; let not god regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it.

3:5 let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell
upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.

3:6 as for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be
joined unto the days of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e field: and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.

5:24 and thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and
thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin.

5:25 thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
offspring as the grass of the earth.

5:26 thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season.

5:27 lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thy good.

6:1 but job answered and said, 6:2 oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together!  6:3 for now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up.

6:4 for the arrows of the almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of god do set themselves in array
against me.

6:5 doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder?  6:6 can that which is unsavoury be eaten without
 
 ___________________________
 
h the place of
stones.

8:18 if he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
i have not seen thee.

8:19 behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow.

8:20 behold, god will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing.

8:22 they that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought.

9:1 then job answered and said, 9:2 i know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with god?  9:3 if he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand.

9:4 he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered?  9:5 which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger.

9:6 which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble.

9:7 which commandeth the sun, and it riseth n
 
 ___________________________
 
ss away: 11:17 and thine
age shall be clearer than the noonday: thou shalt shine forth, thou
shalt be as the morning.

11:18 and thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt
dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety.

11:19 also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea,
many shall make suit unto thee.

11:20 but the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.

12:1 and job answered and said, 12:2 no doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you.

12:3 but i have understanding as well as you; i am not inferior to
you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these?  12:4 i am as one
mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon god, and he answereth him:
the just upright man is laughed to scorn.

12:5 he that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in
the thought of him that is at ease.

12:6 the tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they
 
 ___________________________
 

15:31 let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall
be his recompence.

15:32 it shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall
not be green.

15:33 he shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast
off his flower as the olive.

15:34 for the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire
shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.

15:35 they conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
prepareth deceit.

16:1 then job answered and said, 16:2 i have heard many such things:
miserable comforters are ye all.

16:3 shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou
answerest?  16:4 i also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my
soul's stead, i could heap up words against you, and shake mine head
at you.

16:5 but i would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my
lips should asswage your grief.

16:6 though i speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though i forbear,
what am i 
 
 ___________________________
 
7 his remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have
no name in the street.

18:18 he shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of
the world.

18:19 he shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any
remaining in his dwellings.

18:20 they that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they
that went before were affrighted.

18:21 surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the
place of him that knoweth not god.

19:1 then job answered and said, 19:2 how long will ye vex my soul,
and break me in pieces with words?  19:3 these ten times have ye
reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to
me.

19:4 and be it indeed that i have erred, mine error remaineth with
myself.

19:5 if indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead
against me my reproach: 19:6 know now that god hath overthrown me, and
hath compassed me with his net.

19:7 behold, i cry out of wrong, but i am not hear
 
 ___________________________
 
th out of his gall: terrors are upon him.

20:26 all darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown
shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his
tabernacle.

20:27 the heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise
up against him.

20:28 the increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow
away in the day of his wrath.

20:29 this is the portion of a wicked man from god, and the heritage
appointed unto him by god.

21:1 but job answered and said, 21:2 hear diligently my speech, and
let this be your consolations.

21:3 suffer me that i may speak; and after that i have spoken, mock
on.

21:4 as for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should
not my spirit be troubled?  21:5 mark me, and be astonished, and lay
your hand upon your mouth.

21:6 even when i remember i am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my
flesh.

21:7 wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in
power?  21:8 
 
 ___________________________
 
ighty, and shalt
lift up thy face unto god.

22:27 thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shalt pay thy vows.

22:28 thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

22:29 when men are cast down, then thou shalt say, there is lifting
up; and he shall save the humble person.

22:30 he shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered
by the pureness of thine hands.

23:1 then job answered and said, 23:2 even to day is my complaint
bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning.

23:3 oh that i knew where i might find him! that i might come even to
his seat!  23:4 i would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth
with arguments.

23:5 i would know the words which he would answer me, and understand
what he would say unto me.

23:6 will he plead against me with his great power? no; but he would
put strength in me.

23:7 there the righteous might dispute with
 
 ___________________________
 
ing worth?  25:1 then answered bildad the shuhite, and
said, 25:2 dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high
places.

25:3 is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his
light arise?  25:4 how then can man be justified with god? or how can
he be clean that is born of a woman?  25:5 behold even to the moon,
and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight.

25:6 how much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a
worm?  26:1 but job answered and said, 26:2 how hast thou helped him
that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?
26:3 how hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast
thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?  26:4 to whom hast thou
uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?  26:5 dead things are
formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof.

26:6 hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.

26:7 he stretcheth out the north over
 
 ___________________________
 
th compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and
night come to an end.

26:11 the pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof.

26:12 he divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
smiteth through the proud.

26:13 by his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath
formed the crooked serpent.

26:14 lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?  27:1
moreover job continued his parable, and said, 27:2 as god liveth, who
hath taken away my judgment; and the almighty, who hath vexed my soul;
27:3 all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of god is in my
nostrils; 27:4 my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter
deceit.

27:5 god forbid that i should justify you: till i die i will not
remove mine integrity from me.

27:6 my righteousness i hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart
shall not reproach me so long as i live.

27
 
 ___________________________
 
th the place
thereof.

28:24 for he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the
whole heaven; 28:25 to make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth
the waters by measure.

28:26 when he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning
of the thunder: 28:27 then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared
it, yea, and searched it out.

28:28 and unto man he said, behold, the fear of the lord, that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.

29:1 moreover job continued his parable, and said, 29:2 oh that i were
as in months past, as in the days when god preserved me; 29:3 when his
candle shined upon my head, and when by his light i walked through
darkness; 29:4 as i was in the days of my youth, when the secret of
god was upon my tabernacle; 29:5 when the almighty was yet with me,
when my children were about me; 29:6 when i washed my steps with
butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; 29:7 when i went out
to the gate through the city,
 
 ___________________________
 
at mine adversary had written a book.

31:36 surely i would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown
to me.

31:37 i would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince
would i go near unto him.

31:38 if my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof
complain; 31:39 if i have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or
have caused the owners thereof to lose their life: 31:40 let thistles
grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley.

the words of job are ended.

32:1 so these three men ceased to answer job, because he was righteous
in his own eyes.

32:2 then was kindled the wrath of elihu the son of barachel the
buzite, of the kindred of ram: against job was his wrath kindled,
because he justified himself rather than god.

32:3 also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemned job.

32:4 now elihu had waited till job had spoken, because they were elder
than he.

32:
 
 ___________________________
 
peak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom.

32:8 but there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the almighty
giveth them understanding.

32:9 great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand
judgment.

32:10 therefore i said, hearken to me; i also will shew mine opinion.

32:11 behold, i waited for your words; i gave ear to your reasons,
whilst ye searched out what to say.

32:12 yea, i attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you
that convinced job, or that answered his words: 32:13 lest ye should
say, we have found out wisdom: god thrusteth him down, not man.

32:14 now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will i
answer him with your speeches.

32:15 they were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.

32:16 when i had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and
answered no more;) 32:17 i said, i will answer also my part, i also
will shew mine opinion.

32:18 for i am full of matter, the spiri
 
 ___________________________
 
t within me constraineth me.

32:19 behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to
burst like new bottles.

32:20 i will speak, that i may be refreshed: i will open my lips and
answer.

32:21 let me not, i pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me
give flattering titles unto man.

32:22 for i know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker
would soon take me away.

33:1 wherefore, job, i pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all
my words.

33:2 behold, now i have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my
mouth.

33:3 my words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips
shall utter knowledge clearly.

33:4 the spirit of god hath made me, and the breath of the almighty
hath given me life.

33:5 if thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand
up.

33:6 behold, i am according to thy wish in god's stead: i also am
formed out of t
 
 ___________________________
 
e
favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will
render unto man his righteousness.

33:27 he looketh upon men, and if any say, i have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; 33:28 he will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the
light.

33:29 lo, all these things worketh god oftentimes with man, 33:30 to
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living.

33:31 mark well, o job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and i will
speak.

33:32 if thou hast anything to say, answer me: speak, for i desire to
justify thee.

33:33 if not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and i shall teach thee
wisdom.

34:1 furthermore elihu answered and said, 34:2 hear my words, o ye
wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.

34:3 for the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.

34:4 let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is
good.

34:5
 
 ___________________________
 
 for job hath said, i am righteous: and god hath taken away my
judgment.

34:6 should i lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
transgression.

34:7 what man is like job, who drinketh up scorning like water?  34:8
which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with
wicked men.

34:9 for he hath said, it profiteth a man nothing that he should
delight himself with god.

34:10 therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it
from god, that he should do wickedness; and from the almighty, that he
should commit iniquity.

34:11 for the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every
man to find according to his ways.
 
 ___________________________
 
hat the hypocrite reign not,
lest the people be ensnared.

34:31 surely it is meet to be said unto god, i have borne
chastisement, i will not offend any more: 34:32 that which i see not
teach thou me: if i have done iniquity, i will do no more.

34:33 should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it,
whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not i: therefore
speak what thou knowest.

34:34 let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken
unto me.

34:35 job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
wisdom.

34:36 my desire is that job may be tried unto the end because of his
answers for wicked men.

34:37 for he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands
among us, and multiplieth his words against god.

35:1 elihu spake moreover, and said, 35:2 thinkest thou this to be
right, that thou saidst, my righteousness is more than god's?  35:3
for thou saidst, what advantage will it be unto thee? and, what profit
shal
 
 ___________________________
 
acheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and
maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?  35:12 there they cry, but
none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men.

35:13 surely god will not hear vanity, neither will the almighty
regard it.

35:14 although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is
before him; therefore trust thou in him.

35:15 but now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet
he knoweth it not in great extremity: 35:16 therefore doth job open
his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.

36:1 elihu also proceeded, and said, 36:2 suffer me a little, and i
will shew thee that i have yet to speak on god's behalf.

36:3 i will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe
righteousness to my maker.

36:4 for truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.

36:5 behold, god is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in
strength and wisdom.

36:6 he preserveth not the
 
 ___________________________
 
 the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.

37:10 by the breath of god frost is given: and the breadth of the
waters is straitened.

37:11 also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his
bright cloud: 37:12 and it is turned round about by his counsels: that
they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world
in the earth.

37:13 he causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for his land,
or for mercy.

37:14 hearken unto this, o job: stand still, and consider the wondrous
works of god.

37:15 dost thou know when god disposed them, and caused the light of
his cloud to shine?  37:16 dost thou know the balancings of the
clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
37:17 how thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the
south wind?  37:18 hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is
strong, and as a molten looking glass?  37:19 teach us what we shall
say unto him; for we cannot order 
 
 ___________________________
 
a man speak, surely he
shall be swallowed up.

37:21 and now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but
the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.

37:22 fair weather cometh out of the north: with god is terrible
majesty.

37:23 touching the almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent
in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not
afflict.

37:24 men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise
of heart.

38:1 then the lord answered job out of the whirlwind, and said, 38:2
who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?  38:3
gird up now thy loins like a man; for i will demand of thee, and
answer thou me.

38:4 where wast thou when i laid the foundations of the earth?
declare, if thou hast understanding.

38:5 who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath
stretched the line upon it?  38:6 whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; 38:7 when 
 
 ___________________________
 
ar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.

39:26 doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward
the south?  39:27 doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her
nest on high?  39:28 she dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the
crag of the rock, and the strong place.

39:29 from thence she seeketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.

39:30 her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are,
there is she.

40:1 moreover the lord answered job, and said, 40:2 shall he that
contendeth with the almighty instruct him? he that reproveth god, let
him answer it.

40:3 then job answered the lord, and said, 40:4 behold, i am vile;
what shall i answer thee? i will lay mine hand upon my mouth.

40:5 once have i spoken; but i will not answer: yea, twice; but i will
proceed no further.

40:6 then answered the lord unto job out of the whirlwind, and said,
40:7 gird up thy loins now like a man: i will demand of thee, and
declare thou u
 
 ___________________________
 
darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a
spear.

41:30 sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things
upon the mire.

41:31 he maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a
pot of ointment.

41:32 he maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to
be hoary.

41:33 upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.

41:34 he beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children
of pride.

42:1 then job answered the lord, and said, 42:2 i know that thou canst
do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee.

42:3 who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have i
uttered that i understood not; things too wonderful for me, which i
knew not.

42:4 hear, i beseech thee, and i will speak: i will demand of thee,
and declare thou unto me.

42:5 i have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
seeth thee.

42:6 wherefore i abhor myself, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
repent in dust and ashes.

42:7 and it was so, that after the lord had spoken these words unto
job, the lord said to eliphaz the temanite, my wrath is kindled
against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right, as my servant job hath.

42:8 therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go
to my servant job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and
my servant job shall pray for you: for him will i accept: lest i deal
with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing
which is right, like my servant job.

42:9 so eliphaz the temanite and bildad the shuhite and zophar the
naamathite went, and did according as the lord commanded them: the
lord also accepted job.

42:10 and the lord turned the captivity of job, when he prayed for his
friends: also the lord gave job twice as much as he had before.

42:11 then came there unto him
 
 ___________________________
 
 all his brethren, and all his sisters,
and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat
bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him
over all the evil that the lord had brought upon him: every man also
gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.

42:12 so the lord blessed the latter end of job more than his
beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand
camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

42:13 he had also seven sons and three daughters.

42:14 and he called the name of the first, jemima; and the name of the
second, kezia; and the name of the third, kerenhappuch.

42:15 and in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters
of job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.

42:16 after this lived jo
 
 ___________________________
 
b an hundred and forty years, and saw his
sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.

42:17 so job died, being old and full of days.




the book of psalms


1:1 blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful.

1:2 but his delight is in the law of the lord; and in his law doth he
meditate day and night.

1:3 and he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not
wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
 
 ___________________________
 
stray
from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions;
but that they may be my people, and i may be their god, saith the lord
god.

14:12 the word of the lord came again to me, saying, 14:13 son of man,
when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will
i stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast
from it: 14:14 though these three men, noah, daniel, and job, were in
it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith the lord god.

14:15 if i cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because
of the beasts: 14:16 though these three men were in it, as i live,
saith the lord god, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters;
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

14:17 or if i bring a sword upon that land, and say, swo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd, go through
the land; so that i cut off man and beast from it: 14:18 though these
three men were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered
themselves.

14:19 or if i send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: 14:20 though noah,
daniel, and job were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.

14:21 for thus saith the lord god; how much more when i send my four
sore judgments upon jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
14:22 yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth