ut a kinsman, that his name may be famous
in israel.

4:15 and he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

4:16 and naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it.

4:17 and the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, there is a
son born to naomi; and they called his name obed: he is the father of
jesse, the father of david.

4:18 now these are the generations of pharez: pharez begat hezron,
4:19 and hezron begat ram, and ram begat amminadab, 4:20 and amminadab
begat nahshon, and nahshon begat salmon, 4:21 and salmon begat boaz,
and boaz begat obed, 4:22 and obed begat jesse, and jesse begat david.




the first book of samuel

otherwise called:

the first book of the kings


1:1 now there was a certain man of ramathaimzophim, of mount ephraim,
and his name was elkanah, the son of jeroham, the so
 
 ___________________________
 
 thy children? and he
said, there remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. and samuel said unto jesse, send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 and he sent, and brought him in. now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 then samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. so samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord departed from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.

16:15 and saul's servants said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d thou shalt be well.

16:17 and saul said unto his servants, provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 then answered one of the servants, and said, behold, i have seen
a son of jesse the bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the lord is with him.

16:19 wherefore saul sent messengers unto jesse, and said, send me
david thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 and jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by david his son unto saul.

16:21 and david came to saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 and saul sent to jesse, saying, let david, i pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from god was upon
saul, that david took an harp, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
and ye servants to saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 if he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if i prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us.

17:10 and the philistine said, i defy the armies of israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 when saul and all israel heard those words of the philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

17:12 now david was the son of that ephrathite of bethlehemjudah,
whose name was jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of saul.

17:13 and the three eldest sons of jesse went and followed saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
eliab the firstborn, and next unto him abinadab, and the third
shammah.

17:14 and david was the youngest: and the three eldest followed saul.

17:15 but david went and returned from saul t
 
 ___________________________
 
o feed his father's sheep
at bethlehem.

17:16 and the philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.

17:17 and jesse said unto david his son, take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 and carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 now saul, and they, and all the men of israel, were in the
valley of elah, fighting with the philistines.

17:20 and david rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as jesse had commanded him
 
 ___________________________
 
; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle.

17:21 for israel and the philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army.

17:22 and david left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

17:23 and as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the philistine of gath, goliath by name, out of the armies of the
philistines, and spake according to the same words: and david heard
them.

17:24 and all the men of israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid.

17:25 and the men of israel said, have ye seen this man that is
 
 ___________________________
 
 come
up?  surely to defy israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
israel.

17:26 and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall
be done to the man that killeth this philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from israel? for who is this uncircumcised philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living god?  17:27 and the people
answered him after this manner, saying, so shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 and eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and eliab's anger was kindled against david, and he said, why camest
th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? i know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 and david said, what have i now done? is there not a cause?
17:30 and he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

17:31 and when the words were heard which david spake, they rehearsed
them before saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 and david said to saul, let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this philistine.

17:33 and saul said to david, thou art not able to go against this
philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth.

17:34 and david said unto saul, thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:3
 
 ___________________________
 
5 and i went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, i caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living god.

17:37 david said moreover, the lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this philistine. and saul said unto david, go, and the
lord be with thee.

17:38 and saul armed david with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 and david girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. and david said unto saul, i cannot go
with thes
 
 ___________________________
 
e; for i have not proved them. and david put them off him.

17:40 and he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the philistine.

17:41 and the philistine came on and drew near unto david; and the man
that bare the shield went before him.

17:42 and when the philistine looked about, and saw david, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 and the philistine said unto david, am i a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? and the philistine cursed david by his gods.

17:44 and the philistine said to david, come to me, and i will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

17:45 then said david to the philistine, thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but i come to thee in 
 
 ___________________________
 
; and i will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and i will give the
carcases of the host of the philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a god in israel.

17:47 and all this assembly shall know that the lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the lord's, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 and it came to pass, when the philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet david, that david hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the philistine.

17:49 and david put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

17:50 so david prevailed over the philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of david.

17:51 therefore david ran, and stood upon the philist
 
 ___________________________
 
of, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. and when the philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled.

17:52 and the men of israel and of judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of ekron.

and the wounded of the philistines fell down by the way to shaaraim,
even unto gath, and unto ekron.

17:53 and the children of israel returned from chasing after the
philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

17:54 and david took the head of the philistine, and brought it to
jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

17:55 and when saul saw david go forth against the philistine, he said
unto abner, the captain of the host, abner, whose son is this youth?
and abner said, as thy soul liveth, o king, i cannot tell.

17:56 and the king said, enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

17:57 and as david returned from the slaughter of the philistine,
abner took him, and brought him before saul with the head 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
philistine in his hand.

17:58 and saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man? and
david answered, i am the son of thy servant jesse the bethlehemite.

18:1 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
saul, that the soul of jonathan was knit with the soul of david, and
jonathan loved him as his own soul.

18:2 and saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father's house.

18:3 then jonathan and david made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul.

18:4 and jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to david, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

18:5 and david went out whithersoever saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
saul's servants.

18:6 and it came to pass as they came, when david was re
 
 ___________________________
 
turned from
the slaughter of the philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of israel, singing and dancing, to meet king saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 and the women answered one another as they played, and said, saul
hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands.

18:8 and saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, they have ascribed unto david ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 and saul eyed david from that day and forward.

18:10 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from god
came upon saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and david
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
saul's hand.

18:11 and saul cast the javelin; for he said, i will smite david even
to the wall with it. and david avoided o
 
 ___________________________
 
ut of his presence twice.

18:12 and saul was afraid of david, because the lord was with him, and
was departed from saul.

18:13 therefore saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

18:14 and david behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the lord
was with him.

18:15 wherefore when saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him.

18:16 but all israel and judah loved david, because he went out and
came in before them.

18:17 and saul said to david, behold my elder daughter merab, her will
i give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the lord's
battles.

for saul said, let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
philistines be upon him.

18:18 and david said unto saul, who am i? and what is my life, or my
father's family in israel, that i should be son in law to the king?
18:19 but it came to pass at the time when merab saul's
 
 ___________________________
 
 daughter
should have been given to david, that she was given unto adriel the
meholathite to wife.

18:20 and michal saul's daughter loved david: and they told saul, and
the thing pleased him.

18:21 and saul said, i will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the philistines may be against him.
wherefore saul said to david, thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain.

18:22 and saul commanded his servants, saying, commune with david
secretly, and say, behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

18:23 and saul's servants spake those words in the ears of david. and
david said, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
seeing that i am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?  18:24 and the
servants of saul told him, saying, on this manner spake david.

18:25 and saul said, thus shall ye say to david, the king desireth not
any dowry, but a
 
 ___________________________
 
n hundred foreskins of the philistines, to be avenged
of the king's enemies. but saul thought to make david fall by the hand
of the philistines.

18:26 and when his servants told david these words, it pleased david
well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

18:27 wherefore david arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
philistines two hundred men; and david brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. and saul gave him michal his daughter to wife.

18:28 and saul saw and knew that the lord was with david, and that
michal saul's daughter loved him.

18:29 and saul was yet the more afraid of david; and saul became
david's enemy continually.

18:30 then the princes of the philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that david behaved himself more wisel
 
 ___________________________
 
y
than all the servants of saul; so that his name was much set by.

19:1 and saul spake to jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill david.

19:2 but jonathan saul's son delighted much in david: and jonathan
told david, saying, saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, i pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 and i will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and i will commune
with my father of thee; and what i see, that i will tell thee.

19:4 and jonathan spake good of david unto saul his father, and said
unto him, let not the king sin against his servant, against david;
because he hath not sinned again
 
 ___________________________
 
st thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 for he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the philistine, and the lord wrought a great salvation for
all israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay david without a cause?  19:6
and saul hearkened unto the voice of jonathan: and saul sware, as the
lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 and jonathan called david, and jonathan shewed him all those
things.

and jonathan brought david to saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past.

19:8 and there was war again: and david went out, and fought with the
philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 and the evil spirit from the lord was upon saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and david played with his hand.

19:10 and saul sought to smite david even to the wall with the
javelin: 
 
 ___________________________
 
but he slipped away out of saul's presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and david fled, and escaped that night.

19:11 saul also sent messengers unto david's house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and michal david's wife told him, saying,
if thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 so michal let david down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 and michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

19:14 and when saul sent messengers to take david, she said, he is
sick.

19:15 and saul sent the messengers again to see david, saying, bring
him up to me in the bed, that i may slay him.

19:16 and when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of g
 
 ___________________________
 
oats' hair for his bolster.

19:17 and saul said unto michal, why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? and michal answered saul, he
said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?  19:18 so david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it was told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as appointed
over them, the spirit of god was upon the messengers of saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 and when it was told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. and saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, b
 
 ___________________________
 
ehold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan,
what have i done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 and david sware moreover, and said, thy father certainly knoweth
that i have found grace in thine eyes; and h
 
 ___________________________
 
e saith, let not jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the lord liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 then said jonathan unto david, whatsoever thy soul desireth, i
will even do it for thee.

20:5 and david said unto jonathan, behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and i should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that i may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

20:6 if thy father at all miss me, then say, david earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to bethlehem his city: for there is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family.

20:7 if he say thus, it is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined
 
 ___________________________
 
 by him.

20:8 therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
brought thy servant into a covenant of the lord with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father?  20:9 and jonathan said, far be
it from thee: for if i knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not i tell it thee?  20:10 then
said david to jonathan, who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly?  20:11 and jonathan said unto david, come, and
let us go out into the field. and they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 and jonathan said unto david, o lord god of israel, when i have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward david, and i then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 the lord do so and much more to jonathan: but
if it please 
 
 ___________________________
 
my father to do thee evil, then i will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the lord be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 and thou shalt not only while yet i live shew me the kindness of
the lord, that i die not: 20:15 but also thou shalt not cut off thy
kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the lord hath cut off
the enemies of david every one from the face of the earth.

20:16 so jonathan made a covenant with the house of david, saying, let
the lord even require it at the hand of david's enemies.

20:17 and jonathan caused david to swear again, because he loved him:
for he loved him as he loved his own soul.

20:18 then jonathan said to david, to morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

20:19 and when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
business was in hand, and shalt remain by th
 
 ___________________________
 
:21 and, behold, i will send a lad, saying, go, find out the arrows.
if i expressly say unto the lad, behold, the arrows are on this side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
hurt; as the lord liveth.

20:22 but if i say thus unto the young man, behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the lord hath sent thee away.

20:23 and as touching the matter which thou and i have spoken of,
behold, the lord be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 so david hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 and the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and jonathan arose, and abner sat by saul's side,
and david's place was empty.

20:26 nevertheless saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

20:27 and it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that d
 
 ___________________________
 
avid's place was empty: and saul said unto jonathan
his son, wherefore cometh not the son of jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day?  20:28 and jonathan answered saul, david
earnestly asked leave of me to go to bethlehem: 20:29 and he said, let
me go, i pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if i have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, i pray thee, and see my
brethren. therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

20:30 then saul's anger was kindled against jonathan, and he said unto
him, thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not i know that
thou hast chosen the
 
 ___________________________
 
 jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother's nakedness?  20:31 for as long as the son of
jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 and jonathan answered saul his father, and said unto him,
wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?  20:33 and saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay david.

20:34 so jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for david,
because his father had done him shame.

20:35 and it came to pass in the morning, that jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with david, and a little lad with him.

20:36 and he said unto his lad, run, find out now the arrows which i
shoot. and as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

20:37 and when the lad was come to the pla
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of the arrow which
jonathan had shot, jonathan cried after the lad, and said, is not the
arrow beyond thee?  20:38 and jonathan cried after the lad, make
speed, haste, stay not. and jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and
came to his master.

20:39 but the lad knew not any thing: only jonathan and david knew the
matter.

20:40 and jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him,
go, carry them to the city.

20:41 and as soon as the lad was gone, david arose out of a place
toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with
another, until david exceeded.

20:42 and jonathan said to david, go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the lord, saying, the lord be between
me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. and he arose
and departed: and jonathan went into the city.

21:1 then came david to nob to ahimelech the prie
 
 ___________________________
 
st: and ahimelech was
afraid at the meeting of david, and said unto him, why art thou alone,
and no man with thee?  21:2 and david said unto ahimelech the priest,
the king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout i send thee, and what i
have commanded thee: and i have appointed my servants to such and such
a place.

21:3 now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

21:4 and the priest answered david, and said, there is no common bread
under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if th
 
 ___________________________
 
e young men have
kept themselves at least from women.

21:5 and david answered the priest, and said unto him, of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since i came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

21:6 so the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the lord, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

21:7 now a certain man of the servants of saul was
 
 ___________________________
 
 there that day,
detained before the lord; and his name was doeg, an edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to saul.

21:8 and david said unto ahimelech, and is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for i have neither brought my sword nor my
weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.

21:9 and the priest said, the sword of goliath the philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. and david said, there is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 and david arose a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd fled that day for fear of saul, and went to
achish the king of gath.

21:11 and the servants of achish said unto him, is not this david the
king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances,
saying, saul hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands?
21:12 and david laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid
of achish the king of gath.

21:13 and he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let
his spittle fall down upon his beard.

21:14 then said achish unto his servants, lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefore then have ye brought him to me?  21:15 have i need of mad
men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my
presence? shall this fellow co
 
 ___________________________
 
me into my house?  22:1 david therefore
departed thence, and escaped to the cave adullam: and when his
brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 and every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto
him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundred men.

22:3 and david went thence to mizpeh of moab: and he said unto the
king of moab, let my father and my mother, i pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till i know what god will do for me.

22:4 and he brought them before the king of moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that david was in the hold.

22:5 and the prophet gad said unto david, abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of judah. then david departed, and
came into the forest of hareth.

22:6 when saul heard that da
 
 ___________________________
 
iests that were in nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 and saul said, hear now, thou son of ahitub. and he answered,
here i am, my lord.

22:13 and saul said unto him, why have ye conspired against me, thou
and the son of jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquired of god for him, that he should rise against me, to
lie in wait, as at this day?  22:14 then ahimelech answered the king,
and said, and who is so faithful among all thy servants as david,
which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is
honourable in thine house?  22:15 did i then begin to enquire of god
for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his
servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less or more.

22:16 and the king said, thou shalt surely die, ahimelech, thou, and
all thy father's house.

22:17 and the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, turn,
and slay the pries
 
 ___________________________
 
ts of the lord: because their hand also is with
david, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me.
but the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the priests of the lord.

22:18 and the king said to doeg, turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
and doeg the edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 and nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings
 
 ___________________________
 
, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

22:20 and one of the sons of ahimelech the son of ahitub, named
abiathar, escaped, and fled after david.

22:21 and abiathar shewed david that saul had slain the lord's
priests.

22:22 and david said unto abiathar, i knew it that day, when doeg the
edomite was there, that he would surely tell saul: i have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

22:23 abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 then they told david, saying, behold, the philistines fight
against keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 therefore david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go and
smite t
 
 ___________________________
 
hese philistines? and the lord said unto david, go, and smite
the philistines, and save keilah.

23:3 and david's men said unto him, behold, we be afraid here in
judah: how much more then if we come to keilah against the armies of
the philistines?  23:4 then david enquired of the lord yet again. and
the lord answered him and said, arise, go down to keilah; for i will
deliver the philistines into thine hand.

23:5 so david and his men went to keilah, and fought with the
philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. so david saved the inhabitants of keilah.

23:6 and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to
david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 and it was told saul that david was come to keilah. and saul
said, god hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

2
 
 ___________________________
 
3:8 and saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
keilah, to besiege david and his men.

23:9 and david knew that saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod.

23:10 then said david, o lord god of israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that saul seeketh to come to keilah, to destroy the
city for my sake.

23:11 will the men of keilah deliver me up into his hand? will saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? o lord god of israel, i beseech
thee, tell thy servant. and the lord said, he will come down.

23:12 then said david, will the men of keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of saul? and the lord said, they will deliver thee up.

23:13 then david and h
 
 ___________________________
 
is men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. and it
was told saul that david was escaped from keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 and david abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of ziph. and saul sought him every
day, but god delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 and david saw that saul was come out to seek his life: and david
was in the wilderness of ziph in a wood.

23:16 and jonathan saul's son arose, and went to david into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in god.

23:17 and he said unto him, fear not: for the hand of saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over israel, and i shall
be next unto thee; and that also saul my father knoweth.

23:18 and they two made a covenant before the lord: and david abode in
the wood, and jonathan went to his house.

23:19 then came up the ziphit
 
 ___________________________
 
es to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not
david hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
hachilah, which is on the south of jeshimon?  23:20 now therefore, o
king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.

23:21 and saul said, blessed be ye of the lord; for ye have compassion
on me.

23:22 go, i pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth v
 
 ___________________________
 
ery subtilly.

23:23 see therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and i will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that i will search him out throughout all the thousands of
judah.

23:24 and they arose, and went to ziph before saul: but david and his
men were in the wilderness of maon, in the plain on the south of
jeshimon.

23:25 saul also and his men went to seek him. and they told david;
wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
maon. and when saul heard that, he pursued after david in the
wilderness of maon.

23:26 and saul went on this side of the mountain, and david and his
men on that side of the mountain: and david made haste to get away for
fear of saul; for saul and his men compassed dav
 
 ___________________________
 
id and his men round
about to take them.

23:27 but there came a messenger unto saul, saying, haste thee, and
come; for the philistines have invaded the land.

23:28 wherefore saul returned from pursuing after david, and went
against the philistines: therefore they called that place
selahammahlekoth.

23:29 and david went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at
engedi.

24:1 and it came to pass, when saul was returned from following the
philistines, that it was told him, saying, behold, david is in the
wilderness of engedi.

24:2 then saul took three thousand chosen men out of all israel, and
went to seek david and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

24:3 and he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
saul went in to cover his feet: and david and his men remained in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
sides of the cave.

24:4 and the men of david said unto him, behold the day of which the
lord said unto thee, behold, i will deliver thine enemy into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. then
david arose, and cut off the skirt of saul's robe privily.

24:5 and it came to pass afterward, that david's heart smote him,
because he had cut off saul's skirt.

24:6 and he said unto his men, the lord forbid that i should do this
thing unto my master, the lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the lord.

24:7 so david stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them
not to rise against saul. but saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on his way.

24:8 david also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
after saul, sayin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, my lord the king. and when saul looked behind him,
david stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

24:9 and david said to saul, wherefore hearest thou men's words,
saying, behold, david seeketh thy hurt?  24:10 behold, this day thine
eyes have seen how that the lord had delivered thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and i said, i will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
he is the lord's anointed.

24:11 moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand: for in that i cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee
not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in
mi
 
 ___________________________
 
 between me and thee, and the lord avenge me of
thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 as saith the proverb of the ancients, wickedness proceedeth from
the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 after whom is the king of israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 the lord therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

24:16 and it came to pass, when david had made an end of speaking
these words unto saul, that saul said, is this thy voice, my son
david? and saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

24:17 and he said to david, thou art more righteous than i: for thou
hast rewarded me good, whereas i have rewarded thee evil.

24:18 and thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 for if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well a
 
 ___________________________
 
way?
wherefore the lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 and now, behold, i know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 swear now therefore unto me by the lord, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father's house.

24:22 and david sware unto saul. and saul went home; but david and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 and samuel died; and all the israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at ramah. and david
arose, and went down to the wilderness of paran.

25:2 and there was a man in maon, whose possessions were in carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in carmel.

25:3 now the name of the man was nabal; and the name of his wife
abig
 
 ___________________________
 
ail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he
was of the house of caleb.

25:4 and david heard in the wilderness that nabal did shear his sheep.

25:5 and david sent out ten young men, and david said unto the young
men, get you up to carmel, and go to nabal, and greet him in my name:
25:6 and thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, peace be
both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that
thou hast.

25:7 and now i have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds
which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing
unto them, all the while they were in carmel.

25:8 ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. wherefore le
 
 ___________________________
 
t the
young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give,
i pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to
thy son david.

25:9 and when david's young men came, they spake to nabal according to
all those words in the name of david, and ceased.

25:10 and nabal answered david's servants, and said, who is david? and
who is the son of jesse? there be many servants now a days that break
away every man from his master.

25:11 shall i then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that i
have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom i know not
whence they be?  25:12 so david's young men turned their way, and went
again, and came and told him all those sayings.

25:13 and david said unto his men, gird ye on every man his sword. and
they girded on every man his sword; and david also gird
 
 ___________________________
 
ed on his
sword: and there went up after david about four hundred men; and two
hundred abode by the stuff.

25:14 but one of the young men told abigail, nabal's wife, saying,
behold, david sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our
master; and he railed on them.

25:15 but the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt,
neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them,
when we were in the fields: 25:16 they were a wall unto us both by
night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

25:17 now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is
determined against our master, and against all his household: for he
 
 ___________________________
 
an cannot speak to him.

25:18 then abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two
bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred
cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.

25:19 and she said unto her servants, go on before me; behold, i come
after you. but she told not her husband nabal.

25:20 and it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, david and his men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 now david had said, surely in vain have i kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

25:22 so and more also do god unto the enemies of david, if i leave of
all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against
the wall.

25:23 and when abigail saw david, she hasted, and lighted off the ass,
and fell befo
 
 ___________________________
 
re david on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
25:24 and fell at his feet, and said, upon me, my lord, upon me let
this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, i pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

25:25 let not my lord, i pray thee, regard this man of belial, even
nabal: for as his name is, so is he; nabal is his name, and folly is
with him: but i thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom
thou didst send.

25:26 now therefore, my lord, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 sling out, as out
of the middle of a sling.

25:30 and it shall come to pass, when the lord shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee,
and shall have appointed thee ruler over israel; 25:31 that this shall
be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself:
but when the lord shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember
thine handmaid.

25:32 and david said to abigail, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which sent thee this day to meet me: 25:33 and blessed be thy advice,
and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

25:34 for in very deed, as the lord god of israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to
meet me, surely there had not been left unto nabal by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall.

 
 ___________________________
 

25:35 so david received of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, go up in peace to thine house; see, i have
hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

25:36 and abigail came to nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king; and nabal's heart was merry within
him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or
more, until the morning light.

25:37 but it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out
of nabal, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his wife had told him these things, that his heart died
within him, and he became as a stone.

25:38 and it came to pass about ten days after, that the lord smote
nabal, that he died.

25:39 and when david heard that nabal was dead, he said, blessed be
the lord, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of
nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the lord hath returned
the wickedness of nabal upon his own head. and david sent and communed
with abigail, to take her to him to wife.

25:40 and when the servants of david were come to abigail to carmel,
they spake unto her, saying, david sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 and she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and
said, behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.

25:42 and abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five
damsels of hers that went after her; and she
 
 ___________________________
 
 went after the messengers
of david, and became his wife.

25:43 david also took ahinoam of jezreel; and they were also both of
them his wives.

25:44 but saul had given michal his daughter, david's wife, to phalti
the son of laish, which was of gallim.

26:1 and the ziphites came unto saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david
hide himself in the hill of hachilah, which is before jeshimon?  26:2
then saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of ziph, having three
thousand chosen men of israel with him, to seek david in the
wilderness of ziph.

26:3 and saul pitched in the hill of hachilah, which is before
jeshimon, by the way. but david abode in the wilderness, and he saw
that saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 david therefore sent out spies, and understood that saul was come
in very deed.

 
 ___________________________
 

26:5 and david arose, and came to the place where saul had pitched:
and david beheld the place where saul lay, and abner the son of ner,
the captain of his host: and saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, i will go down with
thee.

26:7 so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 then said abishai to david, god hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, i pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and i will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 and david said to abishai, destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth his ha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd against the lord's anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
david said furthermore, as the lord liveth, the lord shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 the lord forbid that i should stretch forth mine hand against
the lord's anointed: but, i pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 so david took the spear and the cruse of water from saul's
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from
the lord was fallen upon them.

26:13 then david went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space being between them: 26:14 and david
cried to the people, and to abner the son of ner, saying, answerest
thou not, abner? then abner answered and said, who art thou that
crie
 
 ___________________________
 
st to the king?  26:15 and david said to abner, art not thou a
valiant man? and who is like to thee in israel? wherefore then hast
thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in
to destroy the king thy lord.

26:16 this thing is not good that thou hast done. as the lord liveth,
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the lord's
anointed.

and now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at his bolster.

26:17 and saul knew david's voice, and said, is t
 
 ___________________________
 
his thy voice, my son
david? and david said, it is my voice, my lord, o king.

26:18 and he said, wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant?  for what have i done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
now therefore, i pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. if the lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the lord; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the lord, saying, go, ser
 
 ___________________________
 
ve other gods.

26:20 now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the lord: for the king of israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 then said saul, i have sinned: return, my son david: for i will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, i have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 and david answered and said, behold the king's spear! and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 the lord render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness; for the lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but i
would not stretch forth mine hand against the lord's anointed.

26:24 and, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the lord, and let him
deliver me out of all tribulation.

26:25 then saul said to
 
 ___________________________
 
 david, blessed be thou, my son david: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. so david
went on his way, and saul returned to his place.

27:1 and david said in his heart, i shall now perish one day by the
hand of saul: there is nothing better for me than that i should
speedily escape into the land of the philistines; and saul shall
despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of israel: so shall i
escape out of his hand.

27:2 and david arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him unto achish, the son of maoch, king of gath.

27:3 and david dwelt with achish at gath, he and his men, every man
with his household, even david with his two wives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the carmelitess, nabal's wife.

27:4 and it was told saul that david was fled to gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 and david said unto achish, if i have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me
 
 ___________________________
 
 a place in some town in the country, that i may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee?  27:6 then achish gave him ziklag that day: wherefore ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of judah unto this day.

27:7 and the time that david dwelt in the country of the philistines
was a full year and four months.

27:8 and david and his men went up, and invaded the geshurites, and
the gezrites, and the amalekites: for those nations were of old the
inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to shur, even unto the land of
egypt.

27:9 and david smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive,
and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels,
and the apparel, and returned, and came to achish.

27:10 and achish said, whither have ye made a road to day? and david
said, against the south of jud
 
 ___________________________
 
ah, and against the south of the
jerahmeelites, and against the south of the kenites.

27:11 and david saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to
gath, saying, lest they should tell on us, saying, so did david, and
so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the
philistines.

27:12 and achish believed david, saying, he hath made his people
israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 and it came to pass in those days, that the philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with israel. and achish
said unto david, know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 and david said to achish, surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. and achish said to david, therefore will i make thee keeper of
min
 
 ___________________________
 
or the philistines
make war against me, and god is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore i have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what i shall do.

28:16 then said samuel, wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?  28:17 and the
lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the lord hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
david: 28:18 because thou obeyedst not the voice of the lord, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon amalek, therefore hath the lord done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 moreover the lord will also deliver israel with thee into the
hand of the philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the lord also shall deliver the host of israel into the hand of
the philistines.

28:20 then saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of 
 
 ___________________________
 
4 and the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 and she brought it before saul, and before his
servants; and they did eat. then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 now the philistines gathered together all their armies to aphek:
and the israelites pitched by a fountain which is in jezreel.

29:2 and the lords of the philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but david and his men passed on in the rereward with
achish.

29:3 then said the princes of the philistines, what do these hebrews
here?  and achish said unto the princes of the philistines, is not
this david, the servant of saul the king of israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and i have found no fault in him
since he fell unto me unto this day?  29:4 and the princes of the
philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the philistines
said unto him, make this fellow
 
 ___________________________
 
 return, that he may go again to his
place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith
should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the
heads of these men?  29:5 is not this david, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, saul slew his thousands, and david his ten
thousands?  29:6 then achish called david, and said unto him, surely,
as the lord liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for i have not
found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

29:7 wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not
the lords of the philistines.

29:8 and david said unto achish, but what have i done? and what hast
thou found in thy servant so long as i have be
 
 ___________________________
 
en with thee unto this
day, that i may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
29:9 and achish answered and said to david, i know that thou art good
in my sight, as an angel of god: notwithstanding the princes of the
philistines have said, he shall not go up with us to the battle.

29:10 wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's
servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the
morning, and have light, depart.

29:11 so david and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to
return into the land of the philistines. and the philistines went up
to jezreel.

30:1 and it came to pass, when david and his men were come to ziklag
on the third day, that the amalekites had invaded the south, and
ziklag, and smitten ziklag, and burned it with fire; 30:2 and had
taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either
great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.

30:3 so david and 
 
 ___________________________
 
his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned
with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were
taken captives.

30:4 then david and the people that were with him lifted up their
voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

30:5 and david's two wives were taken captives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite.

30:6 and david was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning
him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
sons and for his daughters: but david encouraged himself in the lord
his god.

30:7 and david said to abiathar the priest, ahimelech's son, i pray
thee, bring me hither the ephod. and abiathar brought thither the
ephod to david.

30:8 and david enquired at the lord, saying, shall i pursue after this
troop? shall i overtake them? and he answered him, pursue: fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r thou
shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

30:9 so david went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
came to the brook besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

30:10 but david pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred
abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the
brook besor.

30:11 and they found an egyptian in the field, and brought him to
david, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink
water; 30:12 and they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two
clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to
him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and
three nights.

30:13 and david said unto him, to whom belongest thou? and whence art
thou? and he said, i am a young man of egypt, servant to an amalekite;
and my master left me, because three days agone i fell sick.

30:14 w
 
 ___________________________
 
e made an invasion upon the south of the cherethites, and upon
the coast which belongeth to judah, and upon the south of caleb; and
we burned ziklag with fire.

30:15 and david said to him, canst thou bring me down to this company?
and he said, swear unto me by god, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
deliver me into the hands of my master, and i will bring thee down to
this company.

30:16 and when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
philistines, and out of the land of judah.

30:17 and david smote them from th
 
 ___________________________
 
e twilight even unto the evening of
the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred
young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

30:18 and david recovered all that the amalekites had carried away:
and david rescued his two wives.

30:19 and there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great,
neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had
taken to them: david recovered all.

30:20 and david took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave
before those other cattle, and said, this is david's spoil.

30:21 and david came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that
they could not follow david, whom they had made also to abide at the
brook besor: and they went forth to meet david, and to meet the people
that were with him: and when david came near to the people, he saluted
them.

30:22 then answered all the wicked men and men of belial, of those
that went with david,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and said, because they went not with us, we will
not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every
man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and
depart.

30:23 then said david, ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that
which the lord hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the
company that came against us into our hand.

30:24 for who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is
that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by
the stuff: they shall part alike.

30:25 and it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute
and an ordinance for israel unto this day.

30:26 and when david came to ziklag, he 
 
 ___________________________
 
in south ramoth, and to them which were
in jattir, 30:28 and to them which were in aroer, and to them which
were in siphmoth, and to them which were in eshtemoa, 30:29 and to
them which were in rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the
jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the kenites,
30:30 and to them which were in hormah, and to them which were in
chorashan, and to them which were in athach, 30:31 and to them which
were in hebron, and to all the places where david himself and his men
were wont to haunt.

31:1 now the philistines fought against israel: and the men of israel
fled from before the philistines, and fell down slain in mount gilboa.

31:2 and the philistines followed hard upon saul and upon his sons;
and the philistines slew jonathan, and abinadab, and melchishua,
saul's sons.

31:3 and the battle went sore against saul, and the archers hit him;
and he was sore wounded of the archers.

31:4 then said saul unto his armourbearer, dra
 
 ___________________________
 
ants of jabeshgilead heard of that which the
philistines had done to saul; 31:12 all the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of saul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of bethshan, and came to jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 and they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at
jabesh, and fasted seven days.




the second book of samuel

otherwise called:

the second book of the kings


1:1 now it came to pass after the death of saul, when david was
returned from the slaughter of the amalekites, and david had abode two
days in ziklag; 1:2 it came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold, a man came out of the camp from saul with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to david, that he
fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 and david said unto him, from whence comest thou? and he said unto
him, out of the camp of israel am i escaped.

1:4 and david said unto him, how went the matter? i pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ay thee, tell
me.

and he answered, that the people are fled from the battle, and many of
the people also are fallen and dead; and saul and jonathan his son are
dead also.

1:5 and david said unto the young man that told him, how knowest thou
that saul and jonathan his son be dead?  1:6 and the young man that
told him said, as i happened by chance upon mount gilboa, behold, saul
leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed
hard after him.

1:7 and when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. and
i answered, here am i.

1:8 and he said unto me, who art thou? and i answered him, i am an
amalekite.

1:9 he said unto me again, stand, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 pray thee, upon me, and slay me:
for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

1:10 so i stood upon him, and slew him, because i was sure that he
could not live after that he was fallen: and i took the crown that was
upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought
them hither unto my lord.

1:11 then david took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise
all the men that were with him: 1:12 and they mourned, and wept, and
fasted until even, for saul, and for jonathan his son, and for the
people of the lord, and for the house of israel; because they were
fallen by the sword.

1:13 and david said unto the young man that told him, whence art thou?
and he answered, i am the son of a stranger, an amalekite.

1:14 and david said unto him, how wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine h
 
 ___________________________
 
and to destroy the lord's anointed?  1:15 and david
called one of the young men, and said, go near, and fall upon him. and
he smote him that he died.

1:16 and david said unto him, thy blood be upon thy head; for thy
mouth hath testified against thee, saying, i have slain the lord's
anointed.

1:17 and david lamented with this lamentation over saul and over
jonathan his son: 1:18 (also he bade them teach the children of judah
the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of jasher.)
1:19 the beauty of israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
mighty fallen!  1:20 tell it not in gath, publish it not in the
streets of askelon; lest the daughters of the philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

1:21 ye mountains of gilboa, let there be no dew, neith
 
 ___________________________
 
 israel, weep over saul, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your
apparel.

1:25 how are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! o jonathan,
thou wast slain in thine high places.

1:26 i am distressed for thee, my brother jonathan: very pleasant hast
thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women.

1:27 how are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!  2:1
and it came to pass after this, that david enquired of the lord,
saying, shall i go up into any of the cities of judah? and the lord
said unto him, go up. and david said, whither shall i go up? and he
said, unto hebron.

2:2 so david went up thither, and his two wives also, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail nabal's wife the carmelite.

2:3 and his men that were with him did david bring up, every man with
his household: and they dwelt in the cities of hebron.

2:4 and the men of judah came, and there they anointed david ki
 
 ___________________________
 
ng over
the house of judah. and they told david, saying, that the men of
jabeshgilead were they that buried saul.

2:5 and david sent messengers unto the men of jabeshgilead, and said
unto them, blessed be ye of the lord, that ye have shewed this
kindness unto your lord, even unto saul, and have buried him.

2:6 and now the lord shew kindness and truth unto you: and i also will
requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

2:7 therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant:
for your master saul is dead, and also the house of judah have
anointed me king over them.

2:8 but abner 
 
 ___________________________
 
the son of ner, captain of saul's host, took ishbosheth
the son of saul, and brought him over to mahanaim; 2:9 and made him
king over gilead, and over the ashurites, and over jezreel, and over
ephraim, and over benjamin, and over all israel.

2:10 ishbosheth saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign
over israel, and reigned two years. but the house of judah followed
david.

2:11 and the time that david was king in hebron over the house of
judah was seven years and six months.

2:12 and abner the son of ner, and the servants of ishbosheth the son
of saul, went out from mahanaim to gibeon.

2:13 and joab the son of zeruiah, and the servants of david, went out,
and met together by the pool of gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 and abner said to joab, let the young men now arise, and play
before us. and joa
 
 ___________________________
 
b said, let them arise.

2:15 then there arose and went over by number twelve of benjamin,
which pertained to ishbosheth the son of saul, and twelve of the
servants of david.

2:16 and they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
place was called helkathhazzurim, which is in gibeon.

2:17 and there was a very sore battle that day; and abner was beaten,
and the men of israel, before the servants of david.

2:18 and there were three sons of zeruiah there, joab, and abishai,
and asahel: and asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

2:19 and asahel pursued after abner; and in going he turned not to the
right hand nor to the left from following abner.

2:20 then abner looked behind him, and said, art thou asahel? and he
answered, i am.

2:21 and abner said to him, turn thee aside to thy right hand or to
thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
armour.

 
 ___________________________
 
adst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following his brother.

2:28 so joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and
pursued after israel no more, neither fought they any more.

2:29 and abner and his men walked all that night through the plain,
and passed over jordan, and went through all bithron, and they came to
mahanaim.

2:30 and joab returned from following abner: and when he had gathered
all the people together, there lacked of david's servants nineteen men
and asahel.

2:31 but the servants of david had smitten of benjamin, and of abner's
men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

2:32 and they took up asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in bethlehem. and joab and his men went all night,
and they came to hebron at break of day.

3:1 now there was long war between the house of saul and the house of
david: but david waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of saul
waxed we
 
 ___________________________
 
aker and weaker.

3:2 and unto david were sons born in hebron: and his firstborn was
amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; 3:3 and his second, chileab, of
abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite; and the third, absalom the
son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur; 3:4 and the
fourth, adonijah the son of haggith; and the fifth, shephatiah the son
of abital; 3:5 and the sixth, ithream, by eglah david's wife. these
were born to david in hebron.

3:6 and it came to pass, while there was war between the house of saul
and the house of david, that abner made himself strong for the house
of saul.

3:7 and saul had a concubine, whose name was rizpah, the daughter of
aiah: and ishbosheth said to abner, wherefore hast thou gone in unto
my father's concubine?  3:8 then was abner very wroth for the words of
ishbosheth, and said, am i a dog's head, which against judah do shew
kindness this day unto the house of saul thy fath
 
 ___________________________
 
er, to his brethren,
and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of
david, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this
woman?  3:9 so do god to abner, and more also, except, as the lord
hath sworn to david, even so i do to him; 3:10 to translate the
kingdom from the house of saul, and to set up the throne of david over
israel and over judah, from dan even to beersheba.

3:11 and he could not answer abner a word again, because he feared
him.

3:12 and abner sent messengers to david on his behalf, saying, whose
is the land? saying also, make thy league with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all israel unto thee.

3:13 and he said, well; i will make a league with thee: but one thing
i require of thee, that is, thou shalt not see my face, except thou
first bring michal s
 
 ___________________________
 
aul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

3:14 and david sent messengers to ishbosheth saul's son, saying,
deliver me my wife michal, which i espoused to me for an hundred
foreskins of the philistines.

3:15 and ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
phaltiel the son of laish.

3:16 and her husband went with her along weeping behind her to
bahurim.

then said abner unto him, go, return. and he returned.

3:17 and abner had communication with the elders of israel, saying, ye
sought for david in times past to be king ove
 
 ___________________________
 
r you: 3:18 now then do
it: for the lord hath spoken of david, saying, by the hand of my
servant david i will save my people israel out of the hand of the
philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

3:19 and abner also spake in the ears of benjamin: and abner went also
to speak in the ears of david in hebron all that seemed good to
israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of benjamin.

3:20 so abner came to david to hebron, and twenty men with him. and
david made abner and the men that were with him a feast.

3:21 and abner said unto david, i will arise and go, and will gather
all israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth.
and david sent abner away; and he went in peace.

3:22 and, behold, the servants of david and joab came from pursuing a
troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but abner was not with
david in hebron; for he had sent him away, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t that was with him were come, they told
joab, saying, abner the son of ner came to the king, and he hath sent
him away, and he is gone in peace.

3:24 then joab came to the king, and said, what hast thou done?
behold, abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away,
and he is quite gone?  3:25 thou knowest abner the son of ner, that he
came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and
to know all that thou doest.

3:26 and when joab was come out from david, he sent messengers after
abner, which brought him again from the well of sirah: but david knew
it not.

3:27 and when abner was returned to hebron, joab took him aside in the
gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
rib, that he died, for the blood of asahel his brother.

3:28 and afterward when david heard it, he said, i and my kingdom are
guiltless before the lord for ever from the blood of abner the son of
ner: 3:29 let it rest on the head of joab, and o
 
 ___________________________
 
n all his father's
house; and let there not fail from the house of joab one that hath an
issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth
on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

3:30 so joab, and abishai his brother slew abner, because he had slain
their brother asahel at gibeon in the battle.

3:31 and david said to joab, and to all the people that were with him,
rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before
abner. and king david himself followed the bier.

3:32 and they buried abner in hebron: and the king lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of abner; and all the people wept.

3:33 and the king lamented over abner, and said, died abner as a fool
dieth?  3:34 thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters:
as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. and all the
people wept again over him.

3:35 and when all the people came to cause david to eat meat while it
was yet day, david sware, 
 
 ___________________________
 
f the day to the house of ishbosheth, who lay
on a bed at noon.

4:6 and they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
rechab and baanah his brother escaped.

4:7 for when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and
took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

4:8 and they brought the head of ishbosheth unto david to hebron, and
said to the king, behold the head of ishbosheth the son of saul thine
enemy, which sought thy life; and the lord hath avenged my lord the
king this day of saul, and of his seed.

4:9 and david answered rechab and baanah his brother, the sons of
rimmon the beerothite, and said unto them, as the lord liveth, who
hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, 4:10 when one told me,
saying, behold, saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, i
took hold of him, and sle
 
 ___________________________
 
w him in ziklag, who thought that i would
have given him a reward for his tidings: 4:11 how much more, when
wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his
bed? shall i not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and
take you away from the earth?  4:12 and david commanded his young men,
and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged
them up over the pool in hebron. but they took the head of ishbosheth,
and buried it in the sepulchre of abner in hebron.

5:1 then came all the tribes of israel to david unto hebron, and
spake, saying, behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

5:2 also in time past, when saul was king over us, thou wast he that
leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord said to thee, thou
shalt feed 
 
 ___________________________
 
my people israel, and thou shalt be a captain over israel.

5:3 so all the elders of israel came to the king to hebron; and king
david made a league with them in hebron before the lord: and they
anointed david king over israel.

5:4 david was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years.

5:5 in hebron he reigned over judah seven years and six months: and in
jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all israel and judah.

5:6 and the king and his men went to jerusalem unto the jebusites, the
inhabitants of the land: which spake unto david, saying, except thou
take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither:
thinking, david cannot come in hither.

5:7 nevertheless david too
 
 ___________________________
 
k the strong hold of zion: the same is the
city of david.

5:8 and david said on that day, whosoever getteth up to the gutter,
and smiteth the jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated
of david's soul, he shall be chief and captain. wherefore they said,
the blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

5:9 so david dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of david. and
david built round about from millo and inward.

5:10 and david went on, and grew great, and the lord god of hosts was
with him.

5:11 and hiram king of tyre sent messengers to david, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built david an house.

5:12 and david perceived that the lord had established him king over
israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people israel's
sake.

5:13 and david took him more concubines and wives out of jerusalem,
after he was come from hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters
born to d
 
 ___________________________
 
avid.

5:14 and these be the names of those that were born unto him in
jerusalem; shammuah, and shobab, and nathan, and solomon, 5:15 ibhar
also, and elishua, and nepheg, and japhia, 5:16 and elishama, and
eliada, and eliphalet.

5:17 but when the philistines heard that they had anointed david king
over israel, all the philistines came up to seek david; and david
heard of it, and went down to the hold.

5:18 the philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
rephaim.

5:19 and david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go up to the
philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and the lord said
unto david, go up: for i will doubtless deliver the philistines into
thine hand.

5:20 and david came to baalperazim, and david smote them there, and
said, the lord hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the
breach of 
 
 ___________________________
 
waters. therefore he called the name of that place
baalperazim.

5:21 and there they left their images, and david and his men burned
them.

5:22 and the philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in
the valley of rephaim.

5:23 and when david enquired of the lord, he said, thou shalt not go
up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against
the mulberry trees.

5:24 and let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then
shall the lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the
philistines.

5:25 and david did so, as the lord had commanded him; and smote the
philistines from geba until thou come to gazer.

6:1 again, david 
 
 ___________________________
 
gathered together all the chosen men of israel,
thirty thousand.

6:2 and david arose, and went with all the people that were with him
from baale of judah, to bring up from thence the ark of god, whose
name is called by the name of the lord of hosts that dwelleth between
the cherubims.

6:3 and they set the ark of god upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of abinadab that was in gibeah: and uzzah and ahio, the sons
of abinadab, drave the new cart.

6:4 and they brought it out of the house of abinadab which was at
gibeah, accompanying the ark of god: an
 
 ___________________________
 
d ahio went before the ark.

6:5 and david and all the house of israel played before the lord on
all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

6:6 and when they came to nachon's threshingfloor, uzzah put forth his
hand to the ark of god, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

6:7 and the anger of the lord was kindled against uzzah; and god smote
him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of god.

6:8 and david was displeased, bec
 
 ___________________________
 
ause the lord had made a breach upon
uzzah: and he called the name of the place perezuzzah to this day.

6:9 and david was afraid of the lord that day, and said, how shall the
ark of the lord come to me?  6:10 so david would not remove the ark of
the lord unto him into the city of david: but david carried it aside
into the house of obededom the gittite.

6:11 and the ark of the lord continued in the house of obededom the
gittite three months: and the lord blessed obededom, and all his
household.

6:12 and it was told king david, saying, the lord hath blessed the
house of obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the
ark of god. so david went and brought up the ark of god from the house
of obededom into the city of david with gladness.

6:13 and it was so, that wh
 
 ___________________________
 
en they that bare the ark of the lord had
gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

6:14 and david danced before the lord with all his might; and david
was girded with a linen ephod.

6:15 so david and all the house of israel brought up the ark of the
lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 and as the ark of the lord came into the city of david, michal
saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king david leaping
and dancing before the lord; and she despised him in her heart.

6:17 and they brought in the ark of the lord, and set it in his place,
in the midst of the tabernacle that david had pitched for it: and
david offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the lord.

6:18 and as soon as david had made an end of offering burnt offerings
and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the lord of
hosts.

6:19 and he dealt among all the people, even among the whole m
 
 ___________________________
 
ultitude
of israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread,
and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. so all the people
departed every one to his house.

6:20 then david returned to bless his household. and michal the
daughter of saul came out to meet david, and said, how glorious was
the king of israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of
the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly
uncovereth himself!  6:21 and david said unto michal, it was before
the lord, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me ruler over the people of the lord, over israel:
therefore will i play before the lord.

6:22 and i will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine
own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them
shall i be had in honour.

6:23 therefore michal the daughter of saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 and it came to pass, when the
 
 ___________________________
 
 king sat in his house, and the lord
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 7:2 that the king
said unto nathan the prophet, see now, i dwell in an house of cedar,
but the ark of god dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 and nathan said to the king, go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the lord is with thee.

7:4 and it came to pass that night, that the word of the lord came
unto nathan, saying, 7:5 go and tell my servant david, thus saith the
lord, shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?  7:6 whereas i
have not dwelt in any house since the time that i brought up the
children of israel out of egypt, even to this day, but have walked in
a tent and in a tabernacle.

7:7 in all the places wherein i have walked with all the children of
israel spake i a word with any of the tribes of israel, whom i
commanded to feed my people israel, saying, why build ye not me an
house of cedar?  7:8 now therefore so sha
 
 ___________________________
 
lt thou say unto my servant
david, thus saith the lord of hosts, i took thee from the sheepcote,
from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over israel: 7:9
and i was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all
thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like
unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

7:10 moreover i will appoint a place for my people israel, and will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no
more; neither shall the ch
 
 ___________________________
 
r ever.

7:14 i will be his father, and he shall be my son. if he commit
iniquity, i will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 but my mercy shall not depart away from
him, as i took it from saul, whom i put away before thee.

7:16 and thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

7:17 according to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

7:18 then went king david in, and sat before the lord, and he said,
who am i, o lord god? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  7:19 and this was yet a small thing in thy sight, o lord
god; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great
while to come. and is this the manner of man, o lord god?  7:20 and
what can david say more unto thee? for thou, lord god, knowest thy
servant.

7:21 for thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou
 
 ___________________________
 
ch thou redeemedst to thee from egypt, from the
nations and their gods?  7:24 for thou hast confirmed to thyself thy
people israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, lord, art
become their god.

7:25 and now, o lord god, the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do
as thou hast said.

7:26 and let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, the lord of hosts
is the god over israel: and let the house of thy servant david be
established before thee.

7:27 for thou, o lord of hosts, god of israel, hast revealed to thy
servant, saying, i will build thee an house: therefore hath thy
servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

7:28 and now, o lord god, thou art that god, and thy words be true,
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 7:29 therefore
now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee: for thou, o lord god, hast spo
 
 ___________________________
 
ken it:
and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for
ever.

8:1 and after this it came to pass that david smote the philistines,
and subdued them: and david took methegammah out of the hand of the
philistines.

8:2 and he smote moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death,
and with one full line to keep alive. and so the moabites became
david's servants, and brought gifts.

8:3 david smote also hadadezer, the son of rehob, king of zobah, as he
went to recover his border at the river euphrates.

8:4 and david took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and david houghed all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.

8:5 and when the syrians of damascus came to succour hadadezer king of
zobah, david slew of the syrians two and twenty thousand men.

8:6 then david put garrisons in syria of damasc
 
 ___________________________
 
us: and the syrians
became servants to david, and brought gifts. and the lord preserved
david whithersoever he went.

8:7 and david took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
hadadezer, and brought them to jerusalem.

8:8 and from betah, and from berothai, cities of hadadezer, king david
took exceeding much brass.

8:9 when toi king of hamath heard that david had smitten all the host
of hadadezer, 8:10 then toi sent joram his son unto king david, to
salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against hadadezer,
and smitten him: for hadadezer had wars with toi. and joram brought
with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:
8:11 which also king david did dedicate unto the lord, with the silver
and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued; 8:12
of syria, and of moab, and of the children of ammon, and of the
philistines, and of amalek, and of the spoil of hadadezer, son of
rehob, 
 
 ___________________________
 
king of zobah.

8:13 and david gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

8:14 and he put garrisons in edom; throughout all edom put he
garrisons, and all they of edom became david's servants. and the lord
preserved david whithersoever he went.

8:15 and david reigned over all israel; and david executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.

8:16 and joab the son of zeruiah was over the host; and jehoshaphat
the son of ahilud was recorder; 8:17 and zadok the son of ahitub, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, were the priests; and seraiah was the
scribe; 8:18 and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over both the
cherethites and the pelethites; and david's sons were chief rulers.

9:1 and david said, is there yet any that is left of the house of
saul, that i may shew him kindne
 
 ___________________________
 
ss for jonathan's sake?  9:2 and there
was of the house of saul a servant whose name was ziba. and when they
had called him unto david, the king said unto him, art thou ziba?  and
he said, thy servant is he.

9:3 and the king said, is there not yet any of the house of saul, that
i may shew the kindness of god unto him? and ziba said unto the king,
jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

9:4 and the king said unto him, where is he? and ziba said unto the
king, behold, he is in the house of machir, the son of ammiel, in
lodebar.

9:5 then king david sent, and fetched him out of the house of machir,
the s
 
 ___________________________
 
on of ammiel, from lodebar.

9:6 now when mephibosheth, the son of jonathan, the son of saul, was
come unto david, he fell on his face, and did reverence. and david
said, mephibosheth. and he answered, behold thy servant!  9:7 and
david said unto him, fear not: for i will surely shew thee kindness
for jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of
saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.

9:8 and he bowed himself, and said, what is thy servant, that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as i am?  9:9 then the king called
to ziba, saul's servant, and said unto him, i have given unto thy
master's son all that pertained to saul and to all his house.

9:10 thou therefore, an
 
 ___________________________
 
o. as for
mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the
king's sons.

9:12 and mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was micha. and all
that dwelt in the house of ziba were servants unto mephibosheth.

9:13 so mephibosheth dwelt in jerusalem: for he did eat continually at
the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.

10:1 and it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
ammon died, and hanun his son reigned in his stead.

10:2 then said david, i will shew kindness unto hanun the son of
nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. and david sent to
comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. and david's
servants came into the land of the children of ammon.

10:3 and the princes of the children of ammon said unto hanun their
lord, thinkest thou that david doth honour thy father, that he hath
sent comforters unto thee? hath not david rather sent his servants
unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to
 
 ___________________________
 
 overthrow it?
10:4 wherefore hanun took david's servants, and shaved off the one
half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even
to their buttocks, and sent them away.

10:5 when they told it unto david, he sent to meet them, because the
men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, tarry at jericho until
your beards be grown, and then return.

10:6 and when the children of ammon saw that they stank before david,
the children of ammon sent and hired the syrians of bethrehob and the
syrians of zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king maacah a
thousand men, and of ishtob twelve thousand men.

10:7 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

10:8 and the children of ammon came out, and put the battle in array
at the entering in of the gate: and the syrians of zoba, and of rehob,
and ishtob, and maacah, were by themselves in the field.

10:9 when joab saw th
 
 ___________________________
 
 children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
then fled they also before abishai, and entered into the city. so joab
returned from the children of ammon, and came to jerusalem.

10:15 and when the syrians saw that they were smitten before israel,
they gathered themselves together.

10:16 and hadarezer sent, and brought out the syrians that were beyond
the river: and they came to helam; and shobach the captain of the host
of hadarezer went before them.

10:17 and when it was told david, he gathered all israel together, and
passed over jordan, and came to helam. and the syrians set themselves
in array against david, and fought with him.

10:18 and the syrians fled before israel; and david slew the men of
seven hundred chariots of the syrians, and forty thousand horsemen,
and smote shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

10:19 and when all the kings that were servants to hadarezer saw that
they were smitten before israel, they made peace with israel, and
s
 
 ___________________________
 
erved them. so the syrians feared to help the children of ammon any
more.

11:1 and it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when
kings go forth to battle, that david sent joab, and his servants with
him, and all israel; and they destroyed the children of ammon, and
besieged rabbah. but david tarried still at jerusalem.

11:2 and it came to pass in an eveningtide, that david arose from off
his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the
roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful
to look upon.

11:3 and david sent and enquired after the woman. and one said, is not
this bathsheba, the daughter of eliam, the wife of uriah the hittite?
11:4 and david sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto
him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness:
and she returned unto her house.

11:5 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the woman conceived, and sent and told david, and said, i am
with child.

11:6 and david sent to joab, saying, send me uriah the hittite. and
joab sent uriah to david.

11:7 and when uriah was come unto him, david demanded of him how joab
did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

11:8 and david said to uriah, go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.
and uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a
mess of meat from the king.

11:9 but uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the
servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

11:10 and when they had told david, saying, uriah went not down unto
his house, david said unto uriah, camest thou not from thy journey?
why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?  11:11 and uriah
said unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
david, the ark, and israel, and judah, abide in tents; and
my lord joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open
fields; shall i then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to
lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, i will not
do this thing.

11:12 and david said to uriah, tarry here to day also, and to morrow i
will let thee depart. so uriah abode in jerusalem that day, and the
morrow.

11:13 and when david had called him, he did eat and drink before him;
and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with
the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

11:14 and it came to pass in the morning, that david wrote a letter to
joab, and sent it by the hand of uriah.

11:15 and he wrote in the letter, saying, set ye uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may
be smitten, and die.

11:16 and it came to pass, when joab observed
 
 ___________________________
 
 the city, that he
assigned uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

11:17 and the men of the city went out, and fought with joab: and
there fell some of the people of the servants of david; and uriah the
hittite died also.

11:18 then joab sent and told david all the things concerning the war;
11:19 and charged the messenger, saying, when thou hast made an end of
telling the matters of the war unto the king, 11:20 and if so be that
the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, wherefore approached ye
so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall?  11:21 who smote abimelech the son of
jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him
from the wall, that he died in thebez? why went ye 
 
 ___________________________
 
nigh the wall? then
say thou, thy servant uriah the hittite is dead also.

11:22 so the messenger went, and came and shewed david all that joab
had sent him for.

11:23 and the messenger said unto david, surely the men prevailed
against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them
even unto the entering of the gate.

11:24 and the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and
some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant uriah the hittite
is dead also.

11:25 then david said unto the messenger, thus shalt thou say unto
joab, let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one
as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city
 
 ___________________________
 
, and
overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

11:26 and when the wife of uriah heard that uriah her husband was
dead, she mourned for her husband.

11:27 and when the mourning was past, david sent and fetched her to
his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. but the thing
that david had done displeased the lord.

12:1 and the lord sent nathan unto david. and he came unto him, and
said unto him, there were two men in one city; the one rich, and the
other poor.

12:2 the rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds: 12:3 but the
poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought
and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his
children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and
lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

12:4 and there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he sp
 
 ___________________________
 
ared to
take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring
man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed
it for the man that was come to him.

12:5 and david's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he
said to nathan, as the lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing
shall surely die: 12:6 and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

12:7 and nathan said to david, thou art the man. thus saith the lord
god of israel, i anointed thee king over israel, and i delivered thee
out of the hand of saul; 12:8 and i gave thee thy master's house, and
thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of israel
and of judah; and if that had been too little, i would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the lord, to do
evil in his sight? thou hast killed uriah the hittite with the swo
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore the sword shall never depart from thine house;
because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of uriah the
hittite to be thy wife.

12:11 thus saith the lord, behold, i will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house, and i will take thy wives before thine eyes,
and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of this sun.

12:12 for thou didst it secretly: but i will do this thing before all
israel, and before the sun.

12:13 and david said unto nathan, i have sinned against the lord. and
nathan said unto david, the lord also hath put away thy sin; thou
shalt not die.

12:14 howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to
the enemies of the lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto
thee shall surely die.

12:15 and nathan departed unto his house. and the lord struck the
child that uriah's wife bare unto david, and it was very sick.

12:16 david therefore besought god for the child; and dav
 
 ___________________________
 
id fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

12:17 and the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him
up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them.

12:18 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. and
the servants of david feared to tell him that the child was dead: for
they said, behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself,
if we tell him that the child is dead?  12:19 but when david saw that
his servants whispered, david perceived that the child was dead:
therefore david said unto his servants, is the child dead? and they
said, he is dead.

12:20 then david arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed
himself, and cha
 
 ___________________________
 
then said his servants unto him, what thing is this that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive;
but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 and he said, while the child was yet alive, i fasted and wept:
for i said, who can tell whether god will be gracious to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast?
can i bring him back again? i shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 and david comforted bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name solomon:
and the lord loved him.

12:25 and he sent by the hand of nathan the prophet; and he called his
name jedidiah, because of the lord.

12:26 and joab fought against rabbah of the children of ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 and joab sent messengers to david, and said, i have fought
against rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

12:28 now therefore gathe
 
 ___________________________
 
r the rest of the people together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest i take the city, and it be called
after my name.

12:29 and david gathered all the people together, and went to rabbah,
and fought against it, and took it.

12:30 and he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight
whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set
on david's head. and he brought forth the spoil of the city in great
abundance.

12:31 and he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the
cities of the children of ammon. so david and all the people returned
unto jerusalem.

13:1 and it came to pass after this, that absalom the son of david had
a fair sister, whose name was tamar; and amnon the son
 
 ___________________________
 
 of david loved
her.

13:2 and amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister tamar;
for she was a virgin; and amnon thought it hard for him to do anything
to her.

13:3 but amnon had a friend, whose name was jonadab, the son of
shimeah david's brother: and jonadab was a very subtil man.

13:4 and he said unto him, why art thou, being the king's son, lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? and amnon said unto him, i
love tamar, my brother absalom's sister.

13:5 and jonadab said unto him, lay thee down on thy bed, and make
thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, i
pray thee, let my sister tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the
meat in my sight, that i may see it, and eat it at her hand.
 
 ___________________________
 


13:6 so amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was
come to see him, amnon said unto the king, i pray thee, let tamar my
sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that i may eat
at her hand.

13:7 then david sent home to tamar, saying, go now to thy brother
amnon's house, and dress him meat.

13:8 so tamar went to her brother amnon's house; and he was laid down.
and she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and
did bake the cakes.

13:9 and she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he
refused to eat. and amnon said, have out all men from me. and they
went out every man from him.

13:10 and amnon said unto tamar, bring the meat into the chamber, that
i may ea
 
 ___________________________
 
ers that were virgins apparelled. then his
servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

13:19 and tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers
colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
crying.

13:20 and absalom her brother said unto her, hath amnon thy brother
been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother;
regard not this thing. so tamar remained desolate in her brother
absalom's house.

13:21 but when king david heard of all these things, he was very
wroth.

13:22 and absalom spake unto his brother amnon neither good nor bad:
for absalom hated amnon, because he had forced his sister tamar.

13:23 and it came to pass after two full years, that absalom had
sheepshearers in baalhazor, which is beside ephraim: and absalom
invited all the king's sons.

13:24 and absalom came to the king, and said, behold now, thy servant
hath sheepshearers; let the king, i beseech thee, and his servants go
with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng's
sons go with him.

13:28 now absalom had commanded his servants, saying, mark ye now when
amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when i say unto you, smite
amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not i commanded you? be
courageous, and be valiant.

13:29 and the servants of absalom did unto amnon as absalom had
commanded.

then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his
mule, and fled.

13:30 and it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings
came to david, saying, absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and
there is not one of them left.

13:31 then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the
earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

13:32 and jonadab, the son of shimeah david's brother, answered and
said, let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men
the king's sons; for amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of
absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his
sister
 
 ___________________________
 
ted
up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the
way of the hill side behind him.

13:35 and jonadab said unto the king, behold, the king's sons come: as
thy servant said, so it is.

13:36 and it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and
wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

13:37 but absalom fled, and went to talmai, the son of ammihud, king
of geshur. and david mourned for his son every day.

13:38 so absalom fled, and went to geshur, and was there three years.

13:39 and the soul of king david longed to go forth unto absalom: for
he was comforted concerning amnon, seeing he was dead.

14:1 now joab the son of zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was
toward absalom.

14:2 and joab sent to tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and
said unto her, i pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourning apparel, and anoint no
 
 ___________________________
 
o jerusalem, then i
will serve the lord.

15:9 and the king said unto him, go in peace. so he arose, and went to
hebron.

15:10 but absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of israel,
saying, as soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall
say, absalom reigneth in hebron.

15:11 and with absalom went two hundred men out of jerusalem, that
were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any
thing.

15:12 and absalom sent for ahithophel the gilonite, david's
counsellor, from his city, even from giloh, while he offered
sacrifices. and the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased
continually with absalom.

15:13 and there came a messenger to david, saying, the hearts of the
men of israel are after absalom.

15:14 and david said unto all his servants that were with him at
jerusalem, arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from
absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring
evil upon us, and smit
 
 ___________________________
 
place, and abide with the king: for thou
art a stranger, and also an exile.

15:20 whereas thou camest but yesterday, should i this day make thee
go up and down with us? seeing i go whither i may, return thou, and
take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.

15:21 and ittai answered the king, and said, as the lord liveth, and
as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king
shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant
be.

15:22 and david said to ittai, go and pass over. and ittai the gittite
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with
him.

15:23 and all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people
passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook kidron, and
all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

15:24 and lo zadok also, and all the levites were with him, bearing
the ark of the covenant of god: and they set down the ark of god; and
abiathar went up, un
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have no delight in thee; behold, here am i, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.

15:27 the king said also unto zadok the priest, art not thou a seer?
return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, ahimaaz thy
son, and jonathan the son of abiathar.

15:28 see, i will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there
come word from you to certify me.

15:29 zadok therefore and abiathar carried the ark of god again to
jerusalem: and they tarried there.

15:30 and david went up by the ascent of mount olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up,
weeping as they went up.

15:31 and one told david, saying, ahithophel is among the conspirators
with absalom. and david said, o lord, i pray thee, turn the counsel of
ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 and it came to pass, that when david was come to the top of the
mount, where he worshipped 
 
 ___________________________
 
god, behold, hushai the archite came to
meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 15:33 unto whom
david said, if thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 but if thou return to the city, and say unto absalom, i
will be thy servant, o king; as i have been thy father's servant
hitherto, so will i now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me
defeat the counsel of ahithophel.

15:35 and hast thou not there with thee zadok and abiathar the
priests?  therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt
hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to zadok a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd abiathar
the priests.

15:36 behold, they have there with them their two sons, ahimaaz
zadok's son, and jonathan abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send
unto me every thing that ye can hear.

15:37 so hushai david's friend came into the city, and absalom came
into jerusalem.

16:1 and when david was a little past the top of the hill, behold,
ziba the servant of mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses
saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred
bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of
wine.

16:2 and the king said unto ziba, what meanest thou by these? and ziba
said, the asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as
be faint in the wilderne
 
 ___________________________
 
ss may drink.

16:3 and the king said, and where is thy master's son? and ziba said
unto the king, behold, he abideth at jerusalem: for he said, to day
shall the house of israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

16:4 then said the king to ziba, behold, thine are all that pertained
unto mephibosheth. and ziba said, i humbly beseech thee that i may
find grace in thy sight, my lord, o king.

16:5 and when king david came to bahurim, behold, thence came out a
man of the family of the house of saul, whose name was shimei, the son
of gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

16:6 and he cast stones at david, and at all the servants of king
david: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right
hand and on his left.

16:7 and thus said shimei when he cursed, come out, come out, thou
bloody man, and thou man of belial: 16:8 the lord hath returned upon
thee all the blood of the hou
 
 ___________________________
 
 of saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of
absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody man.

16:9 then said abishai the son of zeruiah unto the king, why should
this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, i pray thee, and
take off his head.

16:10 and the king said, what have i to do with you, ye sons of
zeruiah?  so let him curse, because the lord hath said unto him, curse
david. who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so?  16:11 and
david said to abishai, and to all his servants, behold, my son, which
came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this
benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the lord hath
bidden him.

16:12 it may be that the lord will look on mine affliction, and that
the lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.

16:13 and as david and his men went by the way, shimei went along on
the hill's s
 
 ___________________________
 
ide over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw
stones at him, and cast dust.

16:14 and the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,
and refreshed themselves there.

16:15 and absalom, and all the people the men of israel, came to
jerusalem, and ahithophel with him.

16:16 and it came to pass, when hushai the archite, david's friend,
was come unto absalom, that hushai said unto absalom, god save the
king, god save the king.

16:17 and absalom said to hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend?
why wentest thou not with thy friend?  16:18 and hushai said unto
absalom, nay; but whom the lord, and this people, and all the men of
israel, choose, his will i be, and with him will i abide.

16:19 and again, whom should i serve? should i not serve in the
presence of his son? as i have served in thy father's pres
 
 ___________________________
 
er's
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all israel shall
hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 so they spread absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all
israel.

16:23 and the counsel of ahithophel, which he counselled in those
days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of god: so was all
the counsel of ahithophel both with david and with absalom.

17:1 moreover ahithophel said unto absalom, let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and i will arise and pursue after david this
night: 17:2 and i will come upon him while he is weary and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him
shall flee; and i will smite the king only: 17:3 and i will bring back
all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

17:4 and the saying
 
 ___________________________
 
tone found there.

17:14 and absalom and all the men of israel said, the counsel of
hushai the archite is better than the counsel of ahithophel. for the
lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of ahithophel, to the
intent that the lord might bring evil upon absalom.

17:15 then said hushai unto zadok and to abiathar the priests, thus
and thus did ahithophel counsel absalom and the elders of israel; and
thus and thus have i counselled.

17:16 now therefore send quickly, and tell david, saying, lodge not
this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over;
lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

17:17 now jonathan and ahimaaz stayed by enrogel; for they might not
be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and
they went and told king david.

17:18 nevertheless a lad saw them, and told absalom: but they went
both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in bahurim, which
had a well in his court; w
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth,
and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

17:20 and when absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they
said, where is ahimaaz and jonathan? and the woman said unto them,
they be gone over the brook of water. and when they had sought and
could not find them, they returned to jerusalem.

17:21 and it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up
out of the well, and went and told king david, and said unto david,
arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath ahithophel
counselled against you.

17:22 then david arose, and all the people that were with him, and
they passed over jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of
them that was not gone over jordan.

17:23 and when ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his
city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died,

 
 ___________________________
 
and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

17:24 then david came to mahanaim. and absalom passed over jordan, he
and all the men of israel with him.

17:25 and absalom made amasa captain of the host instead of joab:
which amasa was a man's son, whose name was ithra an israelite, that
went in to abigail the daughter of nahash, sister to zeruiah joab's
mother.

17:26 so israel and absalom pitched in the land of gilead.

17:27 and it came to pass, when david was come to mahanaim, that shobi
the son of nahash of rabbah of the children of ammon, and machir the
son of ammiel of lodebar, and barzillai the gileadite of rogelim,
17:28 brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
parched pulse, 17:29 and honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of
kine, for david, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for
they said, the people is hungry, and weary, and thirs
 
 ___________________________
 
ty, in the
wilderness.

18:1 and david numbered the people that were with him, and set
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them.

18:2 and david sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of
joab, and a third part under the hand of abishai the son of zeruiah,
joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of ittai the gittite.
and the king said unto the people, i will surely go forth with you
myself also.

18:3 but the people answered, thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
it i
 
 ___________________________
 
will do. and
the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands.

18:5 and the king commanded joab and abishai and ittai, saying, deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with absalom. and all the
people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
absalom.

18:6 so the people went out into the field against israel: and the
battle was in the wood of ephraim; 18:7 where the people of israel
were slain before the servants of david, and there was there a great
slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

18:8 for the battle was there scattered over the face of all the
country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 and absalom met the servants of david. and absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

18:10
 
 ___________________________
 
e the king's son is dead.

18:21 then said joab to cushi, go tell the king what thou hast seen.
and cushi bowed himself unto joab, and ran.

18:22 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok yet again to joab, but
howsoever, let me, i pray thee, also run after cushi. and joab said,
wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings
ready?  18:23 but howsoever, said he, let me run. and he said unto
him, run. then ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran cushi.

18:24 and david sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to
the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and behold a man running alone.

18:25 and the watchman cried, and told the king. and the king said, if
he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. and he came apace, and
drew near.

18:26 and the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman
called unto the porter, and said, behold another man running alone.
and the king said, he also bringeth tidings.
 
 ___________________________
 
th sit in the gate. and all the
people came before the king: for israel had fled every man to his
tent.

19:9 and all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
israel, saying, the king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and
he delivered us out of the hand of the philistines; and now he is fled
out of the land for absalom.

19:10 and absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?  19:11
and king david sent to zadok and to abiathar the priests, saying,
speak unto the elders of judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 and say ye to amasa,
art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? god do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the
room of joab.

19:14 and he bowed the heart of all the men of judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 so the king returned, and came to jordan. and judah came to
gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over jordan.

19:16 and shimei the son of gera, a benjamite, which was of bahurim,
hasted and came down with the men of judah to meet king david.

19:17 and there were a thousand men of benjamin with him, and ziba the
servant of the house of saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty
servants with him; and they went over jordan before the king.

19:18 and there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's
household, and to do what he thought good. and shimei the son of gera
fell down before the king, as he was come over jordan; 19:19 and said
unto the king, let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do
thou remember th
 
 ___________________________
 
at which thy servant did perversely the day that my
lord the king went out of jerusalem, that the king should take it to
his heart.

19:20 for thy servant doth know that i have sinned: therefore, behold,
i am come the first this day of all the house of joseph to go down to
meet my lord the king.

19:21 but abishai the son of zeruiah answered and said, shall not
shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the lord's
anointed?  19:22 and david said, what have i to do with you, ye sons
of zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in israel? for do not i know
that i am this day king over israel?  19:23 therefore the king said
unto shimei, thou shalt not die. and the king sware unto him.

19:24 and mephibosheth the son of saul came down to meet the king, and
had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until
 
 ___________________________
 
he people went over jordan. and when the king was come
over, the king kissed barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto
his own place.

19:40 then the king went on to gilgal, and chimham went on with him:
and all the people of judah conducted the king, and also half the
people of israel.

19:41 and, behold, all the men of israel came to the king, and said
unto the king, why have our brethren the men of judah stolen thee
away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all david's
men with him, over jordan?  19:42 and all the men of judah answered
the men of israel, because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore
then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king's
cost? or hath he given us any gift?  19:43 and the men of israel
answered the men of judah, and said, we have ten parts in the king,
and we have also more right in david than ye: why then did ye despise
us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king?
and the wo
 
 ___________________________
 
rds of the men of judah were fiercer than the words of the
men of israel.

20:1 and there happened to be there a man of belial, whose name was
sheba, the son of bichri, a benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and
said, we have no part in david, neither have we inheritance in the son
of jesse: every man to his tents, o israel.

20:2 so every man of israel went up from after david, and followed
sheba the son of bichri: but the men of judah clave unto their king,
from jordan even to jerusalem.

20:3 and david came to his house at jerusalem; and the king took the
ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put
them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. so they were
shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

20:4 then said the king to amasa, assemble me the men of judah within
three days, and be thou here present.
 
 ___________________________
 


20:5 so amasa went to assemble the men of judah: but he tarried longer
than the set time which he had appointed him.

20:6 and david said to abishai, now shall sheba the son of bichri do
us more harm than did absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and
pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

20:7 and there went out after him joab's men, and the cherethites, and
the pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of
jerusalem, to pursue after sheba the son of bichri.

20:8 when they were at the great stone which is in gibeon, amasa went
before them. and joab's garment that he had put on
 
 ___________________________
 
ut.

20:9 and joab said to amasa, art thou in health, my brother? and joab
took amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

20:10 but amasa took no heed to the sword that was in joab's hand: so
he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to
the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. so joab and abishai
his brother pursued after sheba the son of bichri.

20:11 and one of joab's men stood by him, and said, he that favoureth
joab, and he that is for david, let him go after joab.

20:12 and amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. and
when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed amasa out
of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw
that every one that came by him stood still.

20:13 when he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on
after joab, to pursue after sheba the son of bichri.

20:14 and he went through all the tribes of israel unto abel, and to
bethmaachah, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
y shall surely ask counsel at abel: and so they ended the
matter.

20:19 i am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in israel: thou
seekest to destroy a city and a mother in israel: why wilt thou
swallow up the inheritance of the lord?  20:20 and joab answered and
said, far be it, far be it from me, that i should swallow up or
destroy.

20:21 the matter is not so: but a man of mount ephraim, sheba the son
of bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even
against david: deliver him only, and i will depart from the city. and
the woman said unto joab, behold, his head shall be thrown to thee
over the wall.

20:22 then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. and they
cut off the head of sheba the son of bichri, and cast it out to joab.
and he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to
his tent. and joab returned to jerusalem unto the king.

20:23 now joab was over all the host of israel: and benaiah the son of
jehoiada was o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver the cherethites and over the pelethites: 20:24 and
adoram was over the tribute: and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 and sheva was scribe: and zadok and abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 and ira also the jairite was a chief ruler about david.

21:1 then there was a famine in the days of david three years, year
after year; and david enquired of the lord. and the lord answered, it
is for saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the gibeonites.

21:2 and the king called the gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
gibeonites were not of the children of israel, but of the remnant of
the amorites; and the children of israel had sworn unto them: and saul
sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of israel and judah.)
21:3 wherefore david said unto the gibeonites, what shall i do for
you?  and wherewith shal
 
 ___________________________
 
will i do for you.

21:5 and they answered the king, the man that consumed us, and that
devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any
of the coasts of israel, 21:6 let seven men of his sons be delivered
unto us, and we will hang them up unto the lord in gibeah of saul,
whom the lord did choose. and the king said, i will give them.

21:7 but the king spared mephibosheth, the son of jonathan the son of
saul, because of the lord's oath that was between them, between david
and jonathan the son of saul.

21:8 but the king took the two sons of rizpah the daughter of aiah,
whom she bare unto saul, armoni and mephibosheth; and the five sons of
michal the daughter of saul, whom she brought up for adriel the son of
barzillai the meholathite: 21:9 and he delivered them into the hands
of the gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the lord:
and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, in the begin
 
 ___________________________
 
ning of barley harvest.

21:10 and rizpah the daughter of aiah took sackcloth, and spread it
for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water
dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the
air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

21:11 and it was told david what rizpah the daughter of aiah, the
concubine of saul, had done.

21:12 and david went and took the bones of saul and the bones of
jonathan his son from the men of jabeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of bethshan, where the philistines had hanged them,
when the philistines had slain saul in gilboa: 21:13 and he brought up
from thence the bones of saul and the bones of jonathan his son; and
they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

21:14 and the bones of saul and jonathan his son buried they in the
country of benjamin in zelah, in the sepulchre
 
 ___________________________
 
 of kish his father: and
they performed all that the king commanded. and after that god was
intreated for the land.

21:15 moreover the philistines had yet war again with israel; and
david went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
philistines: and david waxed faint.

21:16 and ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight
of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he
being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain david.

21:17 but abishai the son of zeruiah succoured him, and smote the
philistine, and killed him. then the men of david sware unto him,
saying, thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench
not the light of israel.

21:18 and it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle
with the philistines at gob: then sibbechai the hushathite slew saph,
which was of the sons of the giant.

21:19 and there was again a battle in gob with the philistines, where
elhanan the 
 
 ___________________________
 
son of jaareoregim, a bethlehemite, slew the brother of
goliath the gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's
beam.

21:20 and there was yet a battle in gath, where was a man of great
stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six
toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

21:21 and when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimeah the
brother of david slew him.

21:22 these four were born to the giant in gath, and fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of his servants.

22:1 and david spake unto the lord the words of this song in the day
that the lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,
and out of the hand of saul: 22:2 and he said, the lord is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 the god of my rock; in him
will i trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, m
 
 ___________________________
 
 god
of the rock of my salvation.

22:48 it is god that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people
under me.

22:49 and that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast
delivered me from the violent man.

22:50 therefore i will give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the
heathen, and i will sing praises unto thy name.

22:51 he is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, unto david, and to his seed for evermore.

23:1 now these be the last words of david. david the son of jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the god
of jacob, and the sweet psalmist of israel, said, 23:2 the spirit of
the lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

23:3 the god of israel said, the rock of israel spake to me, he that
ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of god.

23:4 and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,

 
 ___________________________
 
o with god; yet he hath made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all
my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

23:6 but the sons of belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust
away, because they cannot be taken with hands: 23:7 but the man that
shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear;
and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.

23:8 these be the names of the mighty men whom david had: the
tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same
was adino the eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom
he slew at one time.

23:9 and after him was eleazar the son of dodo the ahohite, one of the
three mighty men with david, when they defied the philistines that
were there gathered together to battle, and the men of israel were
gone away: 23:10 he arose, and smote the philistines until his hand
was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: a
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord wrought a
great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to
spoil.

23:11 and after him was shammah the son of agee the hararite. and the
philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of
ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the philistines.

23:12 but he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and
slew the philistines: and the lord wrought a great victory.

23:13 and three of the thirty chief went down, and came to david in
the harvest time unto the cave of adullam: and the troop of the
philistines pitched in the valley of rephaim.

23:14 and david was then in an hold, and the garrison of the
philistines was then in bethlehem.

23:15 and david longed, and said, oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of bethlehem, which is by the gate!  23:16 and
the three mighty men brake through the host of the philistines, and
drew water out of the well of bethlehem, that was by the gate, and
took
 
 ___________________________
 
 it, and brought it to david: nevertheless he would not drink
thereof, but poured it out unto the lord.

23:17 and he said, be it far from me, o lord, that i should do this:
is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
therefore he would not drink it. these things did these three mighty
men.

23:18 and abishai, the brother of joab, the son of zeruiah, was chief
among three. and he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and
slew them, and had the name among three.

23:19 was he not 
 
 ___________________________
 
o lionlike men of moab: he
went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
23:21 and he slew an egyptian, a goodly man: and the egyptian had a
spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked
the spear out of the egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

23:22 these things did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among three mighty men.

23:23 he was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to
the first three. and david set him over his guard.

23:24 asahel the brother of joab was one of the thirty; elhanan the
son of dodo of bethlehem, 23:25 shammah the harodite, elika the
harodite, 23:26 helez the paltite, ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
23:27 abiezer the anethothite, mebunnai the hushathite, 23:28 zalmon
the ahohite, maharai the netophathite, 23:29 heleb the son of baanah,
a netophathite, ittai the son of ribai out of gibeah of the children
of benjamin, 23:30 benaiah the pirathonite, hiddai of th
 
 ___________________________
 
f sharar the hararite, 23:34
eliphelet the son of ahasbai, the son of the maachathite, eliam the
son of ahithophel the gilonite, 23:35 hezrai the carmelite, paarai the
arbite, 23:36 igal the son of nathan of zobah, bani the gadite, 23:37
zelek the ammonite, nahari the beerothite, armourbearer to joab the
son of zeruiah, 23:38 ira an ithrite, gareb an ithrite, 23:39 uriah
the hittite: thirty and seven in all.

24:1 and again the anger of the lord was kindled against israel, and
he moved david against them to say, go, number israel and judah.

24:2 for the king said to joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, go now through all the tribes of israel, from dan even to
beersheba, and number ye the people, that i may know the number of the
people.

24:3 and joab said unto the king, now the lord thy god add unto the
people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
this thing?  24:
 
 ___________________________
 
came to the strong hold of tyre, and to all the cities of the hivites,
and of the canaanites: and they went out to the south of judah, even
to beersheba.

24:8 so when they had gone through all the land, they came to
jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

24:9 and joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the
king: and there were in israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
drew the sword; and the men of judah were five hundred thousand men.

24:10 and david's heart smote him after that he had numbered the
people.

and david said unto the lord, i have sinned greatly in that i have
done: and now, i beseech thee, o lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant; for i have done very foolishly.

24:11 for when david was up in the morning, the word of the lord came
unto the prophet gad, david's seer, saying, 24:12 go and say unto
david, thus saith the lord, i offer thee three things; choose thee one
of them, that i may do it unto thee.

24:13 
 
 ___________________________
 
so gad came to david, and told him, and said unto him, shall
seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee
three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that
there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what
answer i shall return to him that sent me.

24:14 and david said unto gad, i am in a great strait: let us fall now
into the hand of the lord; for his mercies are great: and let me not
fall into the hand of man.

24:15 so the lord sent a pestilence upon israel from the morning even
to the time appointed: and there died of the people from dan even to
beersheba seventy thousand men.

24:16 and when the angel stretched out his hand upon jerusalem to
destroy it, the lord repented him of the evil, and said to the angel
that destroyed the people, it 
 
 ___________________________
 
is enough: stay now thine hand. and the
angel of the lord was by the threshingplace of araunah the jebusite.

24:17 and david spake unto the lord when he saw the angel that smote
the people, and said, lo, i have sinned, and i have done wickedly: but
these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, i pray thee, be
against me, and against my father's house.

24:18 and gad came that day to david, and said unto him, go up, rear
an altar unto the lord in the threshingfloor of araunah the jebusite.

24:19 and david, according to the saying of gad, went up as the lord
commanded.

24:20 and araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on
toward him: and araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on
his face upon the ground.

24:21 and araunah said, wherefore is my lord the king come to his
servant?  and david said, to buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build
 
 ___________________________
 

an altar unto the lord, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

24:22 and araunah said unto david, let my lord the king take and offer
up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt
sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen
for wood.

24:23 all these things did araunah, as a king, give unto the king. and
araunah said unto the king, the lord thy god accept thee.

24:24 and the king said unto araunah, nay; but i will surely buy it of
thee at a price: neither will i offer burnt offerings unto the lord my
god of that which doth cost me nothi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng. so david bought the
threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

24:25 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings. so the lord was intreated for the land,
and the plague was stayed from israel.




the first book of the kings

commonly called:

the third book of the kings


1:1 now king david was old and stricken in years; and they covered
him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

1:2 wherefore his servants said unto him, let there be sought for my
lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and
let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the
king may get heat.

1:3 so they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of
israel, and found abishag a shunammite, and brought her to the king.

1:4 and the damsel was very fair, and c
 
 ___________________________
 
 him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him.

1:6 and his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, why
hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother
bare him after absalom.

1:7 and he conferred with joab the son of zeruiah, and with abiathar
the priest: and they following adonijah helped him.

1:8 but zadok the priest, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and nathan
the prophet, and shimei, and rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
david, were not with adonijah.

1:9 and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
zoheleth, which is by enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of judah the king's servants: 1:10 but nathan
the prophet, and benaiah, and the mighty men, and solomon his brother,
he called not.

1:11 wherefore nathan spake unto bathsheba the mother of solomon,
saying, hast thou not heard that adonijah the son of haggith doth
reign, and david our lord knoweth it n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot?  1:12 now therefore come,
let me, i pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine
own life, and the life of thy son solomon.

1:13 go and get thee in unto king david, and say unto him, didst not
thou, my lord, o king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, assuredly
solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
why then doth adonijah reign?  1:14 behold, while thou yet talkest
there with the king, i also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 and bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
king was very old; and abishag the shunammite ministered unto the
king.

1:16 and bathsheba bowed, and did ob
 
 ___________________________
 
eep in
abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of
the host, and abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
before him, and say, god save king adonijah.

1:26 but me, even me thy servant, and zadok the priest, and benaiah
the son of jehoiada, and thy servant solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him?  1:28 then king david answered and said, call me bathsheba.
and she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.

1:29 and the king sware, and said, as the lord liveth, that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress, 1:30 even as i sware unto thee
by the lord god of israel, saying, assuredly solomon thy son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
will i certainly do this day.

1:31 then bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the king
 
 ___________________________
 
, and said, let my lord king david live for ever.

1:32 and king david said, call me zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada. and they came before the
king.

1:33 the king also said unto them, take with you the servants of your
lord, and cause solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to gihon: 1:34 and let zadok the priest and nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, god save king solomon.

1:35 then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and 
 
 ___________________________
 
sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and i have appointed him to
be ruler over israel and over judah.

1:36 and benaiah the son of jehoiada answered the king, and said,
amen: the lord god of my lord the king say so too.

1:37 as the lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
david.

1:38 so zadok the priest, and nathan the prophet, and benaiah the son
of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the pelethites, went down, and
caused solomon to ride upon king david's mule, and brought him to
gihon.

1:39 and zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed solomon. and they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, god save king solomon.

1:40 and all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 and adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar?  1:42 and while he yet spake, behold, jonathan the son of
abiathar the priest came; and adonijah said unto him, come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 and jonathan answered and said to adonijah, verily our lord king
david hath made solomon king.

1:44 and the king hath sent with him zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the
pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:
1:45 and zadok the priest and nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again. this is the noise that ye have heard.

1:46 and also solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.


 
 ___________________________
 
1:47 and moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king
david, saying, god make the name of solomon better than thy name, and
make his throne greater than thy throne. and the king bowed himself
upon the bed.

1:48 and also thus said the king, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
seeing it.

1:49 and all the guests that were with adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went every man his way.

1:50 and adonijah feared because of solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the h
 
 ___________________________
 
th caught hold on the horns of the altar,
saying, let king solomon swear unto me today that he will not slay his
servant with the sword.

1:52 and solomon said, if he will shew himself a worthy man, there
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 so king solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar.
and he came and bowed himself to king solomon: and solomon said unto
him, go to thine house.

2:1 now the days of david drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
solomon his son, saying, 2:2 i go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 and keep the charge of
the lord thy god, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
his word which he spake conce
 
 ___________________________
 
absalom thy brother.

2:8 and, behold, thou hast with thee shimei the son of gera, a
benjamite of bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day
when i went to mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at jordan, and i
sware to him by the lord, saying, i will not put thee to death with
the sword.

2:9 now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 so david slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
david.

2:11 and the days that david reigned over israel were forty years:
seven years reigned he in hebron, and thirty and three years reigned
he in jerusalem.

2:12 then sat solomon upon the throne of david his father; and his
kingdom was established greatly.

2:13 and adonijah the son of haggith came to bathsheba the mother of
solomon. and she said, comest thou peaceably? and he said, peaceably.

2:14 he said moreover, i have
 
 ___________________________
 
2:22 and king solomon answered and said unto his mother, and why dost
thou ask abishag the shunammite for adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for abiathar the
priest, and for joab the son of zeruiah.

2:23 then king solomon sware by the lord, saying, god do so to me, and
more also, if adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 now therefore, as the lord liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of david my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 and king solomon sent by the hand of benaiah the son of jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 and unto abiathar the priest said the king, get thee to anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but i will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the lord
god before david my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all
 
 ___________________________
 
me forth. and he said, nay; but i will die
here. and benaiah brought the king word again, saying, thus said joab,
and thus he answered me.

2:31 and the king said unto him, do as he hath said, and fall upon
him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood,
which joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.

2:32 and the lord shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell
upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the
sword, my father david not knowing thereof, to wit, abner the son of
ner, captain of the host of israel, and amasa the son of jether,
captain of the host of judah.

2:33 their blood shall therefore return upon the head of joab, and
upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon david, and upon his seed,
and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever
from the lord.

2:34 so benaiah the son of jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and
slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wi
 
 ___________________________
 
and said unto him, did i
not make thee to swear by the lord, and protested unto thee, saying,
know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, the word
that i have heard is good.

2:43 why then hast thou not kept the oath of the lord, and the
commandment that i have charged thee with?  2:44 the king said
moreover to shimei, thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart
is privy to, that thou didst to david my father: therefore the lord
shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head; 2:45 and king solomon
shall be blessed, and the throne of david shall be established before
the lord for ever.

2:46 so the king commanded benaiah the son of jehoiada; which went
out, and fell upon him, that he died. and the kingdom was established
in the hand of solomon.

3:1 and solomon made affinity with pharaoh king of egypt, and took
pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of david, until he
 
 ___________________________
 

had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the lord,
and the wall of jerusalem round about.

3:2 only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no
house built unto the name of the lord, until those days.

3:3 and solomon loved the lord, walking in the statutes of david his
father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

3:4 and the king went to gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 in gibeon the lord appeared to solomon in a dream by night: and
god said, ask what i shall give thee.

3:6 and solomon said, thou hast shewed unto thy servant david my
father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in uprig
 
 ___________________________
 
htness of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on his throne, as it is this day.

3:7 and now, o lord my god, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
david my father: and i am but a little child: i know not how to go out
or come in.

3:8 and thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.

3:9 give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that i may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people?  3:10 and the speech pleased the
lord, that solomon had asked this thing.

3:11 and god said unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
ding to discern judgment; 3:12 behold, i have done
according to thy words: lo, i have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

3:13 and i have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings
like unto thee all thy days.

3:14 and if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my
commandments, as thy father david did walk, then i will lengthen thy
days.

3:15 and solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. and he came to
jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the lord, and
offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a
feast to all his servants.

3:16 then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
stood before him.

3:17 and the one woman said, o my lord, i and this woman dwell in one
house; and i was delivered of a child with her in the
 
 ___________________________
 

4:33 and he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

4:34 and there came of all people to hear the wisdom of solomon, from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.

5:1 and hiram king of tyre sent his servants unto solomon; for he had
heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for
hiram was ever a lover of david.

5:2 and solomon sent to hiram, saying, 5:3 thou knowest how that david
my father could not build an house unto the name of the lord his god
for the wars which were about him on every side, until the lord put
them under the soles of his feet.

5:4 but now the lord my god hath given me rest on every side, so that
there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.

5:5 and, behold, i purpose to build an house unto the name of the lord
my god, as the lord spake unto david my father, saying
 
 ___________________________
 
an house unto
my name.

5:6 now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of
lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee
will i give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt
appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can
skill to hew timber like unto the sidonians.

5:7 and it came to pass, when hiram heard the words of solomon, that
he rejoiced greatly, and said, blessed be the lord this day, which
hath given unto david a wise son over this great people.

5:8 and hiram sent to solomon, saying, i have considered the things
which thou sentest to me for: and i will do all thy desire concerning
timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

5:9 my servants shall bring them down from lebanon unto the sea: and i
will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt
appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt
receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving 
 
 ___________________________
 
e built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with
beams and boards of cedar.

6:10 and then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits
high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.

6:11 and the word of the lord came to solomon, saying, 6:12 concerning
this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my
statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to
walk in them; then will i perform my word with thee, which i spake
unto david thy father: 6:13 and i will dwell among the children of
israel, and will not forsake my people israel.

6:14 so solomon built the house, and finished it.

6:15 and he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,
both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: and he
covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the
house with planks of fir.

6:16 and he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the
floor and the walls with boards of 
 
 ___________________________
 
re gold, five on the
right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, 7:50 and the bowls, and the
snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure
gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house,
the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the
temple.

7:51 so was ended all the work that king solomon made for the house of
the lord. and solomon brought in the things which david his father had
dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
among the treasures of the house of the lord.

8:1 then solomon assembled the elders of israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of israel, unto
king solomon in jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the
covenant of the lord out of the city of david, which is zion.

8:2 and all the men of israel assembled themselves unto king solomon
at the feast in the
 
 ___________________________
 
inister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the lord had filled the house of the lord.

8:12 then spake solomon, the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 i have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.

8:14 and the king turned his face about, and blessed all the
congregation of israel: (and all the congregation of israel stood;)
8:15 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, which spake with
his mouth unto david my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
saying, 8:16 since the day that i brought forth my people israel out
of egypt, i chose no city out of all the tribes of israel to build an
house, that my name might be therein; but i chose david to be over my
people israel.

8:17 and it was in the heart of david my father to build an house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto david my father, whereas it was in thine
heart to build an house unto my name, th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou didst well that it was in
thine heart.

8:19 nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my
name.

8:20 and the lord hath performed his word that he spake, and i am
risen up in the room of david my father, and sit on the throne of
israel, as the lord promised, and have built an house for the name of
the lord god of israel.

8:21 and i have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of egypt.

8:22 and solomon stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of
all the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands toward
heaven: 8:23 and he said, lord god of israel, there is no
 
 ___________________________
 
 god like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
8:24 who hast kept with thy servant david my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is this day.

8:25 therefore now, lord god of israel, keep with thy servant david my
father that thou promisedst him, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man in my sight to sit on the throne of israel; so that thy children
take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked
before me.

8:26 and now, o god of israel, let thy word, i pray thee, be verified,
which thou spakest unto thy servant david my father.

8:27 but will god indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that i
ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ittle to receive the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 and at that time solomon held a feast, and all israel with him, a
great congregation, from the entering in of hamath unto the river of
egypt, before the lord our god, seven days and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 on the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
goodness that the lord had done for david his servant, and for israel
his people.

9:1 and it came to pass, when solomon had finished the building of the
house of the lord, and the king's house, and all solomon's desire
which he was pleased to do, 9:2 that the lord appeared to solomon the
second time, as he had appeared unto him at gibeon.

9:3 and the lord said unto him, i have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication, that thou hast made before me: i have hallowed this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for eve
 
 ___________________________
 
r; and mine
eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

9:4 and if thou wilt walk before me, as david thy father walked, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that i
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments: 9:5
then i will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon israel for ever,
as i promised to david thy father, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man upon the throne of israel.

9:6 but if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your
children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which i
have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
9:7 then will i cut off israel out of the land which i have given
them; and this house, which i have hallowed for my name, will i cast
out of my sight; and israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all
people:
 
 ___________________________
 
tterly to destroy,
upon those did solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.

9:22 but of the children of israel did solomon make no bondmen: but
they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his
captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.

9:23 these were the chief of the officers that were over solomon's
work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that
wrought in the work.

9:24 but pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of david unto her
house which solomon had built for her: then did he build millo.

9:25 and three times in a year did solomon offer burnt offerings and
peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the lord, and he
burnt incense upon the altar that was before the lord. so he finished
the house.

9:26 and king solomon made a navy of ships in eziongeber, which is
beside eloth, on the shore of the red sea, in the land of edom.

9:27 and hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had
 
 ___________________________
 
rd
said unto the children of israel, ye shall not go in to them, neither
shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 and he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

11:4 for it came to pass, when solomon was old, that his wives turned
away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with
the lord his god, as was the heart of david his father.

11:5 for solomon went after ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians,
and after milcom the abomination of the ammonites.

11:6 and solomon did evil in the sight of the lord, and went not fully
after the lord, as did david his father.

11:7 then did solomon build an high place for chemosh, the abomination
of moab, in the hill that is before jerusalem, and for molech, the
abomination of the children of ammon.

11:8 and likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
 
 ___________________________
 
m the lord god of israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 11:10
and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
after other gods: but he kept not that which the lord commanded.

11:11 wherefore the lord said unto solomon, forasmuch as this is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which i
have commanded thee, i will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 notwithstanding in thy days i will not do it for david thy
father's sake: but i will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

11:13 howbeit i will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for david my servant's sake, and for jerusalem's sake
which i have chosen.

11:14 and the lord stirred up an adversary unto solomon, hadad the
edomite: he was of the king's seed in edom.

11:15 for it came to pass, when david was in edom, and joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had
smitten every mal
 
 ___________________________
 
, and they came to egypt, unto pharaoh king
of egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and
gave him land.

11:19 and hadad found great favour in the sight of pharaoh, so that he
gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of tahpenes
the queen.

11:20 and the sister of tahpenes bare him genubath his son, whom
tahpenes weaned in pharaoh's house: and genubath was in pharaoh's
household among the sons of pharaoh.

11:21 and when hadad heard in egypt that david slept with his fathers,
and that joab the captain of the host was dead, hadad said to pharaoh,
let me depart, that i may go to mine own country.

11:22 then pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered, nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 and god stirred him up another adversary, rezon the son of
eliadah, which fled from his lord hadadezer king of zobah: 11:24 and
he gathered men unto him, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd became captain over a band, when david
slew them of zobah: and they went to damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reigned in damascus.

11:25 and he was an adversary to israel all the days of solomon,
beside the mischief that hadad did: and he abhorred israel, and
reigned over syria.

11:26 and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephrathite of zereda,
solomon's servant, whose mother's name was zeruah, a widow woman, even
he lifted up his hand against the king.

11:27 and this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
ki
 
 ___________________________
 
ng: solomon built millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of
david his father.

11:28 and the man jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and solomon
seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over
all the charge of the house of joseph.

11:29 and it came to pass at that time when jeroboam went out of
jerusalem, that the prophet ahijah the shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 and ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pie
 
 ___________________________
 
ces: 11:31 and he said to jeroboam, take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the lord, the god of israel, behold, i will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (but he shall have one tribe for my servant david's
sake, and for jerusalem's sake, the city which i have chosen out of
all the tribes of israel:) 11:33 because that they have forsaken me,
and have worshipped ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians, chemosh
the god of the moabites, and milcom the god of the children of ammon,
and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine
eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did david his
father.

11:34 howbeit i will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but i
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ill make him prince all the days of his life for david my servant's
sake, whom i chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:
11:35 but i will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give
it unto thee, even ten tribes.

11:36 and unto his son will i give one tribe, that david my servant
may have a light alway before me in jerusalem, the city which i have
chosen me to put my name there.

11:37 and i will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that
thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over israel.

11:38 and it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that i command
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statutes and my commandments, as david my servant did; that i
will be with thee, and build thee a sure house,
 
 ___________________________
 
 as i built for david,
and will give israel unto thee.

11:39 and i will for this afflict the seed of david, but not for ever.

11:40 solomon sought therefore to kill jeroboam. and jeroboam arose,
and fled into egypt, unto shishak king of egypt, and was in egypt
until the death of solomon.

11:41 and the rest of the acts of solomon, and all that he did, and
his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of solomon?
11:42 and the time that solomon reigned in jerusalem over all israel
was forty years.

11:43 and solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of david h
 
 ___________________________
 
ung men, saying, my father made your yoke heavy, and
i will add to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but
i will chastise you with scorpions.

12:15 wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause
was from the lord, that he might perform his saying, which the lord
spake by ahijah the shilonite unto jeroboam the son of nebat.

12:16 so when all israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them,
the people answered the king, saying, what portion have we in david?
neither have we inheritance in the son of jesse: to your tents, o
israel: now see to thine own house, david. so israel departed unto
their tents.

12:17 but as for the children of israel which dwelt in the cities of
judah, rehoboam reigned over them.

12:18 then king rehoboam sent adoram, who was over the tribute; and
all israel stoned him with stones, that he died. therefore king
rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

12:19 so israel rebelled aga
 
 ___________________________
 
inst the house of david unto this day.

12:20 and it came to pass, when all israel heard that jeroboam was
come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and
made him king over all israel: there was none that followed the house
of david, but the tribe of judah only.

12:21 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he assembled all the
house of judah, with the tribe of benjamin, an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of israel, to bring the kingdom again to rehoboam the son of solomon.

12:22 but the word of god came unto shemaiah the man of god, saying,
12:23 speak unto rehoboam, the son of solomon, king of judah, and unto
all the house of judah and benjamin, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
he people,
saying, 12:24 thus saith the lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of israel: return every man to his
house; for this thing is from me. they hearkened therefore to the word
of the lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
lord.

12:25 then jeroboam built shechem in mount ephraim, and dwelt therein;
and went out from thence, and built penuel.

12:26 and jeroboam said in his heart, now shall the kingdom return to
the house of david: 12:27 if this people go up to do sacrifice in the
house of the lord at jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people
turn again unto their lord, even unto rehoboam king of judah, and they
shall kill me, and go again to rehoboam king of judah.

12:28 whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold,
and said unto them, it is too much for you to go up to jerusalem:
behold thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
egypt.

12:29 and he set the one in bethe
 
 ___________________________
 
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of
israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.

13:1 and, behold, there came a man of god out of judah by the word of
the lord unto bethel: and jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

13:2 and he cried against the altar in the word of the lord, and said,
o altar, altar, thus saith the lord; behold, a child shall be born
unto the house of david, josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer
the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's
bones shall be burnt upon thee.

13:3 and he gave a sign the same day, saying, this is the sign which
the lord hath spoken; behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it shall be poured out.

13:4 and it came to pass, when king jeroboam heard the saying of the
man of god, which had cried against the altar in bethel, that he put
forth his hand from the a
 
 ___________________________
 
n she cometh in,
that she shall feign herself to be another woman.

14:6 and it was so, when ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she
came in at the door, that he said, come in, thou wife of jeroboam; why
feignest thou thyself to be another? for i am sent to thee with heavy
tidings.

14:7 go, tell jeroboam, thus saith the lord god of israel, forasmuch
as i exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my
people israel, 14:8 and rent the kingdom away from the house of david,
and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant david, who
kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do
that only which was right in mine eyes; 14:9 but hast done evil above
all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other
gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me
behind thy back: 14:10 therefore, behold, i will bring evil upon the
house of jeroboam, and will cut off from jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ard, which kept
the door of the king's house.

14:28 and it was so, when the king went into the house of the lord,
that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard
chamber.

14:29 now the rest of the acts of rehoboam, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
14:30 and there was war between rehoboam and jeroboam all their days.

14:31 and rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david. and his mother's name was naamah an
ammonitess. and abijam his son reigned in his stead.

15:1 now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam the son of nebat
reigned abijam over judah.

15:2 three years reigned he in jerusalem. and his mother's name was
maachah, the daughter of abishalom.

15:3 and he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him: and his heart was not perfect with the lord his god, as
the heart of david his father.

15:4 nevertheless for david'
 
 ___________________________
 
s sake did the lord his god give him a
lamp in jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish
jerusalem: 15:5 because david did that which was right in the eyes of
the lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him
all the days of his life, save only in the matter of uriah the
hittite.

15:6 and there was war between rehoboam and jeroboam all the days of
his life.

15:7 now the rest of the acts of abijam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah? and
there was war between abijam and jeroboam.

15:8 and abijam slept with his fathers; an
 
 ___________________________
 
d they buried him in the
city of david: and asa his son reigned in his stead.

15:9 and in the twentieth year of jeroboam king of israel reigned asa
over judah.

15:10 and forty and one years reigned he in jerusalem. and his
mother's name was maachah, the daughter of abishalom.

15:11 and asa did that which was right in the eyes of the lord, as did
david his father.

15:12 and he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all
the idols that his fathers had made.

15:13 and also maachah his mother, even her he removed from being
queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and asa destroyed her
idol, and burnt it by the brook kidron.

15:14 but the high places were not removed: nevertheless asa's heart
was perfect with the lord all his days.

15:15 and he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and
the thi
 
 ___________________________
 
 they took away the stones of ramah, and the timber
thereof, wherewith baasha had builded; and king asa built with them
geba of benjamin, and mizpah.

15:23 the rest of all the acts of asa, and all his might, and all that
he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of judah? nevertheless in the time
of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

15:24 and asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
in the city of david his father: and jehoshaphat his son reigned in
his stead.

15:25 and nadab the son of jeroboam began to reign over israel in the
second year of asa king of judah, and reigned over israel two years.

15:26 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walked in the way
of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made israel to sin.

15:27 and baasha the son of ahijah, of the house of issachar,
conspired against him; and baasha smote him at gibbethon, which
belonged to the philistines; 
 
 ___________________________
 
which remained in the days of his father asa, he took out
of the land.

22:47 there was then no king in edom: a deputy was king.

22:48 jehoshaphat made ships of tharshish to go to ophir for gold: but
they went not; for the ships were broken at eziongeber.

22:49 then said ahaziah the son of ahab unto jehoshaphat, let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships. but jehoshaphat would not.

22:50 and jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david his father: and jehoram his son reigned
in his stead.

22:51 ahaziah the son of ahab began to reign over israel in samaria
the seventeenth year of jehoshaphat king of judah, and reigned two
years over israel.

22:52 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walked in the way
of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin: 22:53 for he served
baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the lord god of
israel, ac
 
 ___________________________
 
tead.

8:16 and in the fifth year of joram the son of ahab king of israel,
jehoshaphat being then king of judah, jehoram the son of je hoshaphat
king of judah began to reign.

8:17 thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned eight years in jerusalem.

8:18 and he walked in the way of the kings of israel, as did the house
of ahab: for the daughter of ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the
sight of the lord.

8:19 yet the lord would not destroy judah for david his servant's
sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his
children.

8:20 in his days edom revolted from under the hand of judah, and made
a king over themselves.

8:21 so joram went over to zair, and all the chariots with him: and he
rose by night, and smote the edomites which compassed him about, and
the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.

8:22 yet edom revolted from under the hand of judah unto this day.
then libnah revolted at the 
 
 ___________________________
 
same time.

8:23 and the rest of the acts of joram, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?  8:24
and joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of david: and ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

8:25 in the twelfth year of joram the son of ahab king of israel did
ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah begin to reign.

8:26 two and twenty years old was ahaziah when he began to reign; and
he reigned one year in jerusalem. and his mother's name was athaliah,
the daughter of omri king of israel.

8:27 and he walked in the way of the house of ahab, and did evil in
the sight of the lord, as did the house of ahab: for he was the son in

 
 ___________________________
 
he lord. now therefore take and cast
him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the lord.

9:27 but when ahaziah the king of judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house. and jehu followed after him, and said, smite him
also in the chariot. and they did so at the going up to gur, which is
by ibleam.

and he fled to megiddo, and died there.

9:28 and his servants carried him in a chariot to jerusalem, and
buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of david.

9:29 and in the eleventh year of joram the son of ahab began ahaziah
to reign over judah.

9:30 and when jehu was come to jezreel, jezebel heard of it; and she
painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

9:31 and as jehu entered in at the gate, she said, had zimri peace,
who slew his master?  9:32 and he lifted up his face to the window,
and said, who is on my side?  who? and there looked out to him two or
three eunuchs.

9:33 and he said, throw her down. s
 
 ___________________________
 
g round about, every man with his
weapons in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be
slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

11:9 and the captains over the hundreds did according to all things
that jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men
that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on
the sabbath, and came to jehoiada the priest.

11:10 and to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king
david's spears and shields, that were in the temple of the lord.

11:11 and the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand,
round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left
corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

11:12 and he brought forth the king's son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him;
and they clapped their hands, and said, god save the king.

11:13 and when athaliah heard the
 
 ___________________________
 
 and sent it to hazael king of syria: and he went away from
jerusalem.

12:19 and the rest of the acts of joash, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
12:20 and his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew joash in
the house of millo, which goeth down to silla.

12:21 for jozachar the son of shimeath, and jehozabad the son of
shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with
his fathers in the city of david: and amaziah his son reigned in his
stead.

13:1 in the three and twentieth year of joash the son of ahaziah king
of judah jehoahaz the son of jehu began to reign over israel in
samaria, and reigned seventeen years.

13:2 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord, and
followed the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, which made israel to
sin; he departed not therefrom.

13:3 and the anger of the lord was kindled against israel, and he
delivered them into the hand of haza
 
 ___________________________
 
s, which he had taken out of the
hand of jehoahaz his father by war. three times did joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of israel.

14:1 in the second year of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel
reigned amaziah the son of joash king of judah.

14:2 he was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. and his mother's name was
jehoaddan of jerusalem.

14:3 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, yet not
like david his father: he did according to all things as joash his
father did.

14:4 howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people
did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

14:5 and it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

14:6 but the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of moses, wherein the
lord commanded, saying, 
 
 ___________________________
 


14:17 and amaziah the son of joash king of judah lived after the death
of jehoash son of jehoahaz king of israel fifteen years.

14:18 and the rest of the acts of amaziah, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?  14:19 now they made a
conspiracy against him in jerusalem: and he fled to lachish; but they
sent after him to lachish, and slew him there.

14:20 and they brought him on horses: and he was buried at jerusalem
with his fathers in the city of david.

14:21 and all the people of judah took azariah, which was sixteen
years old, and made him king instead of his father amaziah.

14:22 he built elath, and restored it to judah, after that the king
slept with his fathers.

14:23 in the fifteenth year of amaziah the son of joash king of judah
jeroboam the son of joash king of israel began to reign in samaria,
and reigned forty and one years.

14:24 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord: he
departed not from all the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the people sacrificed and burnt incense
still on the high places.

15:5 and the lord smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day
of his death, and dwelt in a several house. and jotham the king's son
was over the house, judging the people of the land.

15:6 and the rest of the acts of azariah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
15:7 so azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his
fathers in the city of david: and jotham his son reigned in his stead.

15:8 in the thirty and eighth year of azariah king of judah did
zachariah the son of jeroboam reign over israel in samaria six months.

15:9 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord, as his
fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of jeroboam the son of
nebat, who made israel to sin.

15:10 and shallum the son of jabesh conspired against him, and smote
him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

15:
 
 ___________________________
 
e high places were not removed: the people sacrificed
and burned incense still in the high places. he built the higher gate
of the house of the lord.

15:36 now the rest of the acts of jotham, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
15:37 in those days the lord began to send against judah rezin the
king of syria, and pekah the son of remaliah.

15:38 and jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david his father: and ahaz his son reigned in
his stead.

16:1 in the seventeenth year of pekah the son of remaliah ahaz the son
of jotham king of judah began to reign.

16:2 twenty years old was ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen years in jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the
sight of the lord his god, like david his father.

16:3 but he walked in the way of the kings of israel, yea, and made
his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the
 
 ___________________________
 
em; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen
that were under it, and put it upon the pavement of stones.

16:18 and the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house,
and the king's entry without, turned he from the house of the lord for
the king of assyria.

16:19 now the rest of the acts of ahaz which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?  16:20
and ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of david: and hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

17:1 in the twelfth year of ahaz king of judah began hoshea the son of
elah to reign in samaria over israel nine years.

17:2 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord, but not
as the kings of israel that were before him.

17:3 against him came up shalmaneser king of assyria; and hoshea
became his servant, and gave him presents.

17:4 and the king of assyria found conspiracy in hoshea: for he had
sent messengers to so king o
 
 ___________________________
 
to provoke him to anger.

17:18 therefore the lord was very angry with israel, and removed them
out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of judah only.

17:19 also judah kept not the commandments of the lord their god, but
walked in the statutes of israel which they made.

17:20 and the lord rejected all the seed of israel, and afflicted
them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast
them out of his sight.

17:21 for he rent israel from the house of david; and they made
jeroboam the son of nebat king: and jeroboam drave israel from
following the lord, and made them sin a great sin.

17:22 for the children of israel walked in all the sins of jeroboam
which he did; they departed not from them; 17:23 until the lord
removed israel out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants
the prophets. so was israel carried away out of their own land to
assyria unto this day.

17:24 and the king of assyria brought men from babylon, and from
cut
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren, and their children's children: as did
their fathers, so do they unto this day.

18:1 now it came to pass in the third year of hoshea son of elah king
of israel, that hezekiah the son of ahaz king of judah began to reign.

18:2 twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. his mother's name also was
abi, the daughter of zachariah.

18:3 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that david his father did.

18:4 he removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that moses had
made: for unto those days the children of israel did burn incense to
it: and he called it nehushtan.

18:5 he trusted in the lord god of israel; so that after him was none
like him among all the kings of judah, nor any that were before him.

18:6 for he clave to the lord, and departed not from following him,
but kept his commandments, 
 
 ___________________________
 
forth a remnant, and they that
escape out of mount zion: the zeal of the lord of hosts shall do this.

19:32 therefore thus saith the lord concerning the king of assyria, he
shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

19:33 by the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into this city, saith the lord.

19:34 for i will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and
for my servant david's sake.

19:35 and it came to pass that night, that the angel of the lord went
out, and smote in the camp of the assyrians an hundred fourscore and
five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they
were all dead corpses.

19:36 so sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

19:37 and it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
nisroch his god, that adrammelech and sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword: and t
 
 ___________________________
 
die, and not live.

20:2 then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the lord,
saying, 20:3 i beseech thee, o lord, remember now how i have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

20:4 and it came to pass, afore isaiah was gone out into the middle
court, that the word of the lord came to him, saying, 20:5 turn again,
and tell hezekiah the captain of my people, thus saith the lord, the
god of david thy father, i have heard thy prayer, i have seen thy
tears: behold, i will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up
unto the house of the lord.

20:6 and i will add unto thy days fifteen years; and i will deliver
thee and this city out of the hand of the king of assyria; and i will
defend this city for mine own sake, and for my servant david's sake.

20:7 and isaiah said, take a lump of figs. and they took and laid it
on the boil, and he recovered.

20:8 and hezekiah said unto is
 
 ___________________________
 
use of the lord, of which the lord
said, in jerusalem will i put my name.

21:5 and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the lord.

21:6 and he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times,
and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he
wrought much wickedness in the sight of the lord, to provoke him to
anger.

21:7 and he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the
house, of which the lord said to david, and to solomon his son, in
this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen out of all tribes of
israel, will i put my name for ever: 21:8 neither will i make the feet
of israel move any more out of the land which i gave their fathers;
only if they will observe to do according to all that i have commanded
them, and according to all the law that my servant moses commanded
them.

21:9 but they hearkened not: and manasseh seduced them to do more evil
than did the nations whom the lord d
 
 ___________________________
 
 rest of the acts of amon which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?  21:26
and he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of uzza: and josiah
his son reigned in his stead.

22:1 josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
thirty and one years in jerusalem. and his mother's name was jedidah,
the daughter of adaiah of boscath.

22:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, and
walked in all the way of david his father, and turned not aside to the
right hand or to the left.

22:3 and it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king josiah, that
the king sent shaphan the son of azaliah, the son of meshullam, the
scribe, to the house of the lord, saying, 22:4 go up to hilkiah the
high priest, that he may sum the silver which is brought into the
house of the lord, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the
people: 22:5 and let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the
work, that
 
 ___________________________
 
ing accursed.

2:8 and the sons of ethan; azariah.

2:9 the sons also of hezron, that were born unto him; jerahmeel, and
ram, and chelubai.

2:10 and ram begat amminadab; and amminadab begat nahshon, prince of
the children of judah; 2:11 and nahshon begat salma, and salma begat
boaz, 2:12 and boaz begat obed, and obed begat jesse, 2:13 and jesse
begat his firstborn eliab, and abinadab the second, and shimma the
third, 2:14 nethaneel the fourth, raddai the fifth, 2:15 ozem the
sixth, david the seventh: 2:16 whose sisters were zeruiah, and
abigail. and the sons of zeruiah; abishai, and joab, and asahel,
three.

2:17 and abigail bare amasa: and the father of amasa was jether the
ishmeelite.

2:18 and caleb the son of hezron begat children of azubah his wife,
and of jerioth: her sons are these; jesher, and shobab, and ardon.

2:19 and when azubah was dead, caleb took unto him ephrath, which bare
him hur.

2:20 and hur begat uri, and uri begat bezaleel.

2:21 and after
 
 ___________________________
 
f kirjathjearim; the ithrites, and the puhites,
and the shumathites, and the mishraites; of them came the zareathites,
and the eshtaulites, 2:54 the sons of salma; bethlehem, and the
netophathites, ataroth, the house of joab, and half of the
manahethites, the zorites.

2:55 and the families of the scribes which dwelt at jabez; the
tirathites, the shimeathites, and suchathites. these are the kenites
that came of hemath, the father of the house of rechab.

3:1 now these were the sons of david, which were born unto him in
hebron; the firstborn amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; the second
daniel, of abigail the carmelitess: 3:2 the third, absalom the son of
maachah the daughter of talmai king of geshur: the fourth, adonijah
the son of haggith: 3:3 the fifth, shephatiah of abital: the sixth,
ithream by eglah his wife.

3:4 these six were born unto him in hebron; and there he reigned seven
years and six months: and in jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
years.

3:5 and th
 
 ___________________________
 
ese were born unto him in jerusalem; shimea, and shobab, and
nathan, and solomon, four, of bathshua the daughter of ammiel: 3:6
ibhar also, and elishama, and eliphelet, 3:7 and nogah, and nepheg,
and japhia, 3:8 and elishama, and eliada, and eliphelet, nine.

3:9 these were all the sons of david, beside the sons of the
concubines, and tamar their sister.

3:10 and solomon's son was rehoboam, abia his son, asa his son,
jehoshaphat his son, 3:11 joram his son, ahaziah his son, joash his
son, 3:12 amaziah his son, azariah his son, jotham his son, 3:13 ahaz
his son, hezekiah his son, manasseh his son, 3:14 amon his son, josiah
his son.

3:15 and the sons of josiah were, the firstborn johanan, the second
jehoiakim, the third zedekiah, the fourth shallum.

3:16 and the sons of je
 
 ___________________________
 
l his son, zacchur his son, shimei
his son.

4:27 and shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters: but his brethren
had not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to
the children of judah.

4:28 and they dwelt at beersheba, and moladah, and hazarshual, 4:29
and at bilhah, and at ezem, and at tolad, 4:30 and at bethuel, and at
hormah, and at ziklag, 4:31 and at bethmarcaboth, and hazarsusim, and
at bethbirei, and at shaaraim. these were their cities unto the reign
of david.

4:32 and their villages were, etam, and ain, rimmon, and tochen, and
ashan, five cities: 4:33 and all their villages that were round about
the same cities, unto baal. these were their habitations, and their
genealogy.

4:34 and meshobab, and jamlech, and joshah, the son of amaziah, 4:35
and joel, and jehu the son of josibiah, the son of seraiah, the son of
asiel, 4:36 and elioenai, and jaakobah, and jeshohaiah, and asaiah,
and adiel, and jesimiel, and benaiah, 4:37 and ziza the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
 son,
6:24 tahath his son, uriel his son, uzziah his son, and shaul his son.

6:25 and the sons of elkanah; amasai, and ahimoth.

6:26 as for elkanah: the sons of elkanah; zophai his son, and nahath
his son, 6:27 eliab his son, jeroham his son, elkanah his son.

6:28 and the sons of samuel; the firstborn vashni, and abiah.

6:29 the sons of merari; mahli, libni his son, shimei his son, uzza
his son, 6:30 shimea his son, haggiah his son, asaiah his son.

6:31 and these are they whom david set over the service of song in the
house of the lord, after that the ark had rest.

6:32 and they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle
of the congregation with singing, until solomon had built the house of
the lord in jerusalem: and then they waited on their office according
to their order.

6:33 and these are they that waited with their children. of the sons
of the kohathites: heman a singer, the son of joel, the son of
shemuel, 6:34 the son of elkanah, the son of 
 
 ___________________________
 
with her suburbs: 6:80
and out of the tribe of gad; ramoth in gilead with her suburbs, and
mahanaim with her suburbs, 6:81 and heshbon with her suburbs, and
jazer with her suburbs.

7:1 now the sons of issachar were, tola, and puah, jashub, and
shimrom, four.

7:2 and the sons of tola; uzzi, and rephaiah, and jeriel, and jahmai,
and jibsam, and shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of
tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose
number was in the days of david two and twenty thousand and six
hundred.

7:3 and the sons of uzzi; izrahiah: and the sons of izrahiah; michael,
and obadiah, and joel, ishiah, five: all of them chief men.

7:4 and with them, by their generations, after the house of their
fathers, were bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand men:
for they had many wives and sons.

7:5 and their brethren among all the families of issachar were valiant
men of might, reckoned in all by their genealogies fourscore and seven

 
 ___________________________
 
ervice, keepers of the gates of the
tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the lord, were
keepers of the entry.

9:20 and phinehas the son of eleazar was the ruler over them in time
past, and the lord was with him.

9:21 and zechariah the son of meshelemiah was porter of the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

9:22 all these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two
hundred and twelve. these were reckoned by their genealogy in their
villages, whom david and samuel the seer did ordain in their set
office.

9:23 so they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the
house of the lord, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.

9:24 in four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north,
and south.

9:25 and their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come
after seven days from time to time with them.

9:26 for these levites, the four chief porters, were in their set
office, and were over the chamber
 
 ___________________________
 
hey arose, all the valiant men, and took away the
body of saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to jabesh,
and buried their bones under the oak in jabesh, and fasted seven days.

10:13 so saul died for his transgression which he committed against
the lord, even against the word of the lord, which he kept not, and
also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire
of it; 10:14 and enquired not of the lord: therefore he slew him, and
turned the kingdom unto david the son of jesse.

11:1 then all israel gathered themselves to david unto hebron, saying,
behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

11:2 and moreover in time past, even when saul was king, thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord thy god said
unto thee, thou shalt feed my people israel, and thou shalt be ruler
over my people israel.

11:3 therefore came all the elders of israel to the king to hebron;
and david made a covenant with them in hebron before the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ord; and
they anointed david king over israel, according to the word of the
lord by samuel.

11:4 and david and all israel went to jerusalem, which is jebus; where
the jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

11:5 and the inhabitants of jebus said to david, thou shalt not come
hither. nevertheless david took the castle of zion, which is the city
of david.

11:6 and david said, whosoever smiteth the jebusites first shall be
chief and captain. so joab the son of zeruiah went first up, and was
chief.

11:7 and david dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city
of david.

11:8 and he built the city round about, even from millo round about:
and joab repaired the rest of the city.

11:9 so david waxed greater and greater: for the lord of hosts was
with him.

11:10 these also are the chief of the mighty men whom david had, who
strengthened them
 
 ___________________________
 
selves with him in his kingdom, and with all israel,
to make him king, according to the word of the lord concerning israel.

11:11 and this is the number of the mighty men whom david had;
jashobeam, an hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his
spear against three hundred slain by him at one time.

11:12 and after him was eleazar the son of dodo, the ahohite, who was
one of the three mighties.

11:13 he was with david at pasdammim, and there the philistines were
gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of
barley; and the people fled from before the philistines.

11:14 and they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and
delivered it, and slew the philistines; and the lord saved them by a
great deliverance.

11:15 now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to david,
into the cave of adullam; and the host of the philistines encamped in
the valley of rephaim.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
1:16 and david was then in the hold, and the philistines' garrison
was then at bethlehem.

11:17 and david longed, and said, oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of bethlehem, that is at the gate!  11:18 and
the three brake through the host of the philistines, and drew water
out of the well of bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and
brought it to david: but david would not drink of it, but poured it
out to the lord.

11:19 and said, my god forbid it me, that i should do this thing:
shall i drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in
jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it.
therefore he would not drink it.

these things did these three mightiest.

11:20 and abishai the brother of joab, he was chief of the three: for
lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
name among the three.

 
 ___________________________
 
own and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.

11:23 and he slew an egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits
high; and in the egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and
he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the
egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

11:24 these things did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighties.

11:25 behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to
the first three: and david set him over his guard.

11:26 also the valiant men of the armies were, asahel the brother of
joab, elhanan the son of dodo of bethlehem, 11:27 shammoth the
harorite, helez the pelonite, 11:28 ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
abiezer the antothite, 11:29 sibbecai the hushathite, ilai the
ahohite, 11:30 maharai the netophathite, heled the son of baanah the
netophathite, 11:31 ithai the son of ribai of gibeah, that pertained
to the children of benjamin, benaiah the pirathonite, 11:32 hu
 
 ___________________________
 
lai, 11:42
adina the son of shiza the reubenite, a captain of the reubenites, and
thirty with him, 11:43 hanan the son of maachah, and joshaphat the
mithnite, 11:44 uzzia the ashterathite, shama and jehiel the sons of
hothan the aroerite, 11:45 jediael the son of shimri, and joha his
brother, the tizite, 11:46 eliel the mahavite, and jeribai, and
joshaviah, the sons of elnaam, and ithmah the moabite, 11:47 eliel,
and obed, and jasiel the mesobaite.

12:1 now these are they that came to david to ziklag, while he yet
kept himself close because of saul the son of kish: and they were
among the mighty men, helpers of the war.

12:2 they were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and
the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of
saul's brethren of benjamin.

12:3 the chief was ahiezer, then joash, the sons of shemaah the
gibeathite; and jeziel, and pelet, the sons of azmaveth; and berachah,
and jehu the antothite.

12:4 and ismaiah the gibe
 
 ___________________________
 
onite, a mighty man among the thirty, and
over the thirty; and jeremiah, and jahaziel, and johanan, and josabad
the gederathite, 12:5 eluzai, and jerimoth, and bealiah, and
shemariah, and shephatiah the haruphite, 12:6 elkanah, and jesiah, and
azareel, and joezer, and jashobeam, the korhites, 12:7 and joelah, and
zebadiah, the sons of jeroham of gedor.

12:8 and of the gadites there separated themselves unto david into the
hold to the wilderness men of might, and men of war fit for the
battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like
the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains;
12:9 ezer the first, obadiah the second, eliab the third, 12:10
mishmannah the fourth, jeremiah the fifth, 12:11 attai the sixth,
eliel the seventh, 12:12 johanan the eighth, elzabad the ninth, 12:13
jeremiah the tenth, machbanai the eleventh.

12:14 these were of the sons of ga
 
 ___________________________
 
d, captains of the host: one of the
least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.

12:15 these are they that went over jordan in the first month, when it
had overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all them of the
valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

12:16 and there came of the children of benjamin and judah to the hold
unto david.

12:17 and david went out to meet them, and answered and said unto
them, if ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be
knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing
there is no wrong in mine hands, the god of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it.

12:18 then the spirit came upon amasai, who was chief of the captains,
and he said, thine are we, david, and on thy side, thou son of jesse:
peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy god
hel
 
 ___________________________
 
peth thee.

then david received them, and made them captains of the band.

12:19 and there fell some of manasseh to david, when he came with the
philistines against saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the
lords of the philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, he
will fall to his master saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

12:20 as he went to ziklag, there fell to him of manasseh, adnah, and
jozabad, and jediael, and michael, and jozabad, and elihu, and
zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of manasseh.

12:21 and they helped david against the band of the rovers: for they
were all
 
 ___________________________
 
 mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.

12:22 for at that time day by day there came to david to help him,
until it was a great host, like the host of god.

12:23 and these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to
the war, and came to david to hebron, to turn the kingdom of saul to
him, according to the word of the lord.

12:24 the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

12:25 of the children of simeon, mighty men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 of the children of levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 and jehoiada was the leader of the aaronites, and with him were
three thousand and seven hundred; 12:28 and zadok, a yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ung man mighty
of valour, and of his father's house twenty and two captains.

12:29 and of the children of benjamin, the kindred of saul, three
thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
the house of saul.

12:30 and of the children of ephraim twenty thousand and eight
hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their
fathers.

12:31 and of the half tribe of manasseh eighteen thousand, which were
expressed by name, to come and make david king.

12:32 and of the children of issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what israel ought to do; the heads
of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their
commandment.

12:33 of zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with
all instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could keep rank: they
were not of double heart.

12:34 and of naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield
and spear thirty and seven thousand.
 
 ___________________________
 


12:35 and of the danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and
six hundred.

12:36 and of asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty
thousand.

12:37 and on the other side of jordan, of the reubenites, and the
gadites, and of the half tribe of manasseh, with all manner of
instruments of war for the battle, an hundred and twenty thousand.

12:38 all these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect
heart to hebron, to make david king over all israel: and all the rest
also of israel were of one heart to make david king.

12:39 and there they were with david three days, eating and drinking:
for their brethren had prepared for them.

12:40 moreover they that were nigh them, even unto issachar and
zebulun and naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on
mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there
was joy in isra
 
 ___________________________
 
el.

13:1 and david consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds,
and with every leader.

13:2 and david said unto all the congregation of israel, if it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the lord our god, let us send abroad
unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of
israel, and with them also to the priests and levites which are in
their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:
13:3 and let us bring again the ark of our god to us: for we enquired
not at it in the days of saul.

13:4 and all the congregation said that they would do so: for the
t
 
 ___________________________
 
hing was right in the eyes of all the people.

13:5 so david gathered all israel together, from shihor of egypt even
unto the entering of hemath, to bring the ark of god from
kirjathjearim.

13:6 and david went up, and all israel, to baalah, that is, to
kirjathjearim, which belonged to judah, to bring up thence the ark of
god the lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is
called on it.

13:7 and they carried the ark of god in a new cart out of the house of
abinadab: and uzza and ahio drave the cart.

13:8 and david and all israel played before god with all their might,
and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with
timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trum
 
 ___________________________
 
pets.

13:9 and when they came unto the threshingfloor of chidon, uzza put
forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

13:10 and the anger of the lord was kindled against uzza, and he smote
him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before god.

13:11 and david was displeased, because the lord had made a breach
upon uzza: wherefore that place is called perezuzza to this day.

13:12 and david was afraid of god that day, saying, how shall i bring
the ark of god home to me?  13:13 so david brought not the ark home to
himself to the city of david, but carried it aside into the house of
obededom the gittite.

13:14 and the ark of god remained with the family of obededom in his
house three months. and the lord blessed the house of obededom, and
all that he had.

14:1 now hiram king of tyre sent messengers to david, and timber of
cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him 
 
 ___________________________
 
an house.

14:2 and david perceived that the lord had confirmed him king over
israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people
israel.

14:3 and david took more wives at jerusalem: and david begat more sons
and daughters.

14:4 now these are the names of his children which he had in
jerusalem; shammua, and shobab, nathan, and solomon, 14:5 and ibhar,
and elishua, and elpalet, 14:6 and nogah, and nepheg, and japhia, 14:7
and elishama, and beeliada, and eliphalet.

14:8 and when the philistines heard that david was anointed king over
all israel, all the philistines went up to seek david. and david heard
of it, and went out against them.

14:9 and the philistines came and 
 
 ___________________________
 
spread themselves in the valley of
rephaim.

14:10 and david enquired of god, saying, shall i go up against the
philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and the lord
said unto him, go up; for i will deliver them into thine hand.

14:11 so they came up to baalperazim; and david smote them there. then
david said, god hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the
breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place
baalperazim.

14:12 and when they had left their gods there, david gave a
commandment, and they were burned with fire.

14:13 and the philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the
valley.

14:14 therefore david enquired again of god; and god said unto him, go
not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over
against the mulberr
 
 ___________________________
 
y trees.

14:15 and it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the
tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for
god is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the philistines.

14:16 david therefore did as god commanded him: and they smote the
host of the philistines from gibeon even to gazer.

14:17 and the fame of david went out into all lands; and the lord
brought the fear of him upon all nations.

15:1 and david made him houses in the city of david, and prepared a
place for the ark of god, and pitched for it a tent.

15:2 then david said, none ought to carry the ark of god but the
levites: for them hath the lord chosen to carry the ark of god, and to
minister unto him for ever.

15:3 and david gathered all israel together to jerusalem, to bring up
the ark of the lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it.

15:4 and david assembled the children of aaron, and the levites: 15:5
of the so
 
 ___________________________
 
kohath; uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
and twenty: 15:6 of the sons of merari; asaiah the chief, and his
brethren two hundred and twenty: 15:7 of the sons of gershom; joel the
chief and his brethren an hundred and thirty: 15:8 of the sons of
elizaphan; shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred: 15:9 of
the sons of hebron; eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 15:10
of the sons of uzziel; amminadab the chief, and his brethren an
hundred and twelve.

15:11 and david called for zadok and abiathar the priests, and for the
levites, for uriel, asaiah, and joel, shemaiah, and eliel, and
amminadab, 15:12 and said unto them, ye are the chief of the fathers
of the levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that
ye may bring up the ark of the lord god of israel unto the place that
i have prepared for it.

15:13 for because ye did it not at the first, the lord our god made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

15:
 
 ___________________________
 
14 so the priests and the levites sanctified themselves to bring up
the ark of the lord god of israel.

15:15 and the children of the levites bare the ark of god upon their
shoulders with the staves thereon, as moses commanded according to the
word of the lord.

15:16 and david spake to the chief of the levites to appoint their
brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and
harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.

15:17 so the levites appointed heman the son of joel; and of his
brethren, asaph the son of berechiah; and of the sons of merari their
brethren, ethan the son of kushaiah; 15:18 and with them their
brethren of the second degree, zechariah, ben, and jaaziel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and unni, eliab, an
 
 ___________________________
 
, and obededom, and jeiel, and azaziah, with
harps on the sheminith to excel.

15:22 and chenaniah, chief of the levites, was for song: he instructed
about the song, because he was skilful.

15:23 and berechiah and elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.

15:24 and shebaniah, and jehoshaphat, and nethaneel, and amasai, and
zechariah, and benaiah, and eliezer, the priests, did blow with the
trumpets before the ark of god: and obededom and jehiah were
doorkeepers for the ark.

15:25 so david, and the elders of israel, and the captains over
thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of
the house of obededom with joy.

15:26 and it came to pass, when god helped the levites that bare the
ark of the covenant of the lord, that they offered seven bullocks and
seven rams.

15:27 and david was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the
levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and chenaniah the master
of the song with the singers: david also had upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n him an ephod of
linen.

15:28 thus all israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the lord
with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and
with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.

15:29 and it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the lord came
to the city of david, that michal, the daughter of saul looking out at
a window saw king david dancing and playing: and she despised him in
her heart.

16:1 so they brought the ark of god, and set it in the midst of the
tent that david had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices
and peace offerings before god.

16:2 and when david had made an end of offering the burnt offerings
and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the
lord.

16:3 and he dealt to every one of israel, both man and woman, to every
one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh,
 
 ___________________________
 
and he appointed certain of the levites to minister before the
ark of the lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the lord god
of israel: 16:5 asaph the chief, and next to him zechariah, jeiel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and mattithiah, and eliab, and benaiah, and
obededom: and jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but asaph made a
sound with cymbals; 16:6 benaiah also and jahaziel the priests with
trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of god.

16:7 then on that day david delivered first this psalm to thank the
lord into the hand of asaph and his brethren.

16:8 give thanks unto the lord, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people.

16:9 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

16:10 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.

16:11 seek the lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders,
and the j
 
 ___________________________
 
do
according to all that is written in the law of the lord, which he
commanded israel; 16:41 and with them heman and jeduthun, and the rest
that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to the
lord, because his mercy endureth for ever; 16:42 and with them heman
and jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a
sound, and with musical instruments of god. and the sons of jeduthun
were porters.

16:43 and all the people departed every man to his house: and david
returned to bless his house.

17:1 now it came to pass, as david sat in his house, that david said
to nathan the prophet, lo, i dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark
of the covenant of the lord remaineth under curtains.

17:2 then nathan said unto david, do all that is in thine heart; for
god is with thee.

17:3 and it came to pass the same night, that the word of god came to
nathan, saying, 17:4 go and tell david my servant, thus saith the
lord, thou shalt not build me an house 
 
 ___________________________
 
to dwell in: 17:5 for i have
not dwelt in an house since the day that i brought up israel unto this
day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to
another.

17:6 wheresoever i have walked with all israel, spake i a word to any
of the judges of israel, whom i commanded to feed my people, saying,
why have ye not built me an house of cedars?  17:7 now therefore thus
shalt thou say unto my servant david, thus saith the lord of hosts, i
took thee from the sheepcote, even from following the sheep, that thou
shouldest be ruler over my people israel: 17:8 and i have been with
thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and have cut off all thine
enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name like the name of
the great men that are in the earth.

17:9 also i will ordain a place for my people israel, and will plant
them, and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more;
neither
 
 ___________________________
 
shall be of thy sons; and i will establish his kingdom.

17:12 he shall build me an house, and i will stablish his throne for
ever.

17:13 i will be his father, and he shall be my son: and i will not
take my mercy away from him, as i took it from him that was before
thee: 17:14 but i will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for
ever: and his throne shall be established for evermore.

17:15 according to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

17:16 and david the king came and sat before the lord, and said, who
am i, o lord god, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  17:17 and yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, o god;
for thou hast also spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to
come, and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of high
degree, o lord god.

17:18 what can david speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant?
for thou knowest thy servant.

17:19 o lord, for
 
 ___________________________
 
e thy
people whom thou hast redeemed out of egypt?  17:22 for thy people
israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, lord,
becamest their god.

17:23 therefore now, lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken
concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for
ever, and do as thou hast said.

17:24 let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for
ever, saying, the lord of hosts is the god of israel, even a god to
israel: and let the house of david thy servant be established before
thee.

17:25 for thou, o my god, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build
him an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray
before thee.

17:26 and now, lord, thou art god, and hast promised this goodness
unto thy servant: 17:27 now therefore let it please thee to bless the
house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou
blessest, o lord, and it shall be blessed for ever.

18:1 now after this it came to pass, 
 
 ___________________________
 
that david smote the philistines,
and subdued them, and took gath and her towns out of the hand of the
philistines.

18:2 and he smote moab; and the moabites became david's servants, and
brought gifts.

18:3 and david smote hadarezer king of zobah unto hamath, as he went
to stablish his dominion by the river euphrates.

18:4 and david took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: david also houghed all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them an hundred chariots.

18:5 and when the syrians of damascus came to help hadarezer king of
zobah, david slew of the syrians two and twenty thousand men.

18:6 then david put garrisons in syriadamascus; and the syrians became
david's servants, and brought gifts. thus the lord preserved david
whithersoever he went.

18:7 and david took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
hadarezer, and brought them to jerusalem.


 
 ___________________________
 
18:8 likewise from tibhath, and from chun, cities of hadarezer,
brought david very much brass, wherewith solomon made the brasen sea,
and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.

18:9 now when tou king of hamath heard how david had smitten all the
host of hadarezer king of zobah; 18:10 he sent hadoram his son to king
david, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he
had fought against hadarezer, and smitten him; (for hadarezer had war
with tou;) and with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and
brass.

18:11 them also king david dedicated unto the lord, with the silver
and the gold that he brought from all these nations; from edom, and
from moab, and from the children of ammon, and from the philistines,
and from amalek.

18:12 moreover abishai the son of zeruiah slew of the e
 
 ___________________________
 
domites in the
valley of salt eighteen thousand.

18:13 and he put garrisons in edom; and all the edomites became
david's servants. thus the lord preserved david whithersoever he went.

18:14 so david reigned over all israel, and executed judgment and
justice among all his people.

18:15 and joab the son of zeruiah was over the host; and jehoshaphat
the son of ahilud, recorder.

18:16 and zadok the son of ahitub, and abimelech the son of abiathar,
were the priests; and shavsha was scribe; 18:17 and benaiah the son of
jehoiada was over the cherethites and the pelethites; and the sons of
david were chief about the king.

19:1 now it came to pass after this, that nahash the king of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
children of ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.

19:2 and david said, i will shew kindness unto hanun the son of
nahash, because his father shewed kindness to me. and david sent
messengers to comfort him concerning his father. so the servants of
david came into the land of the children of ammon to hanun, to comfort
him.

19:3 but the princes of the children of ammon said to hanun, thinkest
thou that david doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters
unto thee?  are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to
overthrow, and to spy out the land?  19:4 wherefore hanun took david's
servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the midst
hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.

19:5 then there went certain, and told david how the men were served.
and he sent to meet them: for the men were greatly ashamed. and the
king said, tarry at jericho until your beards b
 
 ___________________________
 
e grown, and then
return.

19:6 and when the children of ammon saw that they had made themselves
odious to david, hanun and the children of ammon sent a thousand
talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of
mesopotamia, and out of syriamaachah, and out of zobah.

19:7 so they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of
maachah and his people; who came and pitched before medeba. and the
children of ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and
came to battle.

19:8 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

19:9 and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 nigh before the
syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.

19:15 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
they likewise fled before abishai his brother, and entered into the
city. then joab came to jerusalem.

19:16 and when the syrians saw that they were put to the worse before
israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the syrians that were
beyond the river: and shophach the captain of the host of hadarezer
went before them.

19:17 and it was told david; and he gathered all israel, and passed
over jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against
them. so when david had put the battle in array against the syrians,
they fought with him.

19:18 but the syrians fled before israel; and david slew of the
syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty
thousand footmen, and killed shophach the captain of the host.

19:19 and when the servants of hadarezer saw that they were put to the
worse before israel, they 
 
 ___________________________
 
made peace with david, and became his
servants: neither would the syrians help the children of ammon any
more.

20:1 and it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time
that kings go out to battle, joab led forth the power of the army, and
wasted the country of the children of ammon, and came and besieged
rabbah. but david tarried at jerusalem. and joab smote rabbah, and
destroyed it.

20:2 and david took the crown of their king from off his head, and
found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in
it; and it was set upon david's head: and he brought also exceeding
much spoil out of the city.

20:3 and he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with
saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. even so dealt david
with all the cities of the children of ammon. and david and all the
people returned to jerusalem.

20:4 and it came to pass after thi
 
 ___________________________
 
at was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.

20:5 and there was war again with the philistines; and elhanan the son
of jair slew lahmi the brother of goliath the gittite, whose spear
staff was like a weaver's beam.

20:6 and yet again there was war at gath, where was a man of great
stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each
hand, and six on each foot and he also was the son of the giant.

20:7 but when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimea david's
brother slew him.

20:8 these were born unto the giant in gath; and they fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of his servants.

21:1 and satan stood up against israel, and provoked david to number
israel.

21:2 and david said to joab and to the rulers of the people, go,
number israel from beersheba even to dan; and bring the number of them
to me, that i may know it.

21:3 and joab answered, the lord make his people an hundred times so
many more as they be: but, my lord the
 
 ___________________________
 
 king, are they not all my
lord's servants?  why then doth my lord require this thing? why will
he be a cause of trespass to israel?  21:4 nevertheless the king's
word prevailed against joab. wherefore joab departed, and went
throughout all israel, and came to jerusalem.

21:5 and joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto david. and
all they of israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand
men that drew sword: and judah was four hundred threescore and ten
thousand men that drew sword.

21:6 but levi and benjamin counted he not among them: for the king's
word was abominable to joab.

21:7 and god was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote
israel.

21:8 and david said unto god, i have sinned greatly, because i have
done this thing: but now, i beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy
serva
 
 ___________________________
 
nt; for i have done very foolishly.

21:9 and the lord spake unto gad, david's seer, saying, 21:10 go and
tell david, saying, thus saith the lord, i offer thee three things:
choose thee one of them, that i may do it unto thee.

21:11 so gad came to david, and said unto him, thus saith the lord,
choose thee 21:12 either three years' famine; or three months to be
destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies
overtaketh thee; or else three days the sword of the lord, even the
pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the lord destroying
throughout all the coasts of israel. now therefore advise thyself what
word i shall bring again to him that sent me.

21:13 and david said unto gad, i am in a great strait: let me fall no
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hand of the lord; for very great are his mercies: but let me
not fall into the hand of man.

21:14 so the lord sent pestilence upon israel: and there fell of
israel seventy thousand men.

21:15 and god sent an angel unto jerusalem to destroy it: and as he
was destroying, the lord beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed, it is enough, stay now thine hand.
and the angel of the lord stood by the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

21:16 and david lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the lord
stand between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his
hand stretched out over jerusalem. then david and the elders of
israel, who were clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.

21:17 and david said unto god, is it not i that commanded the people
to be numbered? even i it is that have sinned and done evil indeed;
but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, i pray
thee, o lord my god, be on me, and on my 
 
 ___________________________
 
father's house; but not on
thy people, that they should be plagued.

21:18 then the angel of the lord commanded gad to say to david, that
david should go up, and set up an altar unto the lord in the
threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite.

21:19 and david went up at the saying of gad, which he spake in the
name of the lord.

21:20 and ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with
him hid themselves. now ornan was threshing wheat.

21:21 and as david came to ornan, ornan looked and saw david, and went
out of the threshingfloor, and bowed himself to david with his face to
the ground.

21:22 then david said to ornan, grant me the place of this
threshingfloor, that i may build an altar therein unto the lord: thou
shalt grant it me for the full price: that the plague may be stayed
from the people.

21:23 and ornan said unto david, take it to thee, and let my lord the
king do that which is good in his eyes: lo, i give thee the oxen als
 
 ___________________________
 
o
for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the
wheat for the meat offering; i give it all.

21:24 and king david said to ornan, nay; but i will verily buy it for
the full price: for i will not take that which is thine for the lord,
nor offer burnt offerings without cost.

21:25 so david gave to ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold
by weight.

21:26 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the lord; and he
answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

21:27 and the lord commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again
into the sheath thereof.

21:28 at that time when david saw that the lord had answered him in
the threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

21:29 for the tabernacle of the lord, which moses made in the
wildern
 
 ___________________________
 
ess, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season
in the high place at gibeon.

21:30 but david could not go before it to enquire of god: for he was
afraid because of the sword of the angel of the lord.

22:1 then david said, this is the house of the lord god, and this is
the altar of the burnt offering for israel.

22:2 and david commanded to gather together the strangers that were in
the land of israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build
the house of god.

22:3 and david prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors
of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without
weight; 22:4 also cedar trees in abundance: for the zidonians and they
of tyre brought much cedar wood to david.

22:5 and david said, solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
that is to be builded f
 
 ___________________________
 
or the lord must be exceeding magnifical, of
fame and of glory throughout all countries: i will therefore now make
preparation for it. so david prepared abundantly before his death.

22:6 then he called for solomon his son, and charged him to build an
house for the lord god of israel.

22:7 and david said to solomon, my son, as for me, it was in my mind
to build an house unto the name of the lord my god: 22:8 but the word
of the lord came to me, saying, thou hast shed blood abundantly, and
hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name,
because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

22:9 behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest;
and i will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his
name shall be solomon, and i wil
 
 ___________________________
 
lents of gold, and a thousand thousand
talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in
abundance: timber also and stone have i prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every
manner of work.

22:16 of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is
no number. arise therefore, and be doing, and the lord be with thee.

22:17 david also commanded all the princes of israel to help solomon
his son, saying, 22:18 is not the lord your god with you? and hath he
not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of
the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the lord, and
before his people.

22:19 now set your heart and your soul to seek the lord your god;
arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the lord god, to bring
the ark of the covenant of the lord, and the holy vessels of god, i
 
 ___________________________
 
nto
the house that is to be built to the name of the lord.

23:1 so when david was old and full of days, he made solomon his son
king over israel.

23:2 and he gathered together all the princes of israel, with the
priests and the levites.

23:3 now the levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and
upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and
eight thousand.

23:4 of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work
of the house of the lord; and six thousand were officers and judges:
23:5 moreover four thousand were po
 
 ___________________________
 
rters; and four thousand praised
the lord with the instruments which i made, said david, to praise
therewith.

23:6 and david divided them into courses among the sons of levi,
namely, gershon, kohath, and merari.

23:7 of the gershonites were, laadan, and shimei.

23:8 the sons of laadan; the chief was jehiel, and zetham, and joel,
three.

23:9 the sons of shimei; shelomith, and haziel, and haran, three.
these were the chief of the fathers of laadan.

23:10 and the sons of shimei were, jahath, zina, and jeush, and
beriah.

these four were the sons of shimei.

23:11 and jahath was the chief, and zizah t
 
 ___________________________
 
, and mushi. the sons of mahli;
eleazar, and kish.

23:22 and eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their
brethren the sons of kish took them.

23:23 the sons of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jeremoth, three.

23:24 these were the sons of levi after the house of their fathers;
even the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names
by their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the
lord, from the age of twenty years and upward.

23:25 for david said, the lord god of israel hath given rest unto his
people, that they may dwell in jerusalem for ever: 23:26 and also unto
the levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels
of it for the service thereof.

23:27 for by the last words of david the levites were numbered from
twenty years old and above: 23:28 because their office was to wait on
the sons of aaron for the service of the house of the lord, in the
courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all ho
 
 ___________________________
 
lly before the
lord: 23:32 and that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of
the congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of
the sons of aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the
lord.

24:1 now these are the divisions of the sons of aaron. the sons of
aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

24:2 but nadab and abihu died before their father, and had no
children: therefore eleazar and ithamar executed the priest's office.

24:3 and david distributed them, both zadok of the sons of eleazar,
and ahimelech of the sons of ithamar, according to their offices in
their service.

24:4 and there were more chief men found of the sons of eleazar than
of the sons of ithamar, and thus were they divided. among the sons of
eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers,
and eight among the sons of ithamar according to the house of their
fathers.

24:5 thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the
 
 ___________________________
 


24:26 the sons of merari were mahli and mushi: the sons of jaaziah;
beno.

24:27 the sons of merari by jaaziah; beno, and shoham, and zaccur, and
ibri.

24:28 of mahli came eleazar, who had no sons.

24:29 concerning kish: the son of kish was jerahmeel.

24:30 the sons also of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jerimoth. these
were the sons of the levites after the house of their fathers.

24:31 these likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
aaron in the presence of david the king, and zadok, and ahimelech, and
the chief of the fathers of the priests and levites, even the
principal fathers over against their younger brethren.

25:1 moreover david and the captains of the host separated to the
service of the sons of asaph, and of heman, and of jeduthun, who
should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the
number of the workmen according to their service was: 25:2 of the sons
of asaph; zaccur, and joseph, and nethaniah, and asarelah, t
 
 ___________________________
 
; zetham, and joel his brother, which were
over the treasures of the house of the lord.

26:23 of the amramites, and the izharites, the hebronites, and the
uzzielites: 26:24 and shebuel the son of gershom, the son of moses,
was ruler of the treasures.

26:25 and his brethren by eliezer; rehabiah his son, and jeshaiah his
son, and joram his son, and zichri his son, and shelomith his son.

26:26 which shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.

26:28 and all that samuel the seer, and saul the son of kish, and
abner the son of ner, and joab the son of zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 of the izharites, chenaniah and his so
 
 ___________________________
 
ns were for the outward
business over israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 and of the hebronites, hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
israel on this side jordan westward in all the business of the lord,
and in the service of the king.

26:31 among the hebronites was jerijah the chief, even among the
hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. in the
fortieth year of the reign of david they were sought for, and there
were found among them mighty men of valour at jazer of gilead.

26:32 and his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven
hundred chief fathers, whom king david made rulers over the
reubenites, the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh, for every
matter pertaining to god, and affairs of the king.

27:1 now the children of israel after their number, to wit, the chief
fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers
that serve
 
 ___________________________
 
he children of ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:15 the twelfth captain for the twelfth month was heldai the
netophathite, of othniel: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:16 furthermore over the tribes of israel: the ruler of the
reubenites was eliezer the son of zichri: of the simeonites,
shephatiah the son of maachah: 27:17 of the levites, hashabiah the son
of kemuel: of the aaronites, zadok: 27:18 of judah, elihu, one of the
brethren of david: of issachar, omri the son of michael: 27:19 of
zebulun, ishmaiah the son of obadiah: of naphtali, jerimoth the son of
azriel: 27:20 of the children of ephraim, hoshea the son of azaziah:
of the half tribe of manasseh, joel the son of pedaiah: 27:21 of the
half tribe of manasseh in gilead, iddo the son of zechariah: of
benjamin, jaasiel the son of abner: 27:22 of dan, azareel the son of
jeroham. these were the princes of the tribes of israel.

27:23 but david took not the number of them
 
 ___________________________
 
 from twenty years old and
under: because the lord had said he would increase israel like to the
stars of the heavens.

27:24 joab the son of zeruiah began to number, but he finished not,
because there fell wrath for it against israel; neither was the number
put in the account of the chronicles of king david.

27:25 and over the king's treasures was azmaveth the son of adiel: and
over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the
villages, and in the castles, was jehonathan the son of uzziah: 27:26
and over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground
was ezri the son of chelub: 27:27 and over the vineyards was shimei
the ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars
was zabdi the shiphmite: 27:28 and over the olive trees and the
sycomore tr
 
 ___________________________
 
ees that were in the low plains was baalhanan the gederite:
and over the cellars of oil was joash: 27:29 and over the herds that
fed in sharon was shitrai the sharonite: and over the herds that were
in the valleys was shaphat the son of adlai: 27:30 over the camels
also was obil the ishmaelite: and over the asses was jehdeiah the
meronothite: 27:31 and over the flocks was jaziz the hagerite. all
these were the rulers of the substance which was king david's.

27:32 also jonathan david's uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a
scribe: and jehiel the son of hachmoni was with the king's sons: 27:33
and ahithophel was the king's counsellor: and hushai the archite was
the king's companion: 27:34 and after ahithophel was jehoiada the son
of benaiah, and abiathar: and the general of the king's army was joab.

28:1 and david assembled all the princes of israel, the princes of the
tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king
by course, and the capta
 
 ___________________________
 
ins over the thousands, and captains over the
hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of
the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men,
and with all the valiant men, unto jerusalem.

28:2 then david the king stood up upon his feet, and said, hear me, my
brethren, and my people: as for me, i had in mine heart to build an
house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the lord, and for the
footstool of our god, and had made ready for the building: 28:3 but
god said unto me, thou shalt not build an house for my name, because
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 howbeit the lord god of israel chose me before all the house of
my father to be king over israel for ever: f
 
 ___________________________
 
nheritance for your children after you for ever.

28:9 and thou, solomon my son, know thou the god of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the lord
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:10 take heed now; for the lord hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 then david gave to solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper
chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place
of the mercy seat, 28:12 and the pattern of all that he had by the
spirit, of the courts of the house of the lord, and of all the
chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of god, and of
the treasuries of the dedicated things: 28:13 also for the courses of
the priests and the levites, 
 
 ___________________________
 
les of shewbread, for
every table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver: 28:17 also
pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the
golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise
silver by weight for every bason of silver: 28:18 and for the altar of
incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the
ark of the covenant of the lord.

28:19 all this, said david, the lord made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

28:20 and david said to solomon his son, be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the lord god, even
my god, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of
the lord.

28:21 and, behold, the courses of the priests and the levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the servi
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of the house of god: and
there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing
skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy commandment.

29:1 furthermore david the king said unto all the congregation,
solomon my son, whom alone god hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the lord
god.

29:2 now i have prepared with all my might for the house of my god the
gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of
iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of diver
 
 ___________________________
 
d gave
for the service of the house of god of gold five thousand talents and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass
eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.

29:8 and they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
treasure of the house of the lord, by the hand of jehiel the
gershonite.

29:9 then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly,
because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the lord: and
david the king also rejoiced with great joy.

29:10 wherefore david blessed the lord before all the congregation:
and david said, blessed be thou, lord god of israel our father, for
ever and ever.

29:11 thine, o lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in
the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, o lord, and thou art exalted
as head above all.

29:12 both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd now have i seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 o lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which i have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congregation blessed the lord god of their fathers, and
bowed down their heads, and worshipped the lord, and the king.

29:21 and they sacrificed sacrifices unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings unto the lord, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all israel: 29:22 and did
eat and drink before 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord on that day with great gladness. and
they made solomon the son of david king the second time, and anointed
him unto the lord to be the chief governor, and zadok to be priest.

29:23 then solomon sat on the throne of the lord as king instead of
david his father, and prospered; and all israel obeyed him.

29:24 and all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons
likewise of king david, submitted themselves unto solomon the king.

29:25 and the lord magnified solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on
any king before him in israel.

29:26 thus david the son of jesse reigned over all israel.

29:27 and the time that he reigned over israel was forty years; seven
years reigned he in hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
jerusalem.

29:28 and he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d honour:
and solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 now the acts of david the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of samuel the seer, and in the book of nathan the
prophet, and in the book of gad the seer, 29:30 with all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.




the second book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the lord his god was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 so solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of god, which moses the servant of the lord had made in
the wilderness.

1:
 
 ___________________________
 
4 but the ark of god had david brought up from kirjathjearim to the
place which david had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at jerusalem.

1:5 moreover the brasen altar, that bezaleel the son of uri, the son
of hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the lord: and
solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 and solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the lord,
which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a
thousand burnt offerings upon it.

1:7 in that night did god appear unto solomon, and said unto him, ask
wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at i shall give thee.

1:8 and solomon said unto god, thou hast shewed great mercy unto david
my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

1:9 now, o lord god, let thy promise unto david my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of
the earth in multitude.

1:10 give me now wisdom and knowledge, that i may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
great?  1:11 and god said to solomon, because this was in thine heart,
and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom
and knowledge for thyself, that thou 
 
 ___________________________
 
n hundred and fifty:
and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the hittites, and
for the kings of syria, by their means.

2:1 and solomon determined to build an house for the name of the lord,
and an house for his kingdom.

2:2 and solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

2:3 and solomon sent to huram the king of tyre, saying, as thou didst
deal with david my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 behold, i build an house to the name of the lord my god, to
dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the
continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening,
on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the
lord our god. this is an ordinance for ever to israel.

2:5 and the house which i build is great: for great is our 
 
 ___________________________
 
god above
all gods.

2:6 but who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am i then, that i should
build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?  2:7 send
me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can
skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in judah and in
jerusalem, whom david my father did provide.

2:8 send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of
lebanon: for i know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in
lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants, 2:9 even
to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which i am about to
build shall be wonderful great.

2:10 and, behold, i will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
measures of barley, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
wenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil.

2:11 then huram the king of tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
solomon, because the lord hath loved his people, he hath made thee
king over them.

2:12 huram said moreover, blessed be the lord god of israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to david the king a wise son, endued
with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
lord, and an house for his kingdom.

2:13 and now i have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
huram my father's, 2:14 the son of a woman of the daughters of dan,
and his father was a man of tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to fin
 
 ___________________________
 
d out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord david thy father.

2:15 now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 2:16 and
we will cut wood out of lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we
will bring it to thee in floats by sea to joppa; and thou shalt carry
it up to jerusalem.

2:17 and solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
israel, after the numbering wherewith david his father had numbered
them; and they were found an hundred and
 
 ___________________________
 
 fifty thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

2:18 and he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

3:1 then solomon began to build the house of the lord at jerusalem in
mount moriah, where the lord appeared unto david his father, in the
place that david had prepared in the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

3:2 and he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
the fourth year of his reign.

3:3 now these are the things wherein solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of god. the length by cubits after the first
measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

3:4 and the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner
doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of
the temple, were of gold.

5:1 thus all the work that solomon made for the house of the lord was
finished: and solomon brought in all the things that david his father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasures of the house of god.

5:2 then solomon assembled the elders of israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of israel, unto
jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of the
city of david, which is zion.

5:3 wherefore all the men of israel assembled themselves unto the king
in the feast which was in the seventh month.


 
 ___________________________
 
e glory of the lord had filled the house of
god.

6:1 then said solomon, the lord hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 but i have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for
thy dwelling for ever.

6:3 and the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation
of israel: and all the congregation of israel stood.

6:4 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, who hath with his
hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father david,
saying, 6:5 since the day that i brought forth my people out of the
land of egypt i chose no city among all the tribes of israel to build
an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose i any man to
be a ruler over my people israel: 6:6 but i have chosen jerusalem,
that my name might be there; and have chosen david to be over my
people israel.

6:7 now it was in the heart of david my father to build an house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

6:8 but the lord said to d
 
 ___________________________
 
avid my father, forasmuch as it was in thine
heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in
thine heart: 6:9 notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but
thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the
house for my name.

6:10 the lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken:
for i am risen up in the room of david my father, and am set on the
throne of israel, as the lord promised, and have built the house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

6:11 and in it have i put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
lord, that he made with the children of israel.

6:12 and he stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of all
the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands: 6:13 for
solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five
cubits broad, and three cubits high, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d had set it in the midst of
the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
before all the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven.

6:14 and said, o lord god of israel, there is no god like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 6:15
thou which hast kept with thy servant david my father that which thou
hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it
with thine hand, as it is this day.

6:16 now therefore, o lord god of israel, keep with thy servant david
my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, there shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of israel; yet so
that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou
hast walked before me.

6:17 now then, o lord god of israel, let thy word be veri
 
 ___________________________
 
fied, which
thou hast spoken unto thy servant david.

6:18 but will god in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less
this house which i have built!  6:19 have respect therefore to the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, o lord my god, to
hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before
thee: 6:20 that thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night,
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name
there; to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which
have sinned against thee.

6:40 now, my god, let, i beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

6:41 now therefore arise, o lord god, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, o lord god, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

6:42 o lord god, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
the mercies of david thy servant.

7:1 now when solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and
the glory of the lord filled the house.

7:2 and the priests could not enter into the house of the lord,
because the glory of the lord had filled the lord's house.

7:3 and when all the children of israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glory of the lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the 
 
 ___________________________
 
pavement, and worshipped, and
praised the lord, saying, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for
ever.

7:4 then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
lord.

7:5 and king solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all
the people dedicated the house of god.

7:6 and the priests waited on their offices: the levites also with
instruments of musick of the lord, which david the king had made to
praise the lord, because his mercy endureth for ever, when david
praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
them, and all israel stood.

7:7 moreover solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before
the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which solomon had
made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat
offerings, and the fat.

7:8 also
 
 ___________________________
 
 at the same time solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of
hamath unto the river of egypt.

7:9 and in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept
the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

7:10 and on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the
goodness that the lord had shewed unto david, and to solomon, and to
israel his people.

7:11 thus solomon finished the house of the lord, and the king's
house: and all that came into solomon's heart to make in the house of
the lord, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

7:12 and the lord appeared to solomon by night, and said unto him, i
have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an
house of sacrifice.

7:13 if i shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if i command the
locusts to devour the la
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will i hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

7:15 now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer
that is made in this place.

7:16 for now have i chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may
be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there
perpetually.

7:17 and as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as david thy father
walked, and do according to all that i have commanded thee, and shalt
observe my statutes and my judgments; 7:18 then will i stablish the
throne of thy kingdom, according as i have covenanted with david thy
father, saying, there shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in israel.

7:19 but if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments,
which i have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and
worship them; 7:20 then will i pluck them up by the roots out 
 
 ___________________________
 
eft
after them in the land, whom the children of israel consumed not, them
did solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

8:9 but of the children of israel did solomon make no servants for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and
captains of his chariots and horsemen.

8:10 and these were the chief of king solomon's officers, even two
hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

8:11 and solomon brought up the daughter of pharaoh out of the city of
david unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, my wife
shall not dwell in the house of david king of israel, because the
places are holy, whereunto the ark of the lord hath come.

8:12 then solomon offered burnt offerings unto the lord on the altar
of the lord, which he had built before the porch, 8:13 even after a
certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of
moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 and he appointed, according to the order of david his father, the
courses of the priests to their service, and the levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had david the man of god commanded.

8:15 and they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
priests and levites concerning any matter, or concerning the
treasures.

8:16 now all the work of solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the lord, and until it was finished. so the
house of the lord was perfected.

8:17 then went solomon to eziongeber, and to eloth, at the sea side in
the land of edom.

8:18 and huram sent him by the hands of his servants shi
 
 ___________________________
 
re in the low plains in abundance.

9:28 and they brought unto solomon horses out of egypt, and out of all
lands.

9:29 now the rest of the acts of solomon, first and last, are they not
written in the book of nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of
ahijah the shilonite, and in the visions of iddo the seer against
jeroboam the son of nebat?  9:30 and solomon reigned in jerusalem over
all israel forty years.

9:31 and solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city
of david his father: and rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

10:1 and rehoboam went to shechem: for to shechem were all israel come
to make him king.

10:2 and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat, who was in
egypt, whither he fled from the presence of solomon the king, heard
it, that jeroboam returned out of egypt.

10:3 and they sent and called him. so jeroboam and all israel came and
spake to rehoboam, saying, 10:4 thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore ease thou s
 
 ___________________________
 

of the young men, saying, my father made your yoke heavy, but i will
add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but i will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:15 so the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of
god, that the lord might perform his word, which he spake by the hand
of ahijah the shilonite to jeroboam the son of nebat.

10:16 and when all israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them, the people answered the king, saying, what portion have we in
david?  and we have none inheritance in the son of jesse: every man to
your tents, o israel: and now, david, see to thine own house. so all
israel went to their tents.

10:17 but as for the children of israel that dwelt in the cities of
judah, rehoboam reigned over them.

10:18 then king rehoboam sent hadoram that was over the tribute; and
the children of israel stoned him with stones, that he died. but king
rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

10:19 an
 
 ___________________________
 
d israel rebelled against the house of david unto this day.

11:1 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he gathered of the house
of judah and benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to rehoboam.

11:2 but the word of the lord came to shemaiah the man of god, saying,
11:3 speak unto rehoboam the son of solomon, king of judah, and to all
israel in judah and benjamin, saying, 11:4 thus saith the lord, ye
shall not go up, nor fight 
 
 ___________________________
 
rom executing the priest's office unto the lord: 11:15 and he
ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for
the calves which he had made.

11:16 and after them out of all the tribes of israel such as set their
hearts to seek the lord god of israel came to jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the lord god of their fathers.

11:17 so they strengthened the kingdom of judah, and made rehoboam the
son of solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of david and solomon.

11:18 and rehoboam took him mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son
of david to wife, and abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse;
11:19 which bare him children; jeush, and shamariah, and zaham.

11:20 and after her he took maachah the daughter of absalom; which
bare him abijah, and attai, and ziza, and shelomith.

11:21 and rehoboam loved maachah the daughter of absalom above all his
wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
concubi
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord had
chosen out of all the tribes of israel, to put his name there. and his
mother's name was naamah an ammonitess.

12:14 and he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the
lord.

12:15 now the acts of rehoboam, first and last, are they not written
in the book of shemaiah the prophet, and of iddo the seer concerning
genealogies? and there were wars between rehoboam and jeroboam
continually.

12:16 and rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of david: and abijah his son reigned in his stead.

13:1 now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam began abijah to reign
over judah.

13:2 he reigned three years in jerusalem. his mother's name also was
michaiah the daughter of uriel of gibeah. and there was war between
abijah and jeroboam.

13:3 and abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of
war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: jeroboam also set the
battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen me
 
 ___________________________
 
n,
being mighty men of valour.

13:4 and abijah stood up upon mount zemaraim, which is in mount
ephraim, and said, hear me, thou jeroboam, and all israel; 13:5 ought
ye not to know that the lord god of israel gave the kingdom over
israel to david for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?  13:6 yet jeroboam the son of nebat, the servant of solomon the
son of david, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

13:7 and there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of belial,
and have strengthened themselves against rehoboam the son of solomon,
when rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 and now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the lord in the hand
of the sons of david; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 have ye not cast out 
 
 ___________________________
 
hanah with the towns thereof,
and ephraim with the towns thereof.

13:20 neither did jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
abijah: and the lord struck him, and he died.

13:21 but abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

13:22 and the rest of the acts of abijah, and his ways, and his
sayings, are written in the story of the prophet iddo.

14:1 so abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of david: and asa his son reigned in his stead. in his days the land
was quiet ten years.

14:2 and asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the lord
his god: 14:3 for he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
and commanded judah to seek the lord god of their fathers, and to do
the law and the commandment.

14:5 also he took away out of all the cities of judah the high places
and the images: and the ki
 
 ___________________________
 
nd, behold, the acts of asa, first and last, lo, they are
written in the book of the kings of judah and israel.

16:12 and asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased
in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease
he sought not to the lord, but to the physicians.

16:13 and asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth
year of his reign.

16:14 and they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for
himself in the city of david, and laid him in the bed which was filled
with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the
apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.

17:1 and jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against israel.

17:2 and he placed forces in all the fenced cities of judah, and set
garrisons in the land of judah, and in the cities of ephraim, which
asa his father had taken.

17:3 and the lord was with jehoshaphat, because he walked in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 first
ways of his father david, and sought not unto baalim; 17:4 but sought
to the lord god of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not
after the doings of israel.

17:5 therefore the lord stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all
judah brought to jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
abundance.

17:6 and his heart was lifted up in the ways of the lord: moreover he
took away the high places and groves out of judah.

17:7 also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even
 
 ___________________________
 

ahaziah king of israel, who did very wickedly: 20:36 and he joined
himself with him to make ships to go to tarshish: and they made the
ships in eziongaber.

20:37 then eliezer the son of dodavah of mareshah prophesied against
jehoshaphat, saying, because thou hast joined thyself with ahaziah,
the lord hath broken thy works. and the ships were broken, that they
were not able to go to tarshish.

21:1 now jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david. and jehoram his son reigned in his
stead.

21:2 and he had brethren the sons of jehoshaphat, azariah, and jehiel,
and zechariah, and azariah, and michael, and shephatiah: all these
were the sons of jehoshaphat king of israel.

21:3 and their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold,
and of precious things, with fenced cities in judah: but the kingdom
gave he to jehoram; because he was the firstborn.

21:4 now when jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he
str
 
 ___________________________
 
engthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and
divers also of the princes of israel.

21:5 jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eight years in jerusalem.

21:6 and he walked in the way of the kings of israel, like as did the
house of ahab: for he had the daughter of ahab to wife: and he wrought
that which was evil in the eyes of the lord.

21:7 howbeit the lord would not destroy the house of david, because of
the covenant that he had made with david, and as he promised to give a
light to him and to his sons for ever.

21:8 in his days the edomites revolted from under the dominion of
judah, and made themselves a king.

21:9 then jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots
with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the edomites which
compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.

21:10 so the edomites revolted from under the hand of judah unto this
day.

 
 ___________________________
 

the same time also did libnah revolt from under his hand; because he
had forsaken the lord god of his fathers.

21:11 moreover he made high places in the mountains of judah and
caused the inhabitants of jerusalem to commit fornication, and
compelled judah thereto.

21:12 and there came a writing to him from elijah the prophet, saying,
thus saith the lord god of david thy father, because thou hast not
walked in the ways of jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of asa
king of judah, 21:13 but hast walked in the way of the kings of
israel, and hast made judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem to go a
whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of ahab, and also hast
slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were better than
thyself: 21:14 behold, with a great plague will the lord smite thy
people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy good
 
 ___________________________
 
8 and after all this the lord smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease.

21:19 and it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of
two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died
of sore diseases. and his people made no burning for him, like the
burning of his fathers.

21:20 thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned in jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired.
howbeit they buried him in the city of david, but not in the
sepulchres of the kings.

22:1 and the inhabitants of jerusalem made ahaziah his youngest son
king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the arabians to
the camp had slain all the eldest. so ahaziah the son of jehoram king
of judah reigned.

22:2 forty and two years old was ahaziah when he began to reign, and
he reigned one year in jerusalem. his mother's name also was athaliah
the daughter of omri.

22:3 he also walked in the ways of the house of ahab: fo
 
 ___________________________
 
d ishmael the
son of jehohanan, and azariah the son of obed, and maaseiah the son of
adaiah, and elishaphat the son of zichri, into covenant with him.

23:2 and they went about in judah, and gathered the levites out of all
the cities of judah, and the chief of the fathers of israel, and they
came to jerusalem.

23:3 and all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the
house of god. and he said unto them, behold, the king's son shall
reign, as the lord hath said of the sons of david.

23:4 this is the thing that ye shall do; a third part of you entering
on the sabbath, of the priests and of the levites, shall be porters of
the doors; 23:5 and a third part shall be at the king's house; and a
third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be
in the courts of the house of the lord.

23:6 but let none come into the house of the lord, save the priests,
and they that minister of the levites; they shall go in, for they are
holy: but all the people sh
 
 ___________________________
 
house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he
cometh in, and when he goeth out.

23:8 so the levites and all judah did according to all things that
jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that
were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the
sabbath: for jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.

23:9 moreover jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of
hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king
david's, which were in the house of god.

23:10 and he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his
hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the
temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

23:11 then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the
crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. and jehoiada and
his sons anointed him, and said, god save the king.

23:12 now when athaliah heard the noise of the people running a
 
 ___________________________
 
ing
of the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there.

23:16 and jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the
people, and between the king, that they should be the lord's people.

23:17 then all the people went to the house of baal, and brake it
down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew mattan
the priest of baal before the altars.

23:18 also jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the lord by
the hand of the priests the levites, whom david had distributed in the
house of the lord, to offer the burnt offerings of the lord, as it is
written in the law of moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it
was ordained by david.

23:19 and he set the porters at the gates of the house of the lord,
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

23:20 and he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the
governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought
down the king from the house of the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
n they had finished it, they brought the rest of the
money before the king and jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the
house of the lord, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and
spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. and they offered burnt
offerings in the house of the lord continually all the days of
jehoiada.

24:15 but jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an
hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.

24:16 and they buried him in the city of david among the kings,
because he had done good in israel, both toward god, and toward his
house.

24:17 now after the death of jehoiada came the princes of judah, and
made obeisance to the king. then the king hearkened unto them.

24:18 and they left the house of the lord god of their fathers, and
served groves and idols: and wrath came upon judah and jerusalem for
this their trespass.

24:19 yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the lord;
and they testified against them
 
 ___________________________
 
 king of damascus.

24:24 for the army of the syrians came with a small company of men,
and the lord delivered a very great host into their hand, because they
had forsaken the lord god of their fathers. so they executed judgment
against joash.

24:25 and when they were departed from him, (for they left him in
great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood
of the sons of jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he
died: and they buried him in the city of david, but they buried him
not in the sepulchres of the kings.

24:26 and these are they that conspired against him; zabad the son of
shimeath an ammonitess, and jehozabad the son of shimrith a moabitess.

24:27 now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid
upon him, and the repairing of the house of god, behold, they are
written in the story of the book of the kings. and amaziah his son
reigned in his stead.

25:1 amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to rei
 
 ___________________________
 
uch did the children of ammon pay unto him,
both the second year, and the third.

27:6 so jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the
lord his god.

27:7 now the rest of the acts of jotham, and all his wars, and his
ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of israel and
judah.

27:8 he was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
reigned sixteen years in jerusalem.

27:9 and jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city of david: and ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

28:1 ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the
sight of the lord, like david his father: 28:2 for he walked in the
ways of the kings of israel, and made also molten images for baalim.

28:3 moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of hinnom, and
burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen
whom the lord had cast out be
 
 ___________________________
 
judah and israel.

28:27 and ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city, even in jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres
of the kings of israel: and hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

29:1 hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old,
and he reigned nine and twenty years in jerusalem. and his mother's
name was abijah, the daughter of zechariah.

29:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that david his father had done.

29:3 he in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the
doors of the house of the lord, and repaired them.

29:4 and he brought in the priests and the levites, and gathered them
together into the east street, 29:5 and said unto them, hear me, ye
levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the lord
god of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy
place.

29:6 for our fathers have trespassed, and done that which wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before
the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:
29:24 and the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with
their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all israel: for
the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should
be made for all israel.

29:25 and he set the levites in the house of the lord with cymbals,
with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of
david, and of gad the king's seer, and nathan the prophet: for so was
the commandment of the lord by his prophets.

29:26 and the levites stood with the instruments of david, and the
priests with the trumpets.

29:27 and hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the
altar.

and when the burnt offering began, the song of the lord began also
with the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by david king of
israel.

29:28 and all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, and
the trumpeters sounded: and all this continued until the burnt
offering was finished.

29:29 and when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that
were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.

29:30 moreover hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the levites
to sing praise unto the lord with the words of david, and of asaph the
seer. and they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads
and worshipped.

29:31 then hezekiah answered and said, now ye have consecrated
yourselves unto the lord, come near and bring sacrifices and thank
offerings into the house of the lord. and the congregation brought in
sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart
burnt offerings.

29:32 and the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation
brought, was threescore and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ion a
thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to
the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a
great number of priests sanctified themselves.

30:25 and all the congregation of judah, with the priests and the
levites, and all the congregation that came out of israel, and the
strangers that came out of the land of israel, and that dwelt in
judah, rejoiced.

30:26 so there was great joy in jerusalem: for since the time of
solomon the son of david king of israel there was not the like in
jerusalem.

30:27 then the priests the levites arose and blessed the people: and
their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling
place, even unto heaven.

31:1 now when all this was finished, all israel that were present went
out to the cities of judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut
down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of
all judah and benjamin, in ephraim also and manasseh, until the
 
 ___________________________
 
his
princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which
were without the city: and they did help him.

32:4 so there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the
fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land,
saying, why should the kings of assyria come, and find much water?
32:5 also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was
broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and
repaired millo in the city of david, and made darts and shields in
abundance.

32:6 and he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them
together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake
comfortably to them, saying, 32:7 be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismayed for the king of assyria, nor for all the multitude
that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: 32:8 with
him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the lord our god to help us,
and to fight our battles. and the people
 
 ___________________________
 
, and for precious stones,
and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant
jewels; 32:28 storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and
oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.

32:29 moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and
herds in abundance: for god had given him substance very much.

32:30 this same hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of gihon,
and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of david.
and hezekiah prospered in all his works.

32:31 howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in
the land, god left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in
his heart.

32:32 now the rest of the acts of hezekiah, and his goodness, behold,
they are written in the vision of isaiah the prophet, the son of amoz,
and in the book of the kings of judah and israel.

32:33 and hezekiah slept with his
 
 ___________________________
 
 fathers, and they buried him in the
chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of david: and all judah and the
inhabitants of jerusalem did him honour at his death. and manasseh his
son reigned in his stead.

33:1 manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty and five years in jerusalem: 33:2 but did that which was
evil in the sight of the lord, like unto the abominations of the
heathen, whom the lord had cast out before the children of israel.

33:3 for he built again the high places which hezekiah his father had
broken down, and he reared u
 
 ___________________________
 

33:5 and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the lord.

33:6 and he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley
of the son of hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments,
and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the lord, to provoke him
to anger.

33:7 and he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the
house of god, of which god had said to david and to solomon his son,
in this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen before all the
tribes of israel, will i put my name for ever: 33:8 neither will i any
more remove the foot of israel from out of the land which i have
appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
i have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and
the ordinances by the hand of moses.

33:9 so manasseh made judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem to err,
and to do wor
 
 ___________________________
 
host of
the king of assyria, which took manasseh among the thorns, and bound
him with fetters, and carried him to babylon.

33:12 and when he was in affliction, he besought the lord his god, and
humbled himself greatly before the god of his fathers, 33:13 and
prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to jerusalem into his kingdom.
then manasseh knew that the lord he was god.

33:14 now after this he built a wall without the city of david, on the
west side of gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish
gate, and compassed about ophel, and raised it up a very great height,
and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of judah.

33:15 and he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house
of the lord, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the
house of the lord, and in jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

33:16 and he repaired the altar of the lord, and sacrificed thereon
p
 
 ___________________________
 
er had humbled
himself; but amon trespassed more and more.

33:24 and his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
house.

33:25 but the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king amon; and the people of the land made josiah his son king
in his stead.

34:1 josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
in jerusalem one and thirty years.

34:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, and
walked in the ways of david his father, and declined neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.

34:3 for in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the god of david his father: and in the twelfth
year he began to purge judah and jerusalem from the high places, and
the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.

34:4 and they brake down the altars of baalim in his presence; and the
images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and
the carved i
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord their god. and
all his days they departed not from following the lord, the god of
their fathers.

35:1 moreover josiah kept a passover unto the lord in jerusalem: and
they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

35:2 and he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to
the service of the house of the lord, 35:3 and said unto the levites
that taught all israel, which were holy unto the lord, put the holy
ark in the house which solomon the son of david king of israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the
lord your god, and his people israel, 35:4 and prepare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of david king of israel, and according to the writing of
solomon his son.

35:5 and stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the levites.

35:6 so k
 
 ___________________________
 
ance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

35:14 and afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: because the priests the sons of aaron were busied in offering
of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the levites
prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of aaron.

35:15 and the singers the sons of asaph were in their place, according
to the commandment of david, and asaph, and heman, and jeduthun the
king's seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the levites prepared for
them.

35:16 so all the service of the lord was prepared the same day, to
keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the
lord, according to the commandment of king josiah.

35:17 and the children of israel that were present kept the passover
at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread
 
 ___________________________
 
 set forward the work of the house of the lord.

3:9 then stood jeshua with his sons and his brethren, kadmiel and his
sons, the sons of judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the
house of god: the sons of henadad, with their sons and their brethren
the levites.

3:10 and when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the
lord, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the
levites the sons of asaph with cymbals, to praise the lord, after the
ordinance of david king of israel.

3:11 and they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever
toward israel.

and all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the
lord, because the foundation of the house of the lord was laid.

3:12 but many of the priests and levites and chief of the fathers, who
were ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation
of this house was laid before their eyes, wept
 
 ___________________________
 
 7:28 and hath extended mercy unto me before the
king, and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes.
and i was strengthened as the hand of the lord my god was upon me, and
i gathered together out of israel chief men to go up with me.

8:1 these are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the
genealogy of them that went up with me from babylon, in the reign of
artaxerxes the king.

8:2 of the sons of phinehas; gershom: of the sons of ithamar; daniel:
of the sons of david; hattush.

8:3 of the sons of shechaniah, of the sons of pharosh; zechariah: and
with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.

8:4 of the sons of pahathmoab; elihoenai the son of zerahiah, and with
him two hundred males.

8:5 of the sons of shechaniah; the son of jahaziel, and with him three
hundred males.

8:6 of the sons also of adin; ebed the son of jonathan, and with him
fifty males.

8:7 and of the sons of elam; jeshaiah the son of athaliah, and with
 
 ___________________________
 
at they should say unto iddo, and to his
brethren the nethinims, at the place casiphia, that they should bring
unto us ministers for the house of our god.

8:18 and by the good hand of our god upon us they brought us a man of
understanding, of the sons of mahli, the son of levi, the son of
israel; and sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; 8:19
and hashabiah, and with him jeshaiah of the sons of merari, his
brethren and their sons, twenty; 8:20 also of the nethinims, whom
david and the princes had appointed for the service of the levites,
two hundred and twenty nethinims: all of them were expressed by name.

8:21 then i proclaimed a fast there, at the river of ahava, that we
might afflict ourselves before our god, to seek of him a right way for
us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.

8:22 for i was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and
horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had
spoken unto the king, sayin
 
 ___________________________
 


3:14 but the dung gate repaired malchiah the son of rechab, the ruler
of part of bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof,
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

3:15 but the gate of the fountain repaired shallun the son of
colhozeh, the ruler of part of mizpah; he built it, and covered it,
and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof,
and the wall of the pool of siloah by the king's garden, and unto the
stairs that go down from the city of david.

3:16 after him repaired nehemiah the son of azbuk, the ruler of the
half part of bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of
david, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the
mighty.

3:17 after him repaired the levites, rehum the son of bani. next unto
him repaired hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of keilah, in his
part.

3:18 after him repaired their brethren, bavai the son of henadad, the
ruler of the half part of keilah.

3:19 and next to him re
 
 ___________________________
 
tes in the days of eliashib, joiada, and johanan, and
jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
reign of darius the persian.

12:23 the sons of levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the
book of the chronicles, even until the days of johanan the son of
eliashib.

12:24 and the chief of the levites: hashabiah, sherebiah, and jeshua
the son of kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise
and to give thanks, according to the commandment of david the man of
god, ward over against ward.

12:25 mattaniah, and bakbukiah, obadiah, meshullam, talmon, akkub,
were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.

12:26 these were in the days of joiakim the son of jeshua, the son of
jozadak, and in the days of nehemiah the governor, and of ezra the
priest, the scribe.

12:27 and at the dedication of the wall of jerusalem they sought the
levites out of all their places, to bring them to jerusalem, to keep
the dedication with 
 
 ___________________________
 
 12:32 and
after them went hoshaiah, and half of the princes of judah, 12:33 and
azariah, ezra, and meshullam, 12:34 judah, and benjamin, and shemaiah,
and jeremiah, 12:35 and certain of the priests' sons with trumpets;
namely, zechariah the son of jonathan, the son of shemaiah, the son of
mattaniah, the son of michaiah, the son of zaccur, the son of asaph:
12:36 and his brethren, shemaiah, and azarael, milalai, gilalai, maai,
nethaneel, and judah, hanani, with the musical instruments of david
the man of god, and ezra the scribe before them.

12:37 and at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went
up by the stairs of the city of david, at the going up of the wall,
above the house of david, even unto the water gate eastward.

12:38 and the other company of them that gave thanks went over against
them, and i after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from
beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall; 12:39 and
from above the gate of ephr
 
 ___________________________
 
f jerusalem was heard even afar
off.

12:44 and at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of
the law for the priests and levites: for judah rejoiced for the
priests and for the levites that waited.

12:45 and both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their god,
and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of
david, and of solomon his son.

12:46 for in the days of david and asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the days of zerubbabel, and in the days of
nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the levites; and the
levites sanctified them unto the children of aaron.

13:1 on that day they read in the book of moses in the audience of the
p
 
 ___________________________
 
 liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the god of my
salvation be exalted.

18:47 it is god that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

18:48 he delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up
above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the
violent man.

18:49 therefore will i give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the
heathen, and sing praises unto thy name.

18:50 great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, to david, and to his seed for evermore.



19:1 the heavens declare the glory of god; and the firmament sheweth
his handywork.

19:2 day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth
knowledge.

19:3 there is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

19:4 their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to
the end of the world. in them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,

19:5 which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth
as a st
 
 ___________________________
 
ins; the fruit thereof shall shake like lebanon: and they of
the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.

72:17 his name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as
long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall
call him blessed.

72:18 blessed be the lord god, the god of israel, who only doeth
wondrous things.

72:19 and blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory; amen, and amen.

72:20 the prayers of david the son of jesse are ended.



73:1 truly god is good to israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.

73:2 but as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh
slipped.

73:3 for i was envious at the foolish, when i saw the prosperity of
the wicked.

73:4 for there are no bands in their death: but their strength is
firm.

73:5 they are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued
like other men.

73:6 therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; vio
 
 ___________________________
 
lamentation.

78:65 then the lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man
that shouteth by reason of wine.

78:66 and he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a
perpetual reproach.

78:67 moreover he refused the tabernacle of joseph, and chose not the
tribe of ephraim:

78:68 but chose the tribe of judah, the mount zion which he loved.

78:69 and he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth
which he hath established for ever.

78:70 he chose david also his servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds:

78:71 from following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed
jacob his people, and israel his inheritance.

78:72 so he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.



79:1 o god, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy
temple have they defiled; they have laid jerusalem on heaps.

79:2 the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto
the
 
 ___________________________
 
e off.

88:17 they came round about me daily like water; they compassed me
about together.

88:18 lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine
acquaintance into darkness.



89:1 i will sing of the mercies of the lord for ever: with my mouth
will i make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

89:2 for i have said, mercy shall be built up for ever: thy
faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

89:3 i have made a covenant with my chosen, i have sworn unto david my
servant,

89:4 thy seed will i establish for ever, and build up thy throne to
all generations. selah.

89:5 and the heavens shall praise thy wonders, o lord: thy
faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.

89:6 for who in the heaven can be compared unto the lord? who among
the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the lord?

89:7 god is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are about him.

89:8 o lord god of 
 
 ___________________________
 
lk, o lord, in the light of thy countenance.

89:16 in thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.

89:17 for thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our
horn shall be exalted.

89:18 for the lord is our defence; and the holy one of israel is our
king.

89:19 then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, i have
laid help upon one that is mighty; i have exalted one chosen out of
the people.

89:20 i have found david my servant; with my holy oil have i anointed
him:

89:21 with whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

89:22 the enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.

89:23 and i will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them
that hate him.

89:24 but my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my
name shall his horn be exalted.

89:25 i will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers.

8
 
 ___________________________
 


89:30 if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

89:31 if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

89:32 then will i visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes.

89:33 nevertheless my lovingkindness will i not utterly take from him,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

89:34 my covenant will i not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips.

89:35 once have i sworn by my holiness that i will not lie unto david.

89:36 his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before
me.

89:37 it shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven. selah.

89:38 but thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with
thine anointed.

89:39 thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast
profaned his crown by casting it to the ground.

89:40 thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his
strong holds to ruin.

89:41 all that pas
 
 ___________________________
 
 throne down to
the ground.

89:45 the days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him
with shame. selah.

89:46 how long, lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath
burn like fire?

89:47 remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men
in vain?

89:48 what man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? selah.

89:49 lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest
unto david in thy truth?

89:50 remember, lord, the reproach of thy servants; how i do bear in
my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;

89:51 wherewith thine enemies have reproached, o lord; wherewith they
have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

89:52 blessed be the lord for evermore. amen, and amen.



90:1 lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

90:2 before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst
formed the earth and the world, even from
 
 ___________________________
 
hy going out and thy coming in from
this time forth, and even for evermore.



122:1 i was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of
the lord.

122:2 our feet shall stand within thy gates, o jerusalem.

122:3 jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:

122:4 whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the lord, unto the
testimony of israel, to give thanks unto the name of the lord.

122:5 for there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house
of david.

122:6 pray for the peace of jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
thee.

122:7 peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

122:8 for my brethren and companions' sakes, i will now say, peace be
within thee.

122:9 because of the house of the lord our god i will seek thy good.



123:1 unto thee lift i up mine eyes, o thou that dwellest in the
heavens.

123:2 behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden u
 
 ___________________________
 
for with the lord there is mercy,
and with him is plenteous redemption.

130:8 and he shall redeem israel from all his iniquities.



131:1 lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do i
exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.

131:2 surely i have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is
weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

131:3 let israel hope in the lord from henceforth and for ever.



132:1 lord, remember david, and all his afflictions:

132:2 how he sware unto the lord, and vowed unto the mighty god of
jacob;

132:3 surely i will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go
up into my bed;

132:4 i will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

132:5 until i find out a place for the lord, an habitation for the
mighty god of jacob.

132:6 lo, we heard of it at ephratah: we found it in the fields of the
wood.

132:7 we will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at
 
 ___________________________
 
 his
footstool.

132:8 arise, o lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.

132:9 let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy
saints shout for joy.

132:10 for thy servant david's sake turn not away the face of thine
anointed.

132:11 the lord hath sworn in truth unto david; he will not turn from
it; of the fruit of thy body will i set upon thy throne.

132:12 if thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that i
shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for
evermore.

132:13 for the lord hath chosen zion; he hath desired it for his
habitation.

132:14 this is my rest for ever: here will i dwell; for i have desired
it.

132:15 i will abundantly bless her provision: i will satisfy her poor
with bread.

132:16 i will als
 
 ___________________________
 
o clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints
shall shout aloud for joy.

132:17 there will i make the horn of david to bud: i have ordained a
lamp for mine anointed.

132:18 his enemies will i clothe with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.



133:1 behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity!

133:2 it is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of
his garments;

133:3 as the dew of hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of zion: for there the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
.

144:6 cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows,
and destroy them.

144:7 send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

144:8 whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.

144:9 i will sing a new song unto thee, o god: upon a psaltery and an
instrument of ten strings will i sing praises unto thee.

144:10 it is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth david
his servant from the hurtful sword.

144:11 rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose
mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood:

144:12 that our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that
our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude
of a palace:

144:13 that our garners may be full, affording all manner of store:
that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our
streets:

144:14
 
 ___________________________
 
ise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his
excellent greatness.

150:3 praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the
psaltery and harp.

150:4 praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
instruments and organs.

150:5 praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high
sounding cymbals.

150:6 let every thing that hath breath praise the lord. praise ye the lord.




the proverbs


1:1 the proverbs of solomon the son of david, king of israel; 1:2 to
know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;
1:3 to receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
equity; 1:4 to give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge
and discretion.

1:5 a wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels: 1:6 to understand a
proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark
sayings.

1:7 the fear of the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
nd eateth not
the bread of idleness.

31:28 her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also,
and he praiseth her.

31:29 many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.

31:30 favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that
feareth the lord, she shall be praised.

31:31 give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise
her in the gates.




ecclesiastes

or

the preacher


1:1 the words of the preacher, the son of david, king in jerusalem.

1:2 vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, vanity of vanities; all is
vanity.

1:3 what profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the
sun?  1:4 one generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
but the earth abideth for ever.

1:5 the sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his
place where he arose.

1:6 the wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north;
it whirleth about continually, and the wind retu
 
 ___________________________
 

4:1 behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that
appear from mount gilead.

4:2 thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is
barren among them.

4:3 thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely:
thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

4:4 thy neck is like the tower of david builded for an armoury,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

4:5 thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed
among the lilies.

4:6 until the day break, and the shadows flee away, i will get me to
the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

4:7 thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.

4:8 come with me from lebanon, my spouse, with me from lebanon: look
from the top of amana, from the top of shenir and h
 
 ___________________________
 
 in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when
they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance
thereof.

7:1 and it came to pass in the days of ahaz the son of jotham, the son
of uzziah, king of judah, that rezin the king of syria, and pekah the
son of remaliah, king of israel, went up toward jerusalem to war
against it, but could not prevail against it.

7:2 and it was told the house of david, saying, syria is confederate
with ephraim. and his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as
the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

7:3 then said the lord unto isaiah, go forth now to meet ahaz, thou,
and shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool
in the highway of the fuller's field; 7:4 and say unto him, take heed,
and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of
these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of rezin with syr
 
 ___________________________
 
within threescore and five years shall ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people.

7:9 and the head of ephraim is samaria, and the head of samaria is
remaliah's son. if ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established.

7:10 moreover the lord spake again unto ahaz, saying, 7:11 ask thee a
sign of the lord thy god; ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above.

7:12 but ahaz said, i will not ask, neither will i tempt the lord.

7:13 and he said, hear ye now, o house of david; is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but will ye weary my god also?  7:14 therefore
the lord himself shall give you a sign; behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name immanuel.

7:15 butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good.

7:16 for before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings.

7:17 the lord shall bring upon th
 
 ___________________________
 
is oppressor, as in the day of midian.

9:5 for every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of
fire.

9:6 for unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
wonderful, counsellor, the mighty god, the everlasting father, the
prince of peace.

9:7 of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of david, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. the zeal of the lord of hosts will perform this.

9:8 the lord sent a word into jacob, and it hath lighted upon israel.

9:9 and all the people shall know, even ephraim and the inhabitant of
samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, 9:10 the bricks
are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into 
 
 ___________________________
 
b shall be at the fords of arnon.

16:3 take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in
the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that
wandereth.

16:4 let mine outcasts dwell with thee, moab; be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the
spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.

16:5 and in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit
upon it in truth in the tabernacle of david, judging, and seeking
judgment, and hasting righteousness.

16:6 we have heard of the pride of moab; he is very proud: even of his
haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be
so.

16:7 therefore shall moab howl for moab, every one shall howl: for the
foundations of kirhareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.

16:8 for the fields of heshbon languish, and the vine of sibmah: the
lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof,
they
 
 ___________________________
 
ley of vision, breaking
down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

22:6 and elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and
kir uncovered the shield.

22:7 and it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be
full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at
the gate.

22:8 and he discovered the covering of judah, and thou didst look in
that day to the armour of the house of the forest.

22:9 ye have seen also the breaches of the city of david, that they
are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.

22:10 and ye have numbered the houses of jerusalem, and the houses
have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

22:11 ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the
old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

22:12 and in that day did the lord god of hosts call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding wit
 
 ___________________________
 
y
glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house.

22:19 and i will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall
he pull thee down.

22:20 and it shall come to pass in that day, that i will call my
servant eliakim the son of hilkiah: 22:21 and i will clothe him with
thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and i will commit thy
government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants
of jerusalem, and to the house of judah.

22:22 and the key of the house of david will i lay upon his shoulder;
so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none
shall open.

22:23 and i will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be
for a glorious throne to his father's house.

22:24 and they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's
house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity,
from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.

22:25 in that day, saith the lord of hosts, shall the nail that is
 
 ___________________________
 
or the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument,
neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches
are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

28:28 bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it,
nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his
horsemen.

28:29 this also cometh forth from the lord of hosts, which is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.

29:1 woe to ariel, to ariel, the city where david dwelt! add ye year
to year; let them kill sacrifices.

29:2 yet i will distress ariel, and there shall be heaviness and
sorrow: and it shall be unto me as ariel.

29:3 and i will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege
against thee with a mount, and i will raise forts against thee.

29:4 and thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the
ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice
shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the gro
 
 ___________________________
 
 forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount
zion: the zeal of the lord of hosts shall do this.

37:33 therefore thus saith the lord concerning the king of assyria, he
shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

37:34 by the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into this city, saith the lord.

37:35 for i will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and
for my servant david's sake.

37:36 then the angel of the lord went forth, and smote in the camp of
the assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

37:37 so sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

37:38 and it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
nisroch his god, that adrammelech and sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword; and they escaped into the land of
 
 ___________________________
 
him, and said unto him, thus saith
the lord, set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

38:2 then hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto
the lord, 38:3 and said, remember now, o lord, i beseech thee, how i
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

38:4 then came the word of the lord to isaiah, saying, 38:5 go, and
say to hezekiah, thus saith the lord, the god of david thy father, i
have heard thy prayer, i have seen thy tears: behold, i will add unto
thy days fifteen years.

38:6 and i will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king
of assyria: and i will defend this city.

38:7 and this shall be a sign unto thee from the lord, that the lord
will do this thing that he hath spoken; 38:8 behold, i will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of
ahaz, ten degrees backward. so the sun returned ten degrees, 
 
 ___________________________
 
o the waters, and he that
hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price.

55:2 wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness.

55:3 incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live; and i will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of david.

55:4 behold, i have given him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the people.

55:5 behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the lord thy
god, and for the holy one of israel; for he hath glorified thee.

55:6 seek ye the lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near: 55:7 let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts: and let him return unto the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
; that they might be unto me for a people, and
for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear.

13:12 therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; thus saith the
lord god of israel, every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they
shall say unto thee, do we not certainly know that every bottle shall
be filled with wine?  13:13 then shalt thou say unto them, thus saith
the lord, behold, i will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even
the kings that sit upon david's throne, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all the inhabitants of jerusalem, with drunkenness.

13:14 and i will dash them one against another, even the fathers and
the sons together, saith the lord: i will not pity, nor spare, nor
have mercy, but destroy them.

13:15 hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the lord hath spoken.

13:16 give glory to the lord your god, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look
for light, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the sabbath day, as i
commanded your fathers.

17:23 but they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their
neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.

17:24 and it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me,
saith the lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city
on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;
17:25 then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and
princes sitting upon the throne of david, riding in chariots and on
horses, they, and their princes, the men of judah, and the inhabitants
of jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.

17:26 and they shall come from the cities of judah, and from the
places about jerusalem, and from the land of benjamin, and from the
plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt
offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and
bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the lord.

17:27 but if ye 
 
 ___________________________
 
n this city shall die by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to
the chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be
unto him for a prey.

21:10 for i have set my face against this city for evil, and not for
good, saith the lord: it shall be given into the hand of the king of
babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

21:11 and touching the house of the king of judah, say, hear ye the
word of the lord; 21:12 o house of david, thus saith the lord; execute
judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the
hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that
none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

21:13 behold, i am against thee, o inhabitant of the valley, and rock
of the plain, saith the lord; which say, who shall come down against
us? or who shall enter into our habitations?  21:14 but i will punish
you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the lord: 
 
 ___________________________
 
and i will
kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things
round about it.

22:1 thus saith the lord; go down to the house of the king of judah,
and speak there this word, 22:2 and say, hear the word of the lord, o
king of judah, that sittest upon the throne of david, thou, and thy
servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates: 22:3 thus saith
the lord; execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no
violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed
innocent blood in this place.

22:4 for if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the
gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of david, riding in
chariots and on horses, he, and h
 
 ___________________________
 

22:27 but to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall
they not return.

22:28 is this man coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel
wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed,
and are cast into a land which they know not?  22:29 o earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the lord.

22:30 thus saith the lord, write ye this man childless, a man that
shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper,
sitting upon the throne of david, and ruling any more in judah.

23:1 woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture! saith the lord.

23:2 therefore thus saith the lord god of israel against the pastors
that feed my people; ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away,
and have not visited them: behold, i will visit upon you the evil of
your doings, saith the lord.

23:3 and i will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
whither i have driven them, and will bring them again
 
 ___________________________
 
 to their folds;
and they shall be fruitful and increase.

23:4 and i will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking, saith the lord.

23:5 behold, the days come, saith the lord, that i will raise unto
david a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

23:6 in his days judah shall be saved, and israel shall dwell safely:
and this is his name whereby he shall be called, the lord our
righteousness.

23:7 therefore, behold, the days come, saith the lord, that they shall
no more say, the lord liveth, which brought up the children of israel
out of the land of egypt; 23:8 but, the lord liveth, which brought up
and which led the se
 
 ___________________________
 
e shall search for me
with all your heart.

29:14 and i will be found of you, saith the lord: and i will turn away
your captivity, and i will gather you from all the nations, and from
all the places whither i have driven you, saith the lord; and i will
bring you again into the place whence i caused you to be carried away
captive.

29:15 because ye have said, the lord hath raised us up prophets in
babylon; 29:16 know that thus saith the lord of the king that sitteth
upon the throne of david, and of all the people that dwelleth in this
city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into
captivity; 29:17 thus saith the lord of hosts; behold, i will send
upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make
them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

29:18 and i will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and
with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the
kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an ast
 
 ___________________________
 
re do i see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman
in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?  30:7 alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of
jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

30:8 for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord of hosts,
that i will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy
bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him: 30:9 but
they shall serve the lord their god, and david their king, whom i will
raise up unto them.

30:10 therefore fear thou not, o my servant jacob, saith the lord;
neither be dismayed, o israel: for, lo, i will save thee from afar,
and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and jacob shall return,
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

30:11 for i am with thee, saith the lord, to save thee: though i make
a full end of all nations whither i have scattered thee, yet i will
not make a full end of thee: bu
 
 ___________________________
 
in the cities of the vale, and
in the cities of the south, and in the land of benjamin, and in the
places about jerusalem, and in the cities of judah, shall the flocks
pass again under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the lord.

33:14 behold, the days come, saith the lord, that i will perform that
good thing which i have promised unto the house of israel and to the
house of judah.

33:15 in those days, and at that time, will i cause the branch of
righteousness to grow up unto david; and he shall execute judgment and
righteousness in the land.

33:16 in those days shall judah be saved, and jerusalem shall dwell
safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, the lord
our righteousness.

33:17 for thus saith the lord; david shall never want a man to sit
upon the throne of the house of israel; 33:18 neither shall the
priests the levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and
to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

33:19
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the word of the lord came unto jeremiah, saying, 33:20 thus
saith the lord; if ye can break my covenant of the day, and my
covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
their season; 33:21 then may also my covenant be broken with david my
servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and
with the levites the priests, my ministers.

33:22 as the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of
the sea measured: so will i multiply the seed of david my servant, and
the levites that minister unto me.

33:23 moreover the word of the lord came to jeremiah, saying, 33:24
considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two
families which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them of
 
 ___________________________
 
f? thus
they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
before them.

33:25 thus saith the lord; if my covenant be not with day and night,
and if i have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 33:26
then will i cast away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for i will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; go and speak to z
 
 ___________________________
 
, and write in it
all the former words that were in the first roll, which jehoiakim the
king of judah hath burned.

36:29 and thou shalt say to jehoiakim king of judah, thus saith the
lord; thou hast burned this roll, saying, why hast thou written
therein, saying, the king of babylon shall certainly come and destroy
this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?  36:30
therefore thus saith the lord of jehoiakim king of judah; he shall
have none to sit upon the throne of david: and his dead body shall be
cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.

36:31 and i will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
iniquity; and i will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
jerusalem, and upon the men of judah, all the evil that i have
pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.

36:32 then took jeremiah another roll, and gave it to baruch the
scribe, the son of neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of
jeremiah all the word
 
 ___________________________
 
our feet.

34:20 therefore thus saith the lord god unto them; behold, i, even i,
will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

34:21 because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
34:22 therefore will i save my flock, and they shall no more be a
prey; and i will judge between cattle and cattle.

34:23 and i will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant david; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd.

34:24 and i the lord will be their god, and my servant david a prince
among them; i the lord have spoken it.

34:25 and i will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause
the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely
in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

34:26 and i will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing; and i will cause the shower to come down in his season;
there shall
 
 ___________________________
 
land upon the
mountains of israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two
kingdoms any more at all.

37:23 neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions: but i will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and i will be their god.

37:24 and david my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
my statutes, and do them.

37:25 and they shall dwell in the land that i have given unto jacob my
servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children
for ever: and my servant david shall be their prince for ever.

37:26 moreover i will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be

 
 ___________________________
 
 silver, and for an
homer of barley, and an half homer of barley: 3:3 and i said unto her,
thou shalt abide for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and
thou shalt not be for another man: so will i also be for thee.

3:4 for the children of israel shall abide many days without a king,
and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image,
and without an ephod, and without teraphim: 3:5 afterward shall the
children of israel return, and seek the lord their god, and david
their king; and shall fear the lord and his goodness in the latter
days.

4:1 hear the word of the lord, ye children of israel: for the lord
hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is
no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of god in the land.

4:2 by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.

4:3 therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth
therein shall languish, with the 
 
 ___________________________
 
rom thence go ye
to hamath the great: then go down to gath of the philistines: be they
better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border?
6:3 ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence
to come near; 6:4 that lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves
out of the midst of the stall; 6:5 that chant to the sound of the
viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like david; 6:6
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of joseph.

6:7 therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed.

6:8 the lord god hath sworn by himself, saith the lord the god of
hosts, i abhor the excellency of jacob, and hate his palaces:
therefore will i deliver up the city with all that is therein.

6:9 and it shall co
 
 ___________________________
 
on the sinful kingdom, and
i will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that i will
not utterly destroy the house of jacob, saith the lord.

9:9 for, lo, i will command, and i will sift the house of israel among
all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.

9:10 all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say,
the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

9:11 in that day will i raise up the tabernacle of david that is
fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and i will raise up his
ruins, and i will build it as in the days of old: 9:12 that they may
possess the remnant of edom, and of all the heathen, which are called
by my name, saith the lord that doeth this.

9:13 behold, the days come, saith the lord, that the plowman shall
overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed;
and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.

9:14 and i will bring 
 
 ___________________________
 
ah shall say in their heart, the
inhabitants of jerusalem shall be my strength in the lord of hosts
their god.

12:6 in that day will i make the governors of judah like an hearth of
fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they
shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the
left: and jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
jerusalem.

12:7 the lord also shall save the tents of judah first, that the glory
of the house of david and the glory of the inhabitants of jerusalem do
not magnify themselves against judah.

12:8 in that day shall the lord defend the inhabitants of jerusalem;
and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as david; and
the house of david shall be as god, as the angel of the lord before
them.

12:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, that i will seek to
destroy all the nations that come against jerusalem.

12:10 and i will pour upon the house of david, and upon the
inhabitan
 
 ___________________________
 
ts of jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications:
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

12:11 in that day shall there be a great mourning in jerusalem, as the
mourning of hadadrimmon in the valley of megiddon.

12:12 and the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the
house of david apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house
of nathan apart, and their wives apart; 12:13 the family of the house
of levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of shimei apart, and
their wives apart; 12:14 all the families that remain, every family
apart, and their wives apart.

13:1 in that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of
david and to the inhabitants of jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.

13:2 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord 