the first book of moses:  called genesis


1:1 in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth.

1:2 and the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep. and the spirit of god moved upon the face of the
waters.

1:3 and god said, let there be light: and there was light.

1:4 and god saw the light, that it was good: and god divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5 and god called the light day, and the darkness he called night.
and the evening and the morning were the first day.

1:6 and god said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters.

1:7 and god made the firmament, and divided the waters which were
under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament:
and it was so.

1:8 and god called the firmament heaven. and the evening and the
morning were the second day.

1:9 and god sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id, let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

1:10 and god called the dry land earth; and the gathering together of
the waters called he seas: and god saw that it was good.

1:11 and god said, let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is
in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

1:12 and the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after
his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after
his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:13 and the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14 and god said, let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven
to divide
 
 ___________________________
 
 the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and years: 1:15 and let them be for lights in
the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so.

1:16 and god made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

1:17 and god set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, 1:18 and to rule over the day and over the night, and
to divide the light from the darkness: and god saw that it was good.

1:19 and the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

1:20 and god said, let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.

1:21 and god created great whales, and every living creature that
move
 
 ___________________________
 
th, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind,
and every winged fowl after his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:22 and god blessed them, saying, be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

1:23 and the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

1:24 and god said, let the earth bring forth the living creature after
his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his
kind: and it was so.

1:25 and god made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle
after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after
his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:26 and god said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over
 
 ___________________________
 
 the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

1:27 so god created man in his own image, in the image of god created
he him; male and female created he them.

1:28 and god blessed them, and god said unto them, be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth.

1:29 and god said, behold, i have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which
is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

1:30 and to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air,
and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is
life, i have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

1:31 and god saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
very good. and the evening and th
 
 ___________________________
 
e morning were the sixth day.

2:1 thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them.

2:2 and on the seventh day god ended his work which he had made; and
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

2:3 and god blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that
in it he had rested from all his work which god created and made.

2:4 these are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the lord god made the earth and the
heavens, 2:5 and every plant of the field before it was in the earth,
and every herb of the field before it grew: for the lord god had not
caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the
ground.

2:6 but there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole
face of the ground.

2:7 and the lord god for
 
 ___________________________
 
med man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living
soul.

2:8 and the lord god planted a garden eastward in eden; and there he
put the man whom he had formed.

2:9 and out of the ground made the lord god to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

2:10 and a river went out of eden to water the garden; and from thence
it was parted, and became into four heads.

2:11 the name of the first is pison: that is it which compasseth the
whole land of havilah, where there is gold; 2:12 and the gold of that
land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

2:13 and the name
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the second river is gihon: the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of ethiopia.

2:14 and the name of the third river is hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of assyria. and the fourth river is euphrates.

2:15 and the lord god took the man, and put him into the garden of
eden to dress it and to keep it.

2:16 and the lord god commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat: 2:17 but of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

2:18 and the lord god said, it is not good that the man should be
alone; i will make him an help meet for him.

2:19 and out of the ground the lord god formed every beast of the
field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto adam to see
what he would call
 
 ___________________________
 
 them: and whatsoever adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof.

2:20 and adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to every beast of the field; but for adam there was not found an
help meet for him.

2:21 and the lord god caused a deep sleep to fall upon adam, and he
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
thereof; 2:22 and the rib, which the lord god had taken from man, made
he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

2:23 and adam said, this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24 therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

2:25 and they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed.

3:1 now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which
the lord god ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d made. and he said unto the woman, yea, hath god said,
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?  3:2 and the woman said
unto the serpent, we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
3:3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
god hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die.

3:4 and the serpent said unto the woman, ye shall not surely die: 3:5
for god doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

3:6 and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that
it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one
wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto
her husband with her; and he did eat.

3:7 and the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made 
 
 ___________________________
 
themselves
aprons.

3:8 and they heard the voice of the lord god walking in the garden in
the cool of the day: and adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the lord god amongst the trees of the garden.

3:9 and the lord god called unto adam, and said unto him, where art
thou?  3:10 and he said, i heard thy voice in the garden, and i was
afraid, because i was naked; and i hid myself.

3:11 and he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten
of the tree, whereof i commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
3:12 and the man said, the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and i did eat.

3:13 and the lord god said unto the woman, what is this that thou hast
done? and th
 
 ___________________________
 
e woman said, the serpent beguiled me, and i did eat.

3:14 and the lord god said unto the serpent, because thou hast done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life: 3:15 and i will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head,
and thou shalt bruise his heel.

3:16 unto the woman he said, i will greatly multiply thy sorrow and
thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy
desi
 
 ___________________________
 
s the ground for thy sake;
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; 3:18 thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field; 3:19 in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

3:20 and adam called his wife's name eve; because she was the mother
of all living.

3:21 unto adam also and to his wife did the lord god make coats of
skins, and clothed them.

3:22 and the lord god said, behold, the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: 3:23 therefore the
lord god sent him forth from the garden of eden, to till the ground
from whence he was taken.

3:24 so he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden
of eden cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep
th
 
 ___________________________
 
organ.

4:22 and zillah, she also bare tubalcain, an instructer of every
artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of tubalcain was naamah.

4:23 and lamech said unto his wives, adah and zillah, hear my voice;
ye wives of lamech, hearken unto my speech: for i have slain a man to
my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

4:24 if cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly lamech seventy and
sevenfold.

4:25 and adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his
name seth: for god, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead
of abel, whom cain slew.

4:26 and to seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his
name enos: then began men to call upon the name of the lord.

5:1 this is the book of the generations of adam. in the day that god
created man, in the likeness of god made he him; 5:2 male and female
created he them; and blessed them, and called their name adam, in the
day when they were created.

5:3 and adam lived an hundred and thirty ye
 
 ___________________________
 
hundred and thirty
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:17 and all the days of
mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

5:18 and jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat
enoch: 5:19 and jared lived after he begat enoch eight hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters: 5:20 and all the days of jared were nine
hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

5:21 and enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat methuselah: 5:22
and enoch walked with god after he begat methuselah three hundred
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:23 and all the days of enoch
were three hundred sixty and five years: 5:24 and enoch walked with
god: and he was not; for god took him.

5:25 and methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat
lamech.

5:26 and methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty
and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:27 and all the days of
methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and
 
 ___________________________
 
 and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the lord hath cursed.

5:30 and lamech lived after he begat noah five hundred ninety and five
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:31 and all the days of lamech
were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

5:32 and noah was five hundred years old: and noah begat shem, ham,
and japheth.

6:1 and it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
earth, and daughters were born unto them, 6:2 that the sons of god saw
the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose.

6:3 and the lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.

6:4 there were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the sons of god came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
renown.

6:5 and god saw that t
 
 ___________________________
 
y evil
continually.

6:6 and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart.

6:7 and the lord said, i will destroy man whom i have created from the
face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and
the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that i have made them.

6:8 but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord.

6:9 these are the generations of noah: noah was a just man and perfect
in his generations, and noah walked with god.

6:10 and noah begat three sons, shem, ham, and japheth.

6:11 the earth also was corrupt before god, and the earth was filled
with violence.

6:12 and god looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

6:13 and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come before me;
for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, i
will destroy them with the earth.

6:14 make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt th
 
 ___________________________
 
ing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt
thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be
male and female.

6:20 of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort
shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21 and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22 thus did noah; according to all that god commanded him, so did
he.

7:1 and the lord said unto noah, come thou and all thy house into the
ark; for thee have i seen righteous before me in this generation.

7:2 of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and
his female.

7:3 of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to
keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

7:4 for yet seven days, and i will cause it to rain u
 
 ___________________________
 
rth.

7:5 and noah did according unto all that the lord commanded him.

7:6 and noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth.

7:7 and noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8 of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 there went in two
and two unto noah into the ark, the male and the female, as god had
commanded noah.

7:10 and it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.

7:11 in the six hundredth year of noah's life, in the second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains
of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

7:12 and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13 in the selfsame day entered noah, and shem, and ham, and japheth,
the sons of noah, and noah
 
 ___________________________
 
's wife, and the three wives of his sons
with them, into the ark; 7:14 they, and every beast after his kind,
and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind,
every bird of every sort.

7:15 and they went in unto noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16 and they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
god had commanded him: and the lord shut him in.

7:17 and the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

7:18 and the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the
earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

7:19 and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the
high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

7:20 fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and t
 
 ___________________________
 
that creepeth
upon the earth, and every man: 7:22 all in whose nostrils was the
breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

7:23 and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face
of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the
fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and noah
only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24 and the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.

8:1 and god remembered noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the ark: and god made a wind to pass over
the earth, and the waters asswaged; 8:2 the fountains also of the deep
and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was
restrained; 8:3 and the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the
waters were abated.

8:4 and the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
the month, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ff the earth.

8:12 and he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.

8:13 and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from
off the earth: and noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked,
and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

8:14 and in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, was the earth dried.

8:15 and god spake unto noah, saying, 8:16 go forth of the ark, thou,
and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

8:17 bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of
all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the
earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

8:18 and noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him: 8:19 every beast, every creepin
 
 ___________________________
 
y clean
beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
altar.

8:21 and the lord smelled a sweet savour; and the lord said in his
heart, i will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will i
again smite any more every thing living, as i have done.

8:22 while the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

9:1 and god blessed noah and his sons, and said unto them, be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2 and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast
of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are
they delivered.

9:3 every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have i given you all things.

9:4 but flesh with the life thereof, which is the b
 
 ___________________________
 
lood thereof, shall
ye not eat.

9:5 and surely your blood of your lives will i require; at the hand of
every beast will i require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
every man's brother will i require the life of man.

9:6 whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
the image of god made he man.

9:7 and you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in
the earth, and multiply therein.

9:8 and god spake unto noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 9:9 and
i, behold, i establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after
you; 9:10 and with every living creature that is with you, of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from
all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

9:11 and i will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall
there any more be a flood to destroy t
 
 ___________________________
 
he earth.

9:12 and god said, this is the token of the covenant which i make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for
perpetual generations: 9:13 i do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall
be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

9:14 and it shall come to pass, when i bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 and i will remember my
covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all
flesh; and the waters shall no more
 
 ___________________________
 
 become a flood to destroy all
flesh.

9:16 and the bow shall be in the cloud; and i will look upon it, that
i may remember the everlasting covenant between god and every living
creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17 and god said unto noah, this is the token of the covenant, which
i have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18 and the sons of noah, that went forth of the ark, were shem, and
ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan.

9:19 these are the three sons of noah: and of them was the whole earth
overspread.

9:20 and noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
9:21 and he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered
within his tent.

 
 ___________________________
 
ess of his father,
and told his two brethren without.

9:23 and shem and japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness.

9:24 and noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had
done unto him.

9:25 and he said, cursed be canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

9:26 and he said, blessed be the lord god of shem; and canaan shall be
his servant.

9:27 god shall enlarge japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of
shem; and canaan shall be his servant.

9:28 and noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29 and all the days of noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and
he died.

10:1 now these are the generations of the sons of noah, shem, ham, and
japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

10:2 the sons of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and ja
 
 ___________________________
 
ed them unto hobah, which is on the
left hand of damascus.

14:16 and he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
brother lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

14:17 and the king of sodom went out to meet him after his return from
the slaughter of chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at
the valley of shaveh, which is the king's dale.

14:18 and melchizedek king of salem brought forth bread and wine: and
he was the priest of the most high god.

14:19 and he blessed him, and said, blessed be abram of the most high
god, possessor of heaven and earth: 14:20 and blessed be the most high
god, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. and he gave him
tithes of all.

14:21 and the king of sodom said unto abram, give me the persons, and
take the goods to thyself.

14:22 and abram said to the king of sodom, i have lift up mine hand
unto the lord, the most high god, the possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23 that i will not 
 
 ___________________________
 
take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and
that i will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say,
i have made abram rich: 14:24 save only that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, aner, eshcol,
and mamre; let them take their portion.

15:1 after these things the word of the lord came unto abram in a
vision, saying, fear not, abram: i am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward.

15:2 and abram said, lord god, what wilt thou give me, seeing i go
childless, and the steward of my house is this eliezer of damascus?
15:3 and abram said, behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo,
one born in my house is mine heir.

15:4 and, behold, the word of the lord came unto him, saying, this
shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own
bowels shall be thine heir.

15:5 and he brought him forth abroad, and said, look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to n
 
 ___________________________
 
umber them: and he
said unto him, so shall thy seed be.

15:6 and he believed in the lord; and he counted it to him for
righteousness.

15:7 and he said unto him, i am the lord that brought thee out of ur
of the chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

15:8 and he said, lord god, whereby shall i know that i shall inherit
it?  15:9 and he said unto him, take me an heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon.

15:10 and he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst,
and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

15:11 and when the fowls came down upon the carcases, abram drove them
away.

15:12 and when the sun was going down, a deep sleep 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i will multiply thy
seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11 and the angel of the lord said unto her, behold, thou art with
child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name ishmael; because
the lord hath heard thy affliction.

16:12 and he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man,
and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence
of all his brethren.

16:13 and she called the name of the lord that spake unto her, thou
god seest me: for she said, have i also here looked after him that
seeth me?  16:14 wherefore the well was called beerlahairoi; behold,
it is between kadesh and bered.

16:15 and hagar bare abram a son: and abram called his son's name,
which hagar bare, ishmael.

16:16 and abram was fourscore and six years old, when hagar bare
ishmael to abram.

17:1 and when abram was ninety years old and nine, the lord appeared
to abram, and said unto him, i am the almighty god; walk before me,
and be
 
 ___________________________
 
 thou perfect.

17:2 and i will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3 and abram fell on his face: and god talked with him, saying, 17:4
as for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
father of many nations.

17:5 neither shall thy name any more be called abram, but thy name
shall be abraham; for a father of many nations have i made thee.

17:6 and i will make thee exceeding fruitful, and i will make nations
of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7 and i will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting
 
 ___________________________
 
 covenant, to be a
god unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8 and i will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an
everlasting possession; and i will be their god.

17:9 and god said unto abraham, thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10 this is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and
thy seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11 and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

17:12 and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is bo
 
 ___________________________
 
rn in the house, or
bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

17:13 he that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting covenant.

17:14 and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath
broken my covenant.

17:15 and god said unto abraham, as for sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
call her name sarai, but sarah shall her name be.

17:16 and i will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people
shall be of her.

17:17 then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?  17:18 and abraham
said unto god, o that
 
 ___________________________
 
 ishmael might live before thee!  17:19 and god
said, sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call
his name isaac: and i will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20 and as for ishmael, i have heard thee: behold, i have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and i will make him a great nation.

17:21 but my covenant will i establish with isaac, which sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set t
 
 ___________________________
 
ime in the next year.

17:22 and he left off talking with him, and god went up from abraham.

17:23 and abraham took ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
men of abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the selfsame day, as god had said unto him.

17:24 and abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:25 and ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:26 in the selfsame day was abraham circumcised, and ishmael his
son.

17:27 and all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.

18:1 and the lord appeared unto him in the plains of mamre: a
 
 ___________________________
 
threw those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
which grew upon the ground.

19:26 but his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.

19:27 and abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the lord: 19:28 and he looked toward sodom and gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke
of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29 and it came to pass, when god destroyed the cities of the plain,
that god remembered abraham, and sent lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt.

19:30 and lot went up out of zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his
two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in zoar: and he dwelt
in a cave, he and his two daughters.

19:31 and the firstborn said unto the younger, our father is old, and
there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of
all t
 
 ___________________________
 
first born bare a son, and called his name moab: the
same is the father of the moabites unto this day.

19:38 and the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name
benammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this
day.

20:1 and abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and
dwelled between kadesh and shur, and sojourned in gerar.

20:2 and abraham said of sarah his wife, she is my sister: and
abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah.

20:3 but god came to abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
for she is a man's wife.

20:4 but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou
slay also a righteous nation?  20:5 said he not unto me, she is my
sister? and she, even she herself said, he is my brother: in the
integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have i done this.

20:6 and god said unto him in a dream, yea, i know that thou didst

 
 ___________________________
 
ng, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
sore afraid.

20:9 then abimelech called abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou
done unto us? and what have i offended thee, that thou hast brought on
me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that
ought not to be done.

20:10 and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou
hast done this thing?  20:11 and abraham said, because i thought,
surely the fear of god is not in this place; and they will slay me for
my wife's sake.

20:12 and yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

20:13 and it came to pass, when god caused me to wander from my
father's house, that i said unto her, this is thy kindness which thou
shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me,
he is my brother.

20:14 and abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
wome
 
 ___________________________
 
nservants, and gave them unto abraham, and restored him sarah his
wife.

20:15 and abimelech said, behold, my land is before thee: dwell where
it pleaseth thee.

20:16 and unto sarah he said, behold, i have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the
eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was
reproved.

20:17 so abraham prayed unto god: and god healed abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
abimelech, because of sarah abraham's wife.

21:1 and the lord visited sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto
sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which god had spoken to him.

21:3 and abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom sarah bare t
 
 ___________________________
 
o him, isaac.

21:4 and abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old, as
god had commanded him.

21:5 and abraham was an hundred years old, when his son isaac was born
unto him.

21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
will laugh with me.

21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should
have given children suck? for i have born him a son in his old age.

21:8 and the child grew, and was weaned: and abraham made a great
feast the same day that isaac was weaned.

21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born
unto abraham, mocking.

21:10 wherefore she said unto abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her
son: fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with isaac.

21:11 and the thing was very grievous in abraham's sight because of
his son.

21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy
seed be called.

21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will i make a nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and gave it unto hagar, putting it on her shoulder,
and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and wandered in
the wilderness of beersheba.

21:15 and the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.

21:16 and she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off,
as it were a bow shot: for she said, let me not see the death of the
child. and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

21:17 and god heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of god called
to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar?
fear not; for god hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

21:18 arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for i will
make him a great nation.

21:19 and god opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20 and god was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer.

21:21 and he dwelt in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the wilderness of paran: and his mother took him
a wife out of the land of egypt.

21:22 and it came to pass at that time, that abimelech and phichol the
chief captain of his host spake unto abraham, saying, god is with thee
in all that thou doest: 21:23 now therefore swear unto me here by god
that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son's son: but according to the kindness that i have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24 and abraham said, i will swear.

21:25 and abraham reproved abimelech because of a well of water, which
abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

21:26 and abimelech said, i wot not who hath done this thing; neither
didst thou tell me, neither yet heard i of it, but t
 
 ___________________________
 
 said, for these seven
ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto
me, that i have digged this well.

21:31 wherefore he called that place beersheba; because there they
sware both of them.

21:32 thus they made a covenant at beersheba: then abimelech rose up,
and phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the
land of the philistines.

21:33 and abraham planted a grove in beersheba, and called there on
the name of the lord, the everlasting god.

21:34 and abraham sojourned in the philistines' land many days.

22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt
abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here i am.

22:2 and he said, take now thy son, thine only son isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of.

22:3 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took 
 
 ___________________________
 
two of his young men with him, and isaac his son, and clave
the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which god had told him.

22:4 then on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.

22:5 and abraham said unto his young men, abide ye here with the ass;
and i and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham his father, and said, my father: and
he sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id, here am i, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 and abraham said, my
son, god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 and abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay
his son.

22:11 and the angel of the lord called unto him out of heaven, and
said, abraham, abraham: and he said, here am i.

22:12 and he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
any thing unto him: for now i know that thou fearest god, seeing thou
hast n
 
 ___________________________
 
machpelah before mamre: the same is hebron in the land of
canaan.

23:20 and the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of heth.

24:1 and abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the lord had
blessed abraham in all things.

24:2 and abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
over all that he had, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3
and i will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
isaac.

24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be
willing to follow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again
unto the land from whence thou camest?  24:6 and abraham said unto
him, beware thou that thou bring not my son thithe
 
 ___________________________
 
r again.

24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, unto thy seed will i give this land; he shall send
his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence.

24:8 and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

24:9 and the servant put his hand under the thigh of abraham his
master, and sware 
 
 ___________________________
 
to him concerning that matter.

24:10 and the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he
arose, and went to mesopotamia, unto the city of nahor.

24:11 and he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well
of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out
to draw water.

24:12 and he said o lord god of my master abraham, i pray thee, send
me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master abraham.

24:13 behold, i stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom i shall say, let down thy pitcher, i
pray thee, that i may drink; and she shall say, drink, and i will give
thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant isaac; and thereby shal
 
 ___________________________
 
nd two bracelets
for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 24:23 and said, whose
daughter art thou? tell me, i pray thee: is there room in thy father's
house for us to lodge in?  24:24 and she said unto him, i am the
daughter of bethuel the son of milcah, which she bare unto nahor.

24:25 she said moreover unto him, we have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodge in.

24:26 and the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord.

24:27 and he said, blessed be the lord god of my master abraham, who
hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: i being
in the way, the lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.

24:28 and the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.

24:29 and rebekah had a brother, and his name was laban: and laban ran
out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30 and it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon
his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of rebekah his sister,
s
 
 ___________________________
 
ife unto my son.

24:39 and i said unto my master, peradventure the woman will not
follow me.

24:40 and he said unto me, the lord, before whom i walk, will send his
angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for
my son of my kindred, and of my father's house: 24:41 then shalt thou
be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if
they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42 and i came this day unto the well, and said, o lord god of my
master abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which i go: 24:43
behold, i stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that
when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and i say to her, give me,
i pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink; 24:44 and she say
to me, both drink thou, and i will also draw for thy camels: let the
same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my master's
son.

24:45 and before i had done speaking in mine heart, behold, rebeka
 
 ___________________________
 
t me drink, i pray
thee.

24:46 and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also: so i drank,
and she made the camels drink also.

24:47 and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she
said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor's son, whom milcah bare unto him:
and i put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

24:48 and i bowed down my head, and worshipped the lord, and blessed
the lord god of my master abraham, which had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

24:49 and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that i may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.

24:50 then laban and bethuel answered and said, the thing proceedeth
from the lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51 behold, rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be
thy master's son's wife, as the lord h
 
 ___________________________
 
d, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

25:9 and his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of
machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which
is before mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchased of the sons
of heth: there was abraham buried, and sarah his wife.

25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed
his son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi.

25:12 now these are the generations of ishmael, abraham's son, whom
hagar the egyptian, sarah's handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 and
these are the names of the sons of ishmael, by their names, according
to their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebajoth; and kedar,
and adbeel, and mibsam, 25:14 and mishma, and dumah, and massa, 25:15
hadar, and tema, jetur, naphish, and kedemah: 25:16 these are the sons
of ishmael, a
 
 ___________________________
 
the well esek;
because they strove with him.

26:21 and they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it sitnah.

26:22 and he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove not: and he called the name of it rehoboth; and he
said, for now the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 and he went up from thence to beersheba.

26:24 and the lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, i am
the god of abraham thy father: fear not, for i am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant abraham's sake.

26:25 and he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
lord, and pitched his tent there: and there isaac's servants digged a
well.

26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his
friends, and phichol the chief captain of his army.

26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me
 
 ___________________________
 
voury meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob.

27:18 and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said,
here am i; who art thou, my son?  27:19 and jacob said unto his
father, i am esau thy first born; i have done according as thou badest
me: arise, i pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

27:20 and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? and he said, because the lord thy god brought it
to me.

27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, i pray thee, that i may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son esau or not.

27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac his father; and he felt him, and
said, the voice is jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of esau.

27:23 and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother esau's hands: so he blessed him.

27:24 and he said, art thou my very son esau? and he said, i am.

27:25 and he said,
 
 ___________________________
 
 bring it near to me, and i will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 and his father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me,
my son.

27:27 and he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of
his raiment, and blessed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefore god
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 let people serve thee, and nations bow
down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of
blessing jacob, and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
isaac his father, that esau his brother came in from his 
 
 ___________________________
 
am weary of my
life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the
daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac called jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee
the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him
 
 ___________________________
 
ad mahalath the
daughter of ishmael abraham's son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his
wife.

28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran.

28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending
and descending on it.

28:13 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord
god of abraham thy father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will
 
 ___________________________
 
 keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i
will not leave thee, until i have done that which i have spoken to
thee of.

28:16 and jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, surely the lord
is in this place; and i knew it not.

28:17 and he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! this is
none other but the house of god, and this is the gate of heaven.

28:18 and jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that
he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil
upon the top of it.

28:19 and he called the name of that place bethel: but the name of
that city was called luz at the first.

28:20 and jacob vowed a vow, saying, if god will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that i go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, 28:21 so that i come again to 
 
 ___________________________
 
my father's house in
peace; then shall the lord be my god: 28:22 and this stone, which i
have set for a pillar, shall be god's house: and of all that thou
shalt give me i will surely give the tenth unto thee.

29:1 then jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east.

29:2 and he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they
watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

29:3 and thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the
stone from the well's mouth, and watered the shee
 
 ___________________________
 
nd said, now this time
will my husband be joined unto me, because i have born him three sons:
therefore was his name called levi.

29:35 and she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, now will
i praise the lord: therefore she called his name judah; and left
bearing.

30:1 and when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children, rachel
envied her sister; and said unto jacob, give me children, or else i
die.

30:2 and jacob's anger was kindled against rachel: and he said, am i
in god's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 and she said, behold my maid bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shall bear upon my knees, that i may also have children by her.

30:4 and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in
unto her.

30:5 and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a son.

30:6 and rachel said, god hath judged me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name dan.

30:7 and bilhah rachel's maid con
 
 ___________________________
 
 give me, i pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

30:15 and she said unto her, is it a small matter that thou hast taken
my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? and
rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's
mandrakes.

30:16 and jacob came out of the field in the evening, and leah went
out to meet him, and said, thou must come in unto me; for surely i
have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. and he lay with her that
night.

30:17 and god hearkened unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob
the fifth son.

30:18 and leah said, god hath given me my hire, because i have given
my maiden to my husband: and she called his name issachar.

30:19 and leah conceived again, and bare jacob the sixth son.

30:20 and leah said, god hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, because i have born him six sons: and she
called his name zebulun.

30:21 and afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name 
 
 ___________________________
 
dinah.

30:22 and god remembered rachel, and god hearkened to her, and opened
her womb.

30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away
my reproach: 30:24 and she called his name joseph; and said, the lord
shall add to me another son.

30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob
said unto laban, send me away, that i may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 give me my wives and my children, for whom i have served thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my service which i have done thee.

30:27 and laban said unto him, i pray thee, if i have found favour in
thine eyes,
 
 ___________________________
 
way all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's
hath he gotten all this glory.

31:2 and jacob beheld the countenance of laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.

31:3 and the lord said unto jacob, return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and i will be with thee.

31:4 and jacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field unto his
flock, 31:5 and said unto them, i see your father's countenance, that
it is not toward me as before; but the god of my father hath been with
me.

31:6 and ye know that with all my power i have served your father.

31:7 and your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;
but god suffered him not to hurt me.

31:8 if he said thus, the speckled shall be thy wages; then all the
cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, the ringstraked shall be
thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

31:9 thus god hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given
them to me.

31:10 and
 
 ___________________________
 
 it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that
i lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which
leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

31:11 and the angel of god spake unto me in a dream, saying, jacob:
and i said, here am i.

31:12 and he said, lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which
leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for i
have seen all that laban doeth unto thee.

31:13 i am the god of bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this
land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.

31:14 and rachel and leah answered and said unto him, is there yet any
portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?  31:15 are we not
counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured
also our money.

31:16 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children'
 
 ___________________________
 
s: now then, whatsoever god hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 then jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
padanaram, for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan.

31:19 and laban went to shear his sheep: and rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.

31:20 and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

 
 ___________________________
 

31:21 so he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over
the river, and set his face toward the mount gilead.

31:22 and it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled.

31:23 and he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount gilead.

31:24 and god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:25 then laban overtook jacob. now jacob had pitched his tent in the
mount: and laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of gilead.

31:26 and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives
taken with the sword?  31:27 wherefore didst thou flee away secretly,
and steal away fro
 
 ___________________________
 
m me; and didst not tell me, that i might have sent
thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou
hast now done foolishly in so doing.

31:29 it is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the god of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that
thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:30 and now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my
gods?  31:31 and jacob answered and said to laban, because i was
afraid: for i said, peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.

31:32 with whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before
our brethren di
 
 ___________________________
 
 i not
eaten.

31:39 that which was torn of beasts i brought not unto thee; i bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 thus i was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 
 
 ___________________________
 
took
stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

31:47 and laban called it jegarsahadutha: but jacob called it galeed.

31:48 and laban said, this heap is a witness between me and thee this
day.

therefore was the name of it called galeed; 31:49 and mizpah; for he
said, the lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another.

31:50 if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which i have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob of
 
 ___________________________
 
fered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him.

32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, this is god's host: and he
called the name of that place mahanaim.

32:3 and jacob sent messengers before him to esau his brother unto the
land of seir, the country of edom.

32:4 and he commanded them, saying, thus shall ye speak unto my lord
esau; thy servant jacob saith thus, i have sojourned with laban, and
stayed there until now: 32:5 and i have oxen, and asses, flocks, and
menservants, and womenservants: and i have sent to tell my lord, that
i may find grace in thy sight.

32:6 and the me
 
 ___________________________
 
ssengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy
brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred, and i will deal well with thee: 32:10 i am not worthy of
the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan;
and now i am become two bands.

32:11 deliver me, i pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of esau: for i fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the children.

 
 ___________________________
 
until the breaking of the day.

32:25 and when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of jacob's thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him.

32:26 and he said, let me go, for the day breaketh. and he said, i
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27 and he said unto him, what is thy name? and he said, jacob.

32:28 and he said, thy name shall be called no more jacob, but israel:
for as a prince hast thou power with god and with men, and hast
prevailed.

32:29 and jacob asked him, and said, tell me, i pray thee, thy name.
and he said, wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? and he
blessed him there.

32:30 and jacob called the name of the place peniel: for i have seen
god face to face, and my life is preserved.

32:31 and as he passed over penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halted upon his thigh.

32:32 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon 
 
 ___________________________
 
ds.

33:2 and he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and leah
and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost.

33:3 and he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him: and they wept.

33:5 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, who are those with thee? and he said, the children which god
hath graciously given thy servant.

33:6 then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
bowed themselves.

33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bowed themselves.

33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met? and
he said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 and esau said, i have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 and
 
 ___________________________
 
 jacob said, nay, i pray thee, if now i have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore i have
seen thy face, as though i had seen the face of god, and thou wast
pleased with me.

33:11 take, i pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because
god hath dealt graciously with me, and because i have enough. and he
urged him, and he took it.

33:12 and he said, let us take our journey, and let us go, and i will
go before thee.

33:13 and he said unto him, my lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men
should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

33:14 let my lord, i pray thee, pass over before his servant: and i
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that 
 
 ___________________________
 
heir wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they
captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

34:30 and jacob said to simeon and levi, ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the canaanites
and the perizzites: and i being few in number, they shall gather
themselves together against me, and slay me; and i shall be destroyed,
i and my house.

34:31 and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
35:1 and god said unto jacob, arise, go up to bethel, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto god, that appeared unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of esau thy brother.

35:2 then jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with
him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and
change your garments: 35:3 and let us arise, and go up to bethel; and
i will make there an altar unto god, who answered me in the day of my
distress, and was with me in the way which i
 
 ___________________________
 
 went.

35:4 and they gave unto jacob all the strange gods which were in their
hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and jacob hid
them under the oak which was by shechem.

35:5 and they journeyed: and the terror of god was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of
jacob.

35:6 so jacob came to luz, which is in the land of canaan, that is,
bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

35:7 and he built there an altar, and called the place elbethel:
because there god appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his
brother.

35:8 but deborah rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called allonba
 
 ___________________________
 
chuth.

35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave
abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will i give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

3
 
 ___________________________
 
5:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to ephrath: and rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

35:17 and it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

35:18 and it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she
died) that she called his name benoni: but his father called him
benjamin.

35:19 and rachel died, and was buried in the way to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ell favoured.

39:7 and it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife
cast her eyes upon joseph; and she said, lie with me.

39:8 but he refused, and said unto his master's wife, behold, my
master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed
all that he hath to my hand; 39:9 there is none greater in this house
than i; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can i do this great wickedness, and sin
against god?  39:10 and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by
day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

39:11 and it came to pass about this time, that joseph went into the
house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house
there within.

39:12 and she caught him by his garment, saying, lie with me: and he
left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

39:13 and it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment
in her h
 
 ___________________________
 
erpretation of his dream, the
butler and the baker of the king of egypt, which were bound in the
prison.

40:6 and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.

40:7 and he asked pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of
his lord's house, saying, wherefore look ye so sadly to day?  40:8 and
they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream, and there is no
interpreter of it. and joseph said unto them, do not interpretations
belong to god? tell me them, i pray you.

40:9 and the chief butler told his dream to joseph, and said to him,
in my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 40:10 and in the vine were
three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot
forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 and
pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and i took the grapes, and pressed them
into pharaoh's cup, and i gave the cup into pharaoh's hand.

40:12 and joseph said unto him, this is the interpret
 
 ___________________________
 
preted to us, so it was; me he
restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

41:14 then pharaoh sent and called joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his
raiment, and came in unto pharaoh.

41:15 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i have dreamed a dream, and there
is none that can interpret it: and i have heard say of thee, that thou
canst understand a dream to interpret it.

41:16 and joseph answered pharaoh, saying, it is not in me: god shall
give pharaoh an answer of peace.

41:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, in my dream, behold, i stood upon
the bank of the river: 41:18 and, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a
meadow: 41:19 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor
and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as i never saw in all the
land of egypt for badness: 41:20 and the lean and the ill favoured
kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:
 
 ___________________________
 
n that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. so i awoke.

41:22 and i saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one
stalk, full and good: 41:23 and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,
and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 and the
thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and i told this unto the
magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

41:25 and joseph said unto pharaoh, the dream of pharaoh is one: god
hath shewed pharaoh what he is about to do.

41:26 the seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are
seven years: the dream is one.

41:27 and the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them
are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind
shall be seven years of famine.

41:28 this is the thing which i have spoken unto pharaoh: what god is
about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh.

41:29 behold, there come seven years of great plenty thro
 
 ___________________________
 
ughout all
the land of egypt: 41:30 and there shall arise after them seven years
of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land; 41:31 and the plenty shall not
be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall
be very grievous.

41:32 and for that the dream was doubled unto pharaoh twice; it is
because the thing is established by god, and god will shortly bring it
to pass.

41:33 now therefore let pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and
set him over the land of egypt.

41:34 let pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of egypt in the seven plenteous
years.

41:35 and let them gather all the food of those good years that come,
and lay up corn under the hand of pharaoh, and let them keep food in
the cities.

41:36 and that food shall be for store to the la
 
 ___________________________
 
nd against the seven
years of famine, which shall be in the land of egypt; that the land
perish not through the famine.

41:37 and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.

41:38 and pharaoh said unto his servants, can we find such a one as
this is, a man in whom the spirit of god is?  41:39 and pharaoh said
unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath shewed thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 thou shalt be over my house,
and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the
throne will i be greater than thou.

41:41 and pharaoh said unto joseph, see, i have set thee over all the
land of egypt.

41:42 and pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a
gold chain about his neck; 41:43 and he made him to
 
 ___________________________
 
ven years, which were
in the land of egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of
the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

41:49 and joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he left numbering; for it was without number.

41:50 and unto joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare unto
him.

41:51 and joseph called the name of the firstborn manasseh: for god,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

41:52 and the name of the second called he ephraim: for god hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

41:53 and the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of
egypt, were ended.

41:54 and the seven years of dearth began to come, according as joseph
had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of
egypt there was bread.

41:55 and when all the land of egypt was fami
 
 ___________________________
 
ying, ye are spies: 42:15 hereby ye shall be proved: by the life of
pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither.

42:16 send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any
truth in you: or else by the life of pharaoh surely ye are spies.

42:17 and he put them all together into ward three days.

42:18 and joseph said unto them the third day, this do, and live; for
i fear god: 42:19 if ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound
in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your
houses: 42:20 but bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your
words be verified, and ye shall not die. and they did so.

42:21 and they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

42:22 and reuben answered
 
 ___________________________
 
man's money into his sack, and to give them provision
for the way: and thus did he unto them.

42:26 and they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

42:27 and as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in
the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

42:28 and he said unto his brethren, my money is restored; and, lo, it
is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, what is this that god hath done unto us?  42:29
and they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan, and
told him all that befell unto them; saying, 42:30 the man, who is the
lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the
country.

42:31 and we said unto him, we are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 we
be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest
is this day with our father in the land of canaan.

42:33 and the man, the lord of the country, said unto us
 
 ___________________________
 
ond time.

43:11 and their father israel said unto them, if it must be so now, do
this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry
down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and
myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 43:12 and take double money in your hand;
and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 43:13 take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 and god
almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your
other brother, and benjamin. if i be bereaved of my children, i am
bereaved.

43:15 and the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and
stood before joseph.

43:16 and when joseph saw benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of
his house, bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these
men shall dine with me at noon.

43:17 and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
muned with him at the door of the house, 43:20 and said, o sir, we
came indeed down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 and it came to
pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full
weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

43:22 and other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food:
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

43:23 and he said, peace be to you, fear not: your god, and the god of
your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: i had your money.
and he brought simeon out unto them.

43:24 and the man brought the men into joseph's house, and gave them
water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

43:25 and they made ready the present against joseph came at noon: for
they heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26 and when joseph came home, they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house, and b
 
 ___________________________
 
owed themselves to him to the
earth.

43:27 and he asked them of their welfare, and said, is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet alive?  43:28 and they
answered, thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
and they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

43:29 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake
unto me? and he said, god be gracious unto thee, my son.

43:30 and joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his
brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber,
and wept there.

43:31 and he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and
said, set on bread.

43:32 and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves,
and for the egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because
the egyptians might not eat bread with the hebrews; for that is an
abomi
 
 ___________________________
 
way, they
and their asses.

44:4 and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for
good?  44:5 is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

44:6 and he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

44:7 and they said unto him, wherefore saith my lord these words? god
forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: 44:8
behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
again unto thee out of the land of canaan: how then should we steal
out of thy lord's house silver or gold?  44:9 with whomsoever of thy
servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's
bondmen.

44:10 and he said, now also let it be according unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.


 
 ___________________________
 
and the cup was found in benjamin's sack.

44:13 then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
returned to the city.

44:14 and judah and his brethren came to joseph's house; for he was
yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

44:15 and joseph said unto them, what deed is this that ye have done?
wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine?  44:16 and judah
said, what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how
shall we clear ourselves? god hath found out the iniquity of thy
servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with
whom the cup is found.

44:17 and he said, god forbid that i should do so: but the man in
whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you,
get you up in peace unto your father.

44:18 then judah came near unto him, and said, oh my lord, let thy
servant, i pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not
thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art e
 
 ___________________________
 
ethren.

45:2 and he wept aloud: and the egyptians and the house of pharaoh
heard.

45:3 and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father
yet live? and his brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubled at his presence.

45:4 and joseph said unto his brethren, come near to me, i pray you.
and they came near. and he said, i am joseph your brother, whom ye
sold into egypt.

45:5 now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye
sold me hither: for god did send me before you to preserve life.

45:6 for these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet
there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor
harvest.

45:7 and god sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

45:8 so now it was not you that sent me hither, but god: and he hath
made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of egypt.

45:9
 
 ___________________________
 
 haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, thus saith
thy son joseph, god hath made me lord of all egypt: come down unto me,
tarry not: 45:10 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen, and thou
shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11
and there will i nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine;
lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

45:12 and, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother benjamin,
that it is my mouth
 
 ___________________________
 
 is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down
into egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will
go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried
jacob their father, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
n their
buryingplace. and he said, i will do as thou hast said.

47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.

48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told joseph,
behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons,
manasseh and ephraim.

48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thy son joseph cometh unto
thee: and israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighty appeared unto me at luz
in the land of canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold,
i will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and i will make of thee
a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee
for an everlasting possession.

48:5 and now thy two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto
thee in the land of egypt before i came unto thee into egypt, are
mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 and thy issue, which tho
 
 ___________________________
 
u begettest after them, shall be thine,
and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their
inheritance.

48:7 and as for me, when i came from padan, rachel died by me in the
land of canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come
unto ephrath: and i buried her there in the way of ephrath; the same
is bethlehem.

48:8 and israel beheld joseph's sons, and said, who are these?  48:9
and joseph said unto his father, they are my sons, whom god hath given
me in this place. and he said, bring them, i pray thee, unto me, and i
will bless them.

48:10 now the eyes of israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see.

and he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced
them.

48:11 and israel said unto joseph, i had not thought to see thy face:
and, lo, god hath shewed me also thy seed.

48:12 and joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
himself with his face to the earth.

48:13 and jo
 
 ___________________________
 
seph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward
israel's left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from ephraim's head unto manasseh's head.

48:18 and joseph said unto his father, 
 
 ___________________________
 
not so, my father: for this is
the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

48:19 and his father refused, and said, i know it, my son, i know it:
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall
become a multitude of nations.

48:20 and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall israel
bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set
ephraim before manasseh.

48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, i die: but god shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 and jacob called unto his sons, and said, gather yourselves
together, that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last
days
 
 ___________________________
 
 a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.

49:20 out of asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

49:22 joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 the archers have sorely
grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 but his bow abode
in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty god of jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of
israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thy father, who shall help thee; and
by the almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 the blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that wa
 
 ___________________________
 

father.

50:15 and when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
said, joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
all the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 and they sent a messenger unto joseph, saying, thy father did
command before he died, saying, 50:17 so shall ye say unto joseph,
forgive, i pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin;
for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the
trespass of the servants of the god of thy father. and joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

50:18 and his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, behold, we be thy servants.

50:19 and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am i in the place of
god?  50:20 but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but god meant
it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people
alive.

50:21 now therefore fear ye not: i will nourish you, and your little
ones.

and he comforted them, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which c
 
 ___________________________
 
e, in
morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all
their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.

1:15 and the king of egypt spake to the hebrew midwives, of which the
name of the one was shiphrah, and the name of the other puah: 1:16 and
he said, when ye do the office of a midwife to the hebrew women, and
see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but
if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

1:17 but the midwives feared god, and did not as the king of egypt
commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

1:18 and the king of egypt called for the midwives, and said unto
them, why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children
alive?  1:19 and the midwives said unto pharaoh, because the hebrew
women are not as the egyptian women; for they are lively, and are
delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.

1:20 therefore god dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied, and waxed very
 
 ___________________________
 
 mighty.

1:21 and it came to pass, because the midwives feared god, that he
made them houses.

1:22 and pharaoh charged all his people, saying, every son that is
born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save
alive.

2:1 and there went a man of the house of levi, and took to wife a
daughter of levi.

2:2 and the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that
he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.

2:3 and when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime a
 
 ___________________________
 
his daughters, and where is he? why is it that
ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 and moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of 
 
 ___________________________
 
a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and moses said, i will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in egypt, an
 
 ___________________________
 
rge, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and
the jebusites.

3:9 now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of israel is come
unto me: and i have also seen the oppression wherewith the egyptians
oppress them.

3:10 come now therefore, and i will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou
mayest bring forth my people the children of israel out of egypt.

3:11 and moses said unto god, who am i, that i should go unto pharaoh,
and that i should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt?
3:12 and he said, certainly i will be with thee; and this shall be a
token unto thee, that i have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth
the people out of egypt, ye shall serve god upon this mountain.

3:13 and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring
you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and the hittites, and the amorites, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the perizzites, and the
hivites, and the jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

3:18 and they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou
and the elders of israel, unto the king of egypt, and ye shall say
unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath met with us: and now let us
go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we
may sacrifice to the lord our god.

3:19 and i am sure that the king of egypt will not let you go, no, not
by a mighty hand.

3:20 and i will stretch out my hand, and smite egypt with all my
wonders which i will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will
let you go.

3:21 and i will give this people favour in the sight of the egyptians:
and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silv
 
 ___________________________
 
nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into
thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and he said,
is not aaron the levite thy brother? i know that he can speak well.
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and i
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of god.

4:17 and thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 and moses went and returned to jethro his father in law, and said
unto him, let me go, i pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
are in egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. and jethro said to
moses, go in peace.

4:19 and the lord said unto moses in midian, go, return into egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 and moses took his wife and his sons, and set them up
 
 ___________________________
 
on an ass,
and he returned to the land of egypt: and moses took the rod of god in
his hand.

4:21 and the lord said unto moses, when thou goest to return into
egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before pharaoh, which i have
put in thine hand: but i will harden his heart, that he shall not let
the people go.

4:22 and thou shalt say unto pharaoh, thus saith the lord, israel is
my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 and i say unto thee, let my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, i will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 so he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 and the lord said to aaron, go into the wilderness to meet moses.
and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kissed him.

4:28 and moses told aaron all the words of the lord who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the words which the
lord had spoken unto moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 and the people believed: and when they heard that the lord had
visited the children of israel, and that he had looked upon their
affl
 
 ___________________________
 
iction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 and afterward moses and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus
saith the lord god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to
let israel go? i know not the lord, neither will i let israel go.

5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.

5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and
aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 and pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmast
 
 ___________________________
 
ers of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be
idle; therefore they cry, saying, let us go and sacrifice to our god.

5:9 let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 and the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
and they spake to the people, saying, thus saith pharaoh, i will not
give you straw.

5:11 go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
work shall be diminished.

5:12 so the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of
egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.

5:13 a
 
 ___________________________
 
and to slay us.

5:22 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefo
 
 ___________________________
 
re say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i
will bring you out from under the burdens of the egyptians, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the chil
 
 ___________________________
 
 pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out
the children of israel from egypt: these are that moses and aaron.

6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto moses in
the land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, i am
the lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that i say unto
thee.

6:30 and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 and the lord said
unto moses, see, i have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 thou shalt speak all that i command thee: and aaron thy brother
shall speak unto pharaoh, that he send the children of israel out of
his land.

7:3 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of egypt.

7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that i may lay my hand
upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
israel, out of the land of egypt by great jud
 
 ___________________________
 

but aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 and he hardened pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the lord had said.

7:14 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 get thee unto pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 and thou shalt say unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath
sent me unto thee, saying, let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 thus saith the lord, in this thou shalt know that i am the lord:
behold, i will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
 
 ___________________________
 
at the
lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and
i will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the lord.

8:9 and moses said unto pharaoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 and he said, to morrow. and he said, be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the lord
our god.

8:11 and the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 and moses and aaron went out from pharaoh: and moses cried unto
the lord because of the frogs which he had brought against pharaoh.

8:13 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 and they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land st
 
 ___________________________
 
he land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of egypt.

8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
egypt.

8:18 and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 then the magicians said unto pharaoh, this is the finger of god:
and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the lord had said.

8:20 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, i will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people,
and into thy houses: and the houses of the egyptians sh
 
 ___________________________
 
es shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that i am the lord in the midst of the earth.

8:23 and i will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 and pharaoh called for moses and for aaron, and said, go ye,
sacrifice to your god in the land.

8:26 and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 we will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command us.

8:28 and pharaoh said, i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
lord your god in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very fa
 
 ___________________________
 
ceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
lord.

8:30 and moses went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

8:31 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and he removed
the swarms of flies from pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; there remained not one.

8:32 and pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would
he let the people go.

9:1 then the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh, and tell him,
thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my people go, that they
may serve me.

9:2 for if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
behold, the hand of the lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

9:4 and the lord shall sever between the cattle of israel and the
cattle of egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the
children's of israel.

9:5 and t
 
 ___________________________
 
inkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 and the magicians could not stand before moses because of the
boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the
egyptians.

9:12 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh, and he hearkened not
unto them; as the lord had spoken unto moses.

9:13 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh, and say unto him, thus saith the lord god of the
hebrews, let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 for i will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 for now i will stretch out my hand, that i may smite thee and thy
people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 and in very deed for this cause have i raised thee up, for to
shew in thee my power; and that my name may b
 
 ___________________________
 
 my
people are wicked.

9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and i will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 and moses said unto him, as soon as i am gone out of the city, i
will spread abroad my hands unto the lord; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the lord's.

9:30 but as for thee and thy servants, i know that ye will not yet
fear the lord god.

9:31 and the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in
the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 but the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 and moses went out of the city from pharaoh, and spread abroad
his hands unto the lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 and when pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he a
 
 ___________________________
 
rael go; as the lord had spoken by moses.

10:1 and the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh: for i have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that i might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things i have wrought in egypt,
and my signs which i have done among them; that ye may know how that i
am the lord.

10:3 and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
i bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of
the field: 10:6 and they shal
 
 ___________________________
 
l fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned himself, and went out
from pharaoh.

10:7 and pharaoh's servants said unto him, how long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the lord their
god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?  10:8 and moses and
aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go,
serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 and
moses said, we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the lord.

10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as i will
let you go, and your little ones: look to
 
 ___________________________
 
 they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 for they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of egypt.

10:16 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i
have sinned against the lord your god, and against you.

10:17 now therefore forgive, i pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

10:19 and the lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of egypt.

10:20 but the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let
the children of isr
 
 ___________________________
 
aven; and there was
a thick darkness in all the land of egypt three days: 10:23 they saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but
all the children of israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 and pharaoh called unto moses, and said, go ye, serve the lord;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones
also go with you.

10:25 and moses said, thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the lord our god.

10:26 our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the lord our god; and
we know not with what we must serve the lord, until we come thither.

10:27 but the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 and pharaoh said unto him, get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 and moses said, thou hast spoken well, i will see 
 
 ___________________________
 
th the purtenance thereof.

12:10 and ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and
that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 and thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on
your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
it is the lord's passover.

12:12 for i will pass through the land of egypt this night, and will
smite all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both man and beast; and
against all the gods of egypt i will execute judgment: i am the lord.

12:13 and the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where
ye are: and when i see the blood, i will pass over you, and the plague
shall not be upon you to destroy you, when i smite the land of egypt.

12:14 and this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep
it a feast to the lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordinance for ever.

12:15 seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; eve
 
 ___________________________
 
raoh would hardly let us go, that
the lord slew all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both the
firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore i sacrifice to
the lord all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the
firstborn of my children i redeem.

13:16 and it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the lord brought us forth
out of egypt.

13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the people go, that
god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines,
although that was near; for god said, lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the red sea:
and the children of israel went up harnessed out of the land of egypt.

13:19 and moses took the bones of joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you; and
ye shall carr
 
 ___________________________
 
h out thine hand over the sea, and
divide it: and the children of israel shall go on dry ground through
the midst of the sea.

14:17 and i, behold, i will harden the hearts of the egyptians, and
they shall follow them: and i will get me honour upon pharaoh, and
upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:18 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i have
gotten me honour upon pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his
horsemen.

14:19 and the angel of god, which went before the camp of israel,
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 and it came between
the camp of the egyptians and the camp of israel; and it was a cloud
and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
one came not near the other all the night.

14:21 and moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the lord
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, an
 
 ___________________________
 
el saw the egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 and israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the
egyptians: and the people feared the lord, and believed the lord, and
his servant moses.

15:1 then sang moses and the children of israel this song unto the
lord, and spake, saying, i will sing unto the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:2 the lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation:
he is my god, and i will prepare him an habitation; my father's god,
and i will exalt him.

15:3 the lord is a man of war: the lord is his name.

15:4 pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his
chosen captains also are drowned in the red sea.

15:5 the depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a
stone.

15:6 thy right hand, o lord, is become glorious in power: thy right
hand, o lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.

15:7 and in the greatness of thine excellenc
 
 ___________________________
 
le.

15:8 and with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered
together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were
congealed in the heart of the sea.

15:9 the enemy said, i will pursue, i will overtake, i will divide the
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; i will draw my sword, my
hand shall destroy them.

15:10 thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank
as lead in the mighty waters.

15:11 who is like unto thee, o lord, among the gods? who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?  15:12 thou
stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

15:13 thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast
redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy
habitation.

15:14 the people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on
the inhabitants of palestina.

15:15 then the dukes of edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of moab,
trembling shall take hold u
 
 ___________________________
 
y came to marah, they could not drink of the waters
of marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
marah.

15:24 and the people murmured against moses, saying, what shall we
drink?  15:25 and he cried unto the lord; and the lord shewed him a
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made
sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he
proved them, 15:26 and said, if thou wilt diligently hearken to the
voice of the lord thy god, and wilt do that which is right in his
sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his
statutes, i will put none of these diseases upon thee, which i have
brought upon the egyptians: for i am the lord that healeth thee.

15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation
of the children of israel came unto the wilder
 
 ___________________________
 
ness of sin, which is
between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their departing out of the land of egypt.

16:2 and the whole congregation of the children of israel murmured
against moses and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of
israel said unto them, would to god we had died by the hand of the
lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, i will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that i may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or
no.

16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day t
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of israel, that they looked toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glory of the lord appeared in the cloud.

16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 i have heard the
murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread;
and ye shall know that i am the lord your god.

16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and
covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of
the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar
frost on the ground.

16:15 and when the children of israel saw it, they said one to
another, it is manna: for they wist not what it was. and moses said
unto them, this is the bread which the lord hath given you t
 
 ___________________________
 
ter out of it,
that the people may drink. and moses did so in the sight of the elders
of israel.

17:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the
lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were 
 
 ___________________________
 
le with the edge of
the sword.

17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write this for a memorial in a
book, and rehearse it in the ears of joshua: for i will utterly put
out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven.

17:15 and moses built an altar, and called the name of it
jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, because the lord hath sworn that the
lord will have war with amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses' father in law, heard of
all that god had done for moses, and for israel his people, and that
the lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses'
father in law, took zipporah, moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
18:3 and her two sons; of which the name of the one was gershom; for
he said, i have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 and the name of
the other was eliezer; for the god of my father, said he, was mine
help, and delivered me from the sword of pharaoh: 18:5 and jethro,
moses' father in law, cam
 
 ___________________________
 
e with his sons and his wife unto moses into
the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of god: 18:6 and he
said unto moses, i thy father in law jethro am come unto thee, and thy
wife, and her two sons with her.

18:7 and moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance,
and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they
came into the tent.

18:8 and moses told his father in law all that the lord had done unto
pharaoh and to the egyptians for israel's sake, and all the travail
that had come upon them by the way, and how the lord delivered them.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
8:9 and jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had done
to israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the egyptians.

18:10 and jethro said, blessed be the lord, who hath delivered you out
of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath
delivered the people from under the hand of the egyptians.

18:11 now i know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 and jethro, moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for god: and aaron came, and all the elders of israel, to
eat bread with moses' father in law before god.

18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses sat to judge the
people: and the people stood by moses from the morning unto the
evening.

18:14 and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
he said, what is this t
 
 ___________________________
 
hing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?  18:15 and moses said unto his father in law, because the people
come unto me to enquire of god: 18:16 when they have a matter, they
come unto me; and i judge between one and another, and i do make them
know the statutes of god, and his laws.

18:17 and moses' father in law said unto him, the thing that thou
doest is not good.

18:18 thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is
with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to
perform it thyself alone.

18:19 hearken now unto my voice, i will give thee counsel, and god
shall be with thee: be thou for the people to god-ward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto god: 18:20 and thou shalt teach them
ordinances and laws,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and shalt shew them the way wherein they must
walk, and the work that they must do.

18:21 moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear god, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over
them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 and let them judge the people at
all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring
unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be
easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 if thou shalt do this thing, and god command thee so, then thou
shalt be able to endure, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ught unto moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

18:27 and moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into
his own land.

19:1 in the third month, when the children of israel were gone forth
out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of sinai.

19:2 for they were departed from rephidim, and were come to the desert
of sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there israel camped
before the mount.

19:3 and moses went up unto god, and the lord called unto him out of
the mountain, saying, thus shalt thou say to the house of jacob, and
tell the children of israel; 19:4 ye have seen what i did unto the
egyptians, and how i bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.


 
 ___________________________
 
 from the mount unto the people, and
sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

19:15 and he said unto the people, be ready against the third day:
come not at your wives.

19:16 and it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and
the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that
was in the camp trembled.

19:17 and moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with
god; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 and mount sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the lord
descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

19:19 and when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder
and louder, moses spake, and god answered him by a voice.

19:20 and the lord came down upon mount sinai, on the top of the
mount: and the lord called moses up to the top of the mo
 
 ___________________________
 
es, lest the lord break forth upon them.

19:23 and moses said unto the lord, the people cannot come up to mount
sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and
sanctify it.

19:24 and the lord said unto him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt
come up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 so moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 i am the lord thy
god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

20:3 thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for i
the lord thy god am a jealous god, visiting the iniq
 
 ___________________________
 
uity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me; 20:6 and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love
me, and keep my commandments.

20:7 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain; for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

20:8 remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

20:9 six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: 20:10 but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor
thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates: 20:11 for in six days the lord made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the
lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

20:12 honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

20:13 thou shalt not kill.
 
 ___________________________
 
gainst thy neighbour.

20:17 thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

20:18 and all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the
people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 and they said unto moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not god speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 and moses said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin
not.

20:21 and the people stood afar off, and moses drew near unto the
thick darkness where god was.

20:22 and the lord said unto moses, thus thou shalt say unto the
children of israel, ye have seen that i have talked with you from
heaven.

20:23 ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make
unto you 
 
 ___________________________
 
gods of gold.

20:24 an altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice
thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and
thine oxen: in all places where i record my name i will come unto
thee, and i will bless thee.

20:25 and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build
it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast
polluted it.

20:26 neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy
nakedness be not discover
 
 ___________________________
 
n
he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

21:9 and if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters.

21:10 if he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish.

21:11 and if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out
free without money.

21:12 he that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death.

21:13 and if a man lie not in wait, but god deliver him into his hand;
then i will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

21:14 but if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him
with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

21:15 and he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely
put to death.

21:16 and he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found
in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

21:17 and he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely
 
 ___________________________
 
ut if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good:
if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.

22:16 and if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.

22:17 if her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay
money according to the dowry of virgins.

22:18 thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

22:19 whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.

22:20 he that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed.

22:21 thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
strangers in the land of egypt.

22:22 ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

22:23 if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, i
will surely hear their cry; 22:24 and my wrath shall wax hot, and i
will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

22:25 if thou lend money to any o
 
 ___________________________
 
f my people that is poor by thee,
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him
usury.

22:26 if thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou
shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 for that
is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that i will
hear; for i am gracious.

22:28 thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy
people.

22:29 thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and
of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.

22:30 likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep:
seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give
it me.

22:31 and ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh
that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

23:1 thou shalt not raise 
 
 ___________________________
 
shalt let it rest and
lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave
the beasts of the field shall eat. in like manner thou shalt deal with
thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.

23:12 six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou
shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy
handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

23:13 and in all things that i have said unto you be circumspect: and
make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out
of thy mouth.

23:14 three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

23:15 thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat
unleavened bread seven days, as i commanded thee, in the time
appointed of the month abib; for in it thou camest out from egypt: and
none shall appear before me empty:) 23:16 and the feast of harvest,
the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and
the feast of ingathering, which is in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he end of the year, when thou
hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.

23:17 three items in the year all thy males shall appear before the
lord god.

23:18 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened
bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.

23:19 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into
the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

23:20 behold, i send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way,
and to bring thee into the place which i have prepared.

23:21 beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will
not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

23:22 but if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that i
speak; then i will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary
unto thine adversaries.

23:23 for mine angel shal
 
 ___________________________
 
l go before thee, and bring thee in unto the
amorites, and the hittites, and the perizzites, and the canaanites,
the hivites, and the jebusites: and i will cut them off.

23:24 thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do
after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite
break down their images.

23:25 and ye shall serve the lord your god, and he shall bless thy
bread, and thy water; and i will take sickness away from the midst of
thee.

23:26 there shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy
land: the number of thy days i will fulfil.

23:27 i will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people
to whom thou shalt come, and i will make all thine enemies turn their
backs unto thee.

23:28 and i will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the
hivite, the canaanite, and the hittite, from be
 
 ___________________________
 
 lest the
land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against
thee.

23:30 by little and little i will drive them out from before thee,
until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

23:31 and i will set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea of
the philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for i will
deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
drive them out before thee.

23:32 thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron,
nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 and moses alone shall come near the lord: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 and moses came and told the people all the words of the lord, and
 
 ___________________________
 
d half
of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of
the people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and
be obedient.

24:8 and moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of
the elders of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which i have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and moses rose up, and his mi
 
 ___________________________
 
nister joshua: and moses went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouri
 
 ___________________________
 
ughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the lord: where i will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 and there i will meet with the children of israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44 and i will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
altar: i will sanctify also both aaron and his sons, to minister to me
in the priest's office.

29:45 and i will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their
god.

29:46 and they shall know that i am the lord their god, that brought
them forth out of the land of egypt, that i may dwell among them: i am
the lord their god.

30:1 and thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim
wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 a cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height
thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.

30:3 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,
 
 ___________________________
 
ee: it shall be unto you
most holy.

30:37 and as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make
to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto
thee holy for the lord.

30:38 whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
even be cut off from his people.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 see, i have called by
name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah:
31:3 and i have filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31:4 to devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, 31:5 and in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of
timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 and i, behold, i have given with him aholiab, the son of
ahisamach, of the tribe of dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise
hearted i have put wisdom, that they may make all that i have
commanded thee; 31:7 the
 
 ___________________________
 
t to death.

31:16 wherefore the children of israel shall keep the sabbath, to
observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for
in six days the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of god.

32:1 and when the people saw that moses delayed to come down out of
the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto aaron, and
said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for
this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we
wot not what is become of him.

32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, which
are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.

32:3 and all the pe
 
 ___________________________
 
ople brake off the golden earrings which were in
their ears, and brought them unto aaron.

32:4 and he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a
graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these
be thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and aaron
made proclamation, and said, to morrow is a feast to the lord.

32:6 and they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt
offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrup
 
 ___________________________
 
ted
themselves: 32:8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which i
commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, these be thy gods, o
israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:9 and the lord said unto moses, i have seen this people, and,
behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 now therefore let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that i may consume them:
and i will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power,
 
 ___________________________
 
to them, i will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 and the tables were the work of god, and the writing was the
writing of god, graven upon the tables.

32:17 and when joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
he said unto moses, there is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do i hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' ang
 
 ___________________________
 
s hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made
the children of israel drink of it.

32:21 and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 and aaron said, let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are set on mischief.

32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us:
for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 and i said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off. so they gave it me: then i cast it into the fire, and there came
out this calf.

32:25 and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then
moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord's
side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of levi gathered
themselves together unto him.

32:27 and he said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 and the children of levi did according to the word of moses: and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

32:29 for moses had said, consecrate yourselves today to the lord,
even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow
upon you a blessing this
 
 ___________________________
 
 day.

32:30 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses said unto the
people, ye have sinned a great sin: and now i will go up unto the
lord; peradventure i shall make an atonement for your sin.

32:31 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, oh, this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

32:32 yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me,
i pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoever hath sinned against me,
him will i blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because
 
 ___________________________
 
any man be seen
throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before
that mount.

34:4 and he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and moses
rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount sinai, as the
lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

34:5 and the lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the name of the lord.

34:6 and the lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the lord, the
lord god, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, 34:7 keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear
the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.

34:8 and moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and
worshipped.

34:9 and he said, if now i have found grace in thy sight, o lord, let
my
 
 ___________________________
 
i will do with thee.

34:11 observe thou that which i command thee this day: behold, i drive
out before thee the amorite, and the canaanite, and the hittite, and
the perizzite, and the hivite, and the jebusite.

34:12 take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in
the midst of thee: 34:13 but ye shall destroy their altars, break
their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 for thou shalt worship
no other god: for the lord, whose name is jealous, is a jealous god:
34:15 lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and
they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods,
and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 34:16 and thou take
of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring
after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

34:17 thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

34:18 the feast of unleavened bread shalt tho
 
 ___________________________
 
 a lamb: and
if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. all the
firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. and none shall appear before
me empty.

34:21 six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

34:22 and thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of
wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.

34:23 thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the
lord god, the god of israel.

34:24 for i will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy
borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up
to appear before the lord thy god thrice in the year.

34:25 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven;
neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto
the morning.

34:26 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto
the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a k
 
 ___________________________
 
d oil for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 the children of israel brought a willing offering unto the lord,
every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
manner of work, which the lord had commanded to be made by the hand of
moses.

35:30 and moses said unto the children of israel, see, the lord hath
called by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe
of judah; 35:31 and he hath filled him with the spirit of god, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship; 35:32 and to devise curious works, to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, 35:33 and in the cutting of stones, to set
them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

35:34 and he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and
aholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan.

35:35 them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of
work, of the engraver, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the offerings of the lord made
by fire.

2:11 no meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the lord, shall be
made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any
offering of the lord made by fire.

2:12 as for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto
the lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

2:13 and every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with
salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy god to
be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt
offer salt.

2:14 and if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the
lord, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green
ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.

2:15 and thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it
is a meat offering.

2:16 and the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten
corn thereof, and part of the oil 
 
 ___________________________
 
m, and burn it upon the
altar.

4:20 and he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an
atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.

4:21 and he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn
him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the
congregation.

4:22 when a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
against any of the commandments of the lord his god concerning things
which should not be done, and is guilty; 4:23 or if his sin, wherein
he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a
kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 4:24 and he shall lay his
hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they
kill the burnt offering before the lord: it is a sin offering.

4:25 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offer
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
before the lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
statute for ever; as the lord hath commanded.

10:16 and moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with eleazar and ithamar, the
sons of aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy,
and god hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the lord?  10:18 behold, the blood of
it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy place, as i commanded.

10:19 and aaron said unto moses, behold, this day have they offered
their sin offering and their burnt offering before the lord; and such
things have befallen me: and if i had eaten the sin offering to day,
should it have been accepted in the sigh
 
 ___________________________
 
at creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination; it shall not be eaten.

11:42 whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all
four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an
abomination.

11:43 ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing
that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them,
that ye should be defiled thereby.

11:44 for i am the lord your god: ye shall therefore sanctify
yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for i am holy: neither shall ye
defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth.

11:45 for i am the lord that bringeth you up out of the land of egypt,
to be your god: ye shall therefore be holy, for i am holy.

11:46 this is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 to make a di
 
 ___________________________
 
l be cut off.

17:15 and every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that
which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or
a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

17:16 but if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear
his iniquity.

18:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, i am the lord your god.

18:3 after the doings of the land of egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of canaan, whither i bring
you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

18:4 ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein: i am the lord your god.

18:5 ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a
man do, he shall live in them: i am the lord.

18:6 none of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to h
 
 ___________________________
 
t is wickedness.

18:18 neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to
uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.

18:19 also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her
nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

18:20 moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife,
to defile thyself with her.

18:21 and thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy god: i am the lord.

18:22 thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination.

18:23 neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself
therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down
thereto: it is confusion.

18:24 defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all
these the nations are defiled which i cast out before you: 18:25 and
the land is defiled: therefore i do visit the iniquity thereof upon
it, and the land itself vomiteth
 
 ___________________________
 
ch were before you, and
the land is defiled;) 18:28 that the land spue not you out also, when
ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.

18:29 for whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the
souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

18:30 therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any
one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and
that ye defile not yourselves therein: i am the lord your god.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 19:2 speak unto all the
congregation of the children of israel, and say unto them, ye shall be
holy: for i the lord your god am holy.

19:3 ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
sabbaths: i am the lord your god.

19:4 turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: i am
the lord your god.

19:5 and if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the lord, ye
shall offer it at your own will.

19:6 
 
 ___________________________
 
e every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity,
because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the lord: and that soul
shall be cut off from among his people.

19:9 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly
reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings
of thy harvest.

19:10 and thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather
every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and
stranger: i am the lord your god.

19:11 ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another.

19:12 and ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy god: i am the lord.

19:13 thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages
of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning.

19:14 thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before
the blind, but shalt fear thy god: i am the lord.

19:15 ye shall do no unr
 
 ___________________________
 
hath done shall be forgiven him.

19:23 and when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all
manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as
uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it
shall not be eaten of.

19:24 but in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to
praise the lord withal.

19:25 and in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it
may yield unto you the increase thereof: i am the lord your god.

19:26 ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use
enchantment, nor observe times.

19:27 ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou
mar the corners of thy beard.

19:28 ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor
print any marks upon you: i am the lord.

19:29 do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest
the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.

19:30 ye shall keep my sabba
 
 ___________________________
 
ths, and reverence my sanctuary: i am the
lord.

19:31 regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards, to be defiled by them: i am the lord your god.

19:32 thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of
the old man, and fear thy god: i am the lord.

19:33 and if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not
vex him.

19:34 but the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one
born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
strangers in the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

19:35 ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in
weight, or in measure.

19:36 just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
ye have: i am the lord your god, whic
 
 ___________________________
 
lech, and kill him not:
20:5 then i will set my face against that man, and against his family,
and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
whoredom with molech, from among their people.

20:6 and the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits,
and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, i will even set my face
against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

20:7 sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for i am the lord
your god.

20:8 and ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: i am the lord which
sanctify you.

20:9 for every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be
surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his
blood shall be upon him.

20:10 and the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife,
even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

20:11 and the man that lieth with his father's wif
 
 ___________________________
 

childless.

20:22 ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments,
and do them: that the land, whither i bring you to dwell therein, spue
you not out.

20:23 and ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which i cast
out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore i
abhorred them.

20:24 but i have said unto you, ye shall inherit their land, and i
will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and
honey: i am the lord your god, which have separated you from other
people.

20:25 ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and
unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make
your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living
thing that creepeth on the ground, which i have separated from you as
unclean.

20:26 and ye shall be holy unto me: for i the lord am holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 a man also or woman that h
 
 ___________________________
 
, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his
daughter, and for his brother.

21:3 and for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 but he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his
people, to profane himself.

21:5 they shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they
shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their
flesh.

21:6 they shall be holy unto their god, and not profane the name of
their god: for the offerings of the lord made by fire, and the bread
of their god, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.

21:7 they shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither
shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto
his god.

21:8 thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of
thy god: he shall be holy unto thee: for i the lord, which sanctify
you, am holy.

21:9 and the daughter of an
 
 ___________________________
 
riest, if she profane herself by playing
the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.

21:10 and he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose
head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on
the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes; 21:11
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his
father, or for his mother; 21:12 neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his god; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his god is upon him: i am the lord.

21:13 and he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to
wife.

21:15 neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for i the
lord do sanctify him.

21:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 21:17 speak unto aaron,
saying, whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his god.

21:18 for whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
thing superfluous, 21:19 or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken; 21:21
no man that hath a blemish of the seed of aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the lord made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot come nigh to offer the bread of his god.

21:22 he shall eat the bread of his god, both of the most holy, and of
the holy.

21:23 only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries:
for i the lord do sanctify them.

21:24 and moses told it unto aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of israel.

22:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:2 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the
children of israel, and that they profane
 
 ___________________________
 
hese unto the lord, nor make an offering
by fire of them upon the altar unto the lord.

22:23 either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or
lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering;
but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

22:24 ye shall not offer unto the lord that which is bruised, or
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof
in your land.

22:25 neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your
god of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and
blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

22:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:27 when a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accepted for an offering made by fire unto the lord.

22:28 and whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 and when ye will o
 
 ___________________________
 
ffer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
lord, offer it at your own will.

22:30 on the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
until the morrow: i am the lord.

22:31 therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: i am the
lord.

22:32 neither shall ye profane my holy name; but i will be hallowed
among the children of israel: i am the lord which hallow you, 22:33
that brought you out of the land of egypt, to be your god: i am the
lord.

23:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, concerning the feasts of the
lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are
my feasts.

23:3 six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the lord in all your dwellings.

23:4 these are the feasts of the lord, even holy convocations, which
ye s
 
 ___________________________
 
ll offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the lord.

23:13 and the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the lord for a
sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the
fourth part of an hin.

23:14 and ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green
ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto
your god: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.

23:15 and ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven
sabbaths shall be complete: 23:16 even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offering unto the lord.

23:17 ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two
tenth deals; they shall be of fine fl
 
 ___________________________
 
the priest.

23:21 and ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it
shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

23:22 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: i am the lord your god.

23:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:24 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, in the seventh month, in the first day of
the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets,
an holy convocation.

23:25 ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord.

23:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:27 also on the tenth
day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
be an holy con
 
 ___________________________
 
vocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and
offer an offering made by fire unto the lord.

23:28 and ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
atonement, to make an atonement for you before the lord your god.

23:29 for whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that
same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

23:30 and whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,
the same soul will i destroy from among his people.

23:31 ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

23:32 it shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, fr
 
 ___________________________
 
side all your
freewill offerings, which ye give unto the lord.

23:39 also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the lord
seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
shall be a sabbath.

23:40 and ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly
trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the lord your god
seven days.

23:41 and ye shall keep it a feast unto the lord seven days in the
year.

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 that your generations may know that
i made the children of israel to dwell in booths, when i brought them
out of the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

23:44 and moses declared unto the children 
 
 ___________________________
 
ursed. and they brought him unto moses: (and his mother's name
was shelomith, the daughter of dibri, of the tribe of dan:) 24:12 and
they put him in ward, that the mind of the lord might be shewed them.

24:13 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:14 bring forth him
that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.

24:15 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying,
whosoever curseth his god shall bear his sin.

24:16 and he that blasphemeth the name of the lord, he shall surely be
put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as
well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the lord, shall be put to death.

24:17 and he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.

24:18 and he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

24:19 and if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done,
so
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall it be done to him; 24:20 breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be
done to him again.

24:21 and he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for i am the lord your god.

24:23 and moses spake to the children of israel, that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. and the children of israel did as the lord commanded moses.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses in mount sinai, saying, 25:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the
land which i give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
lord.

25:3 six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt
pr
 
 ___________________________
 
 one another: 25:15
according to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of
thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he
shall sell unto thee: 25:16 according to the multitude of years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number
of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.

25:17 ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear
thy god:for i am the lord your god.

25:18 wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

25:19 and the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.

25:20 and if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year? behold,
we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 25:21 then i will
command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years.

25:22
 
 ___________________________
 
his possession, shall go out in the year of
jubile: for the houses of the cities of the levites are their
possession among the children of israel.

25:34 but the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold;
for it is their perpetual possession.

25:35 and if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee.

25:36 take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy god; that
thy brother may live with thee.

25:37 thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.

25:38 i am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, to give you the land of canaan, and to be your god.

25:39 and if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
25:40 but as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with
thee, and shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
serve thee unto the year of jubile.

25:41 and then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return.

25:42 for they are my servants, which i brought forth out of the land
of egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

25:43 thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy
god.

25:44 both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have,
shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids.

25:45 moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you,
which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

25:46 and ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after
you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall
 
 ___________________________
 
t with him, and according unto his years shall he give
him again the price of his redemption.

25:53 and as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the
other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.

25:54 and if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out
in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.

25:55 for unto me the children of israel are servants; they are my
servants whom i brought forth out of the land of egypt: i am the lord
your god.

26:1 ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up
a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
land, to bow down unto it: for i am the lord your god.

26:2 ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: i am the
lord.

26:3 if ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
26:4 then i will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

26:5
 
 ___________________________
 
 sword.

26:8 and five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you
shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before
you by the sword.

26:9 for i will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and
multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

26:10 and ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of
the new.

26:11 and i set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor
you.

26:12 and i will walk among you, and will be your god, and ye shall be
my people.

26:13 i am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and i have broken the
bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

26:14 but if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments; 26:15 and if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your
soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant: 26:16 i also will do this unto you; i

 
 ___________________________
 
 the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will i abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for i am the lord their
god.

26:45 but i will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors, whom i brought forth out of the land of egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that i might be their god: i am the lord.

26:46 these are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the lord
made between him and the children of israel in mount sinai by the hand
of moses.

27:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when a man shall make a
singular vow, t
 
 ___________________________
 
.

6:5 all the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he
separateth himself unto the lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the
locks of the hair of his head grow.

6:6 all the days that he separateth himself unto the lord he shall
come at no dead body.

6:7 he shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his
mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the
consecration of his god is upon his head.

6:8 all the days of his separation he is holy unto the lord.

6:9 and if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the
head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of
his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.

6:10 and on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 6:11 and the priest shall offer the one for a sin
offering, and the othe
 
 ___________________________
 
 journey: they shall blow an alarm for
their journeys.

10:7 but when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall
blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.

10:8 and the sons of aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets;
and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations.

10:9 and if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye
shall be remembered before the lord your god, and ye shall be saved
from your enemies.

10:10 also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and
in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over
your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings;
that they may be to you for a memorial before your god: i am the lord
your god.

10:11 and it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in
the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle
of the testim
 
 ___________________________
 
f the
one was eldad, and the name of the other medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 and there ran a young man, and told moses, and said, eldad and
medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, my lord moses, forbid them.

11:29 and moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would god
that all the lord's people were prophets, and that the lord would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 and moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of israel.

11:31 and there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other
side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the
face of the earth.

11:32 and the people stood up all that d
 
 ___________________________
 

12:10 and the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
miriam became leprous, white as snow: and aaron looked upon miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.

12:11 and aaron said unto moses, alas, my lord, i beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 and moses cried unto the lord, saying, heal her now, o god, i
beseech thee.

12:14 and the lord said unto moses, if her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

12:15 and miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till miriam was brought in again.

12:16 and afterward the people removed from hazeroth, and pitched in
the wilderness of paran.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:
 
 ___________________________
 
 that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 and there we saw the giants, the sons of anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 and all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 and all the children of israel murmured against moses and against
aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, would god that we
had died in the land of egypt! or would god we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then moses and aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the congregation of the children of israel.

14:6 and joshua
 
 ___________________________
 
ren of israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the
borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: 15:39 and it
shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember
all the commandments of the lord, and do them; and that ye seek not
after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 that ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
be holy unto your god.

15:41 i am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt, to be your god: i am the lord your god.

16:1 now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi,
and dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab, and on, the son of peleth,
sons of reuben, took men: 16:2 and they rose up before moses, with
certain of the children of israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 and they
gathered themselves togethe
 
 ___________________________
 
ly; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
him.

16:6 this do; take you censers, korah, and all his company; 16:7 and
put fire therein, and put incense in them before the lord to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the lord doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of levi.

16:8 and moses said unto korah, hear, i pray you, ye sons of levi:
16:9 seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel
hath separated you from the congregation of israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 and he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 for which cause
both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the lord:
and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 and moses sent
to
 
 ___________________________
 
and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with moses and aaron.

16:19 and korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 16:21
separate yourselves from among this congregation, that i may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 and they fell upon their faces, and said, o god, the god of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
all the congregation?  16:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying,
16:24 speak unto the congregation, saying, get you up from about the
tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram.

16:25 and moses rose up and went unto dathan and abiram; and the
elders of israel followed him.

16:26 and he spake unto the congregation, saying, depart, i pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of t
 
 ___________________________
 
hatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 then came the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of zin in the first month: and the people abode in
kadesh; and miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 and there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against moses and against aaron.

20:3 and the people chode with moses, and spake, saying, would god
that we had died when our brethren died before the lord!  20:4 and why
have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 and wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 and moses and aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and said, if thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then i will utterly destroy
their cities.

21:3 and the lord hearkened to the voice of israel, and delivered up
the canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and
he called the name of the place hormah.

21:4 and they journeyed from mount hor by the way of the red sea, to
compass the land of edom: and the soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way.

21:5 and the people spake against god, and against moses, wherefore
have ye brought us up out of egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 and the lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit
the people; and much people of israel died.

21:7 therefore the people came to moses, and said, we have sinned, for
we have spoken against the lord, and against thee; pray unto the lord,
that he take away the serpents from us. and moses 
 
 ___________________________
 
y smite them, and that i may drive them out of the land: for
i wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest
is cursed.

22:7 and the elders of moab and the elders of midian departed with the
rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto balaam, and
spake unto him the words of balak.

22:8 and he said unto them, lodge here this night, and i will bring
you word again, as the lord shall speak unto me: and the princes of
moab abode with balaam.

22:9 and god came unto balaam, and said, what men are these with thee?
22:10 and balaam said unto god, balak the son of zippor, king of moab,
hath sent unto me, saying, 22:11 behold, there is a people come out of
egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them;
peradventure i shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.

22:12 and god said unto balaam, thou shalt not go with them; thou
shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.

22:13 and balaam rose up in the mor
 
 ___________________________
 
d more honourable than
they.

22:16 and they came to balaam, and said to him, thus saith balak the
son of zippor, let nothing, i pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto
me: 22:17 for i will promote thee unto very great honour, and i will
do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, i pray thee, curse
me this people.

22:18 and balaam answered and said unto the servants of balak, if
balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, i cannot go
beyond the word of the lord my god, to do less or more.

22:19 now therefore, i pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that i
may know what the lord will say unto me more.

22:20 and god came unto balaam at night, and said unto him, if the men
come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which i
shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

22:21 and balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went
with the princes of moab.

22:22 and god's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel 
 
 ___________________________
 
. so
balaam went with the princes of balak.

22:36 and when balak heard that balaam was come, he went out to meet
him unto a city of moab, which is in the border of arnon, which is in
the utmost coast.

22:37 and balak said unto balaam, did i not earnestly send unto thee
to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am i not able indeed
to promote thee to honour?  22:38 and balaam said unto balak, lo, i am
come unto thee: have i now any power at all to say any thing? the word
that god putteth in my mouth, that shall i speak.

22:39 and balaam went with balak, and they came unto kirjathhuzoth.

22:40 and balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to balaam, and to the
princes that were with him.

22:41 and it came to pass on the morrow, that balak took balaam, and
brought him up into the high places of baal, that thence he might see
the utmost part of the people.

23:1 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven oxen and seven ram
 
 ___________________________
 
s.

23:2 and balak did as balaam had spoken; and balak and balaam offered
on every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:3 and balaam said unto balak, stand by thy burnt offering, and i
will go: peradventure the lord will come to meet me: and whatsoever he
sheweth me i will tell thee. and he went to an high place.

23:4 and god met balaam: and he said unto him, i have prepared seven
altars, and i have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 and the lord put a word in balaam's mouth, and said, return unto
balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

23:6 and he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princes of moab.

23:7 and he took up his parable, and said, balak the king of moab hath
brought me from aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, come,
curse me jaco
 
 ___________________________
 
b, and come, defy israel.

23:8 how shall i curse, whom god hath not cursed? or how shall i defy,
whom the lord hath not defied?  23:9 for from the top of the rocks i
see him, and from the hills i behold him: lo, the people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

23:10 who can count the dust of jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of israel? let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 and balak said unto balaam, what hast thou
done unto me? i took thee to curse mine enemies, and, be
 
 ___________________________
 
n
every altar.

23:15 and he said unto balak, stand here by thy burnt offering, while
i meet the lord yonder.

23:16 and the lord met balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said,
go again unto balak, and say thus.

23:17 and when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering,
and the princes of moab with him. and balak said unto him, what hath
the lord spoken?  23:18 and he took up his parable, and said, rise up,
balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of zippor: 23:19 god is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?  23:20 behold, i have received commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and i cannot reverse it.

23:21 he hath not beheld iniquity in jacob, neither hath he seen
perverseness in israel: the lord his god is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 god brought them out of egypt; he hath as it were the s
 
 ___________________________
 
trength
of an unicorn.

23:23 surely there is no enchantment against jacob, neither is there
any divination against israel: according to this time it shall be said
of jacob and of israel, what hath god wrought!  23:24 behold, the
people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.

23:25 and balak said unto balaam, neither curse them at all, nor bless
them at all.

23:26 but balaam answered and said unto balak, told not i thee,
saying, all that the lord speaketh, that i must do?  23:27 and balak
said unto balaam, come, i pray thee, i will bring thee unto another
place; peradvent
 
 ___________________________
 
ure it will please god that thou mayest curse me them
from thence.

23:28 and balak brought balaam unto the top of peor, that looketh
toward jeshimon.

23:29 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

23:30 and balak did as balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a
ram on every altar.

24:1 and when balaam saw that it pleased the lord to bless israel, he
went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his
face toward t
 
 ___________________________
 
he wilderness.

24:2 and balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw israel abiding in his
tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of god came upon him.

24:3 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:4 he hath said,
which heard the words of god, which saw the vision of the almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open: 24:5 how goodly are
thy tents, o jacob, and thy tabernacles, o israel!  24:6 as the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the
trees of lign aloes which the lord hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters.

24:7 he shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be
in many waters, and his king shall be higher than agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.
 
 ___________________________
 


24:8 god brought him forth out of egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and
shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.

24:9 he couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
stir him up? blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.

24:10 and balak's anger was kindled against balaam, and he smote his
hands together: and balak said unto balaam, i called thee to curse
mine en
 
 ___________________________
 
ive me his
house full of silver and gold, i cannot go beyond the commandment of
the lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the lord
saith, that will i speak?  24:14 and now, behold, i go unto my people:
come therefore, and i will advertise thee what this people shall do to
thy people in the latter days.

24:15 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor
hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:16 he hath
said, which heard the words of god, and knew the knowledge of the most
high, which saw the vision of the almighty, falling into a trance, but
having his eyes open: 24:17 i shall see him, but not now: i shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a star out of jacob, and a
sceptre shall rise out of israel, and shall smite the corners of moab,
and destroy all the children of sheth.

24:18 and edom shall be a possession, seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 out of jac
 
 ___________________________
 
t remaineth of the city.

24:20 and when he looked on amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that
he perish for ever.

24:21 and he looked on the kenites, and took up his parable, and said,
strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.

24:22 nevertheless the kenite shall be wasted, until asshur shall
carry thee away captive.

24:23 and he took up his parable, and said, alas, who shall live when
god doeth this!  24:24 and ships shall come from the coast of chittim,
and shall afflict asshur, and shall afflict eber, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 and balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and
balak also went his way.

25:1 and israel abode in shittim, and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of moab.

25:2 and they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and
the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

25:3 and israel 
 
 ___________________________
 
ty and four thousand.

25:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:11 phinehas, the son
of eleazar, the son of aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away
from the children of israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that i consumed not the children of israel in my jealousy.

25:12 wherefore say, behold, i give unto him my covenant of peace:
25:13 and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his god, and
made an atonement for the children of israel.

25:14 now the name of the israelite that was slain, even that was
slain with the midianitish woman, was zimri, the son of salu, a prince
of a chief house among the simeonites.

25:15 and the name of the midianitish woman that was slain was cozbi,
the daughter of zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in midian.

25:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:17 vex the midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 for they vex y
 
 ___________________________
 
to this mount
abarim, and see the land which i have given unto the children of
israel.

27:13 and when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 for ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and moses spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let the lord, the
god of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 and the lord said unto moses, take thee joshua the son of nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 and set
him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge 
 
 ___________________________
 
and aaron.

33:2 and moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the lord: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out.

33:3 and they departed from rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
egyptians.

33:4 for the egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the lord had
smitten among them: upon their gods also the lord executed judgments.

33:5 and the children of israel removed from rameses, and pitched in
succoth.

33:6 and they departed from succoth, and pitched in etham, which is in
the edge of the wilderness.

33:7 and they removed from etham, and turned again unto pihahiroth,
which is before baalzephon: and they pitched before migdol.

33:8 and they departed from before pihahiroth, and passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
th
 
 ___________________________
 
nt
seir unto kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 and it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that moses
spake unto the children of israel, according unto all that the lord
had given him in commandment unto them; 1:4 after he had slain sihon
the king of the amorites, which dwelt in heshbon, and og the king of
bashan, which dwelt at astaroth in edrei: 1:5 on this side jordan, in
the land of moab, began moses to declare this law, saying, 1:6 the
lord our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and i spake unto you at that time, saying, i am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
tribes, and i will make them rulers over you.

1:14 and ye answered me, and said, the thing which thou hast spoken is
good for us to do.

1:15 so i took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
them heads over you, capt
 
 ___________________________
 
ains over thousands, and captains over
hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and
officers among your tribes.

1:16 and i charged your judges at that time, saying, hear the causes
between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

1:17 ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
for the judgment is god's: and the cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and i will hear it.

1:18 and i commanded you at that time all the things which ye should
do.

1:19 and when we departed from horeb, we went through all that great
and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of
the amorites, as the lord our god commanded us; and we came to
kadeshbarnea.

1:20 and i said unto you, ye are come unto the mountain of the
amorites, which the lord our god doth give unto us.

 
 ___________________________
 

1:21 behold, the lord thy god hath set the land before thee: go up and
possess it, as the lord god of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear
not, neither be discouraged.

1:22 and ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, we will send
men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us
word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall
come.

1:23 and the saying pleased me well: and i took twelve men of you, one
of a tribe: 1:24 and they turned and went up into the mountain, and
came unto the valley of eshcol, and searched it out.

1:25 and t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and
brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, it is a
good land which the lord our god doth give us.

1:26 notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the
commandment of the lord your god: 1:27 and ye murmured in your tents,
and said, because the lord hated us, he hath brought us forth out of
the land of egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the amorites, to
destroy us.

1:28 whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart,
saying, the people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great
and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the
anakims there.

1:29 then i said unto you, dread not, neither be afraid of them.

1:30 the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd your god which goeth before you, he shall fight for you,
according to all that he did for you in egypt before your eyes; 1:31
and in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the lord thy god
bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went,
until ye came into this place.

1:32 yet in this thing ye did not believe the lord your god, 1:33 who
went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your
tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and
in a cloud by day.

1:34 and the lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 surely there shall not one of these men of this
evil generation see that good land, which i sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 save caleb the son of jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
i give the land that he hath trodde
 
 ___________________________
 
 cause israel to inherit it.

1:39 moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will i give it, and they
shall possess it.

1:40 but as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the red sea.

1:41 then ye answered and said unto me, we have sinned against the
lord, we will go up and fight, according to all that the lord our god
commanded us.

and when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready
to go up into the hill.

1:42 and the lord said unto me, say unto them. go not up, neither
fight; for i am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

1:43 so i spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against
the commandment of the lord, and went presumptuously up into the hill.

1:44 and the amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
you, and chased you, as be
 
 ___________________________
 
le, saying, ye are to pass through the
coast of your brethren the children of esau, which dwell in seir; and
they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves
therefore: 2:5 meddle not with them; for i will not give you of their
land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because i have given mount
seir unto esau for a possession.

2:6 ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

2:7 for the lord thy god hath blessed thee in all the works of thy
hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these
forty years the lord thy god hath been with thee; thou hast lacked
nothing.

2:8 and when we passed by from our brethren the children of esau,
which dwelt in seir, through the way of the plain from elath, and from
eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of moab.

2:9 and the lord said unto me, distress not the moabites, neither
contend with them in battle: 
 
 ___________________________
 
oth unto
sihon king of heshbon with words of peace, saying, 2:27 let me pass
through thy land: i will go along by the high way, i will neither turn
unto the right hand nor to the left.

2:28 thou shalt sell me meat for money, that i may eat; and give me
water for money, that i may drink: only i will pass through on my
feet; 2:29 (as the children of esau which dwell in seir, and the
moabites which dwell in ar, did unto me;) until i shall pass over
jordan into the land which the lord our god giveth us.

2:30 but sihon king of heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the
lord thy god hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that
he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.

2:31 and the lord said unto me, behold, i have begun to give sihon and
his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
land.

2:32 then sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight
at jahaz.

2:33 and the lord our god delivered him before us
 
 ___________________________
 
; and we smote him,
and his sons, and all his people.

2:34 and we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed
the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left
none to remain: 2:35 only the cattle we took for a prey unto
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

2:36 from aroer, which is by the brink of the river of arnon, and from
the city that is by the river, even unto gilead, there was not one
city too strong for us: the lord our god delivered all unto us: 2:37
only unto the land of the children of ammon thou camest not, nor unto
any place of the river jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains,
nor unto whatsoever the lord our god forbad us.

3:1 then we turned, and went up the way to bashan: and og the king of
bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at edrei.

3:2 and the lord said unto me, fear him not: for i will deliver him,
and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt
 
 ___________________________
 
 do
unto him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

3:3 so the lord our god delivered into our hands og also, the king of
bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining.

3:4 and we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city
which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of
argob, the kingdom of og in bashan.

3:5 all these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars;
beside unwalled towns a great many.

3:6 and we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto sihon king of
heshbon, utterly des
 
 ___________________________
 

bashanhavothjair, unto this day.

3:15 and i gave gilead unto machir.

3:16 and unto the reubenites and unto the gadites i gave from gilead
even unto the river arnon half the valley, and the border even unto
the river jabbok, which is the border of the children of ammon; 3:17
the plain also, and jordan, and the coast thereof, from chinnereth
even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under ashdothpisgah
eastward.

3:18 and i commanded you at that time, saying, the lord your god hath
given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before
your brethren the children of israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 but your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for i
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which i
have given you; 3:20 until the lord have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the lord your god hath given them beyond jordan: and then shall
ye return ever
 
 ___________________________
 
y man unto his possession, which i have given you.

3:21 and i commanded joshua at that time, saying, thine eyes have seen
all that the lord your god hath done unto these two kings: so shall
the lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

3:22 ye shall not fear them: for the lord your god he shall fight for
you.

3:23 and i besought the lord at that time, saying, 3:24 o lord god,
thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
according to thy works, and according to thy might?  3:25 i pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond jordan, that
goodly mountain, and lebanon.

3:26 but the lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the lord said unto me, let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
me of this matter.

3:27 get thee up into the top of pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastwar
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this jordan.

3:28 but charge joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
the land which thou shalt see.

3:29 so we abode in the valley over against bethpeor.

4:1 now therefore hearken, o israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments, which i teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the lord god of your fathers giveth you.

4:2 ye shall not add unto the word which i command you, neither shall
ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the
lord your god which i command you.

4:3 your eyes have seen what the lord did because of baalpeor: for all
the men that followed baalpeor, the lord thy god hath destroyed them
from among you.

4:4 but ye that did cleave unto the lord your god are alive every one
of you this day.

4:5 behold, i have taught you statutes
 
 ___________________________
 
 and judgments, even as the lord
my god commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it.

4:6 keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.

4:7 for what nation is there so great, who hath god so nigh unto them,
as the lord our god is in all things that we call upon him for?  4:8
and what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so
righteous as all this law, which i set before you this day?  4:9 only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons'
sons; 4:10 specially the day that thou stoodest before the lord thy
god in horeb, when the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
 of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, 4:17 the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, 4:18 the likeness
of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 4:19 and lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and
the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the lord thy god hath divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven.

4:20 but the lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the
iron furnace, even out of egypt, to be unto him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day.

4:21 furthermore the lord was angry with me for your sakes, and sware
that i should not go over jordan, and that i should not go in unto
that good land, which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance:
4:22 but i must die in this land, i must not go over jordan: but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ye
shall go over, and possess that good land.

4:23 take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the
lord your god, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or
the likeness of any thing, which the lord thy god hath forbidden thee.

4:24 for the lord thy god is a consuming fire, even a jealous god.

4:25 when thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye
shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves,
and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do
evil in the sight of the lord thy god, to provoke him to anger: 4:26 i
call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall
soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over jordan to
possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly
be d
 
 ___________________________
 
estroyed.

4:27 and the lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the lord shall lead you.

4:28 and there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

4:29 but if from thence thou shalt seek the lord thy god, thou shalt
find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

4:30 when thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the lord thy god, and
shalt be obedient unto his voice; 4:31 (for the lord thy god is a
merciful god;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.

4:32 for ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,
since
 
 ___________________________
 
 the day that god created man upon the earth, and ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such
thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?  4:33 did
ever people hear the voice of god speaking out of the midst of the
fire, as thou hast heard, and live?  4:34 or hath god assayed to go
and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to
all that the lord your god did for you in egypt before your eyes?
4:35 unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the lord he
is god; there is none else beside him.

4:36 out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might
instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee his great fire; and thou
heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.

4:37 and because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power
out of egypt; 4:38 to drive out nations from before thee greater and
mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is this day.

4:39 know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
lord he is god in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
none else.

4:40 thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,
which i command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon
the earth, which the lord thy god giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 then moses severed three cities on this side jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 that the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
his neighbour unaware
 
 ___________________________
 
two kings of the amorites, which were on this side jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 from aroer, which is by the bank of the
river arnon, even unto mount sion, which is hermon, 4:49 and all the
plain on this side jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
under the springs of pisgah.

5:1 and moses called all israel, and said unto them, hear, o israel,
the statutes and judgments which i speak in your ears this day, that
ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

5:2 the lord our god made a covenant with us in horeb.

5:3 the lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us,
even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

5:4 the lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire, 5:5 (i stood between the lord and you at that time,
to shew you the word of the lord: for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 5:6 i am the lord thy
god, which brought thee out of the land of egypt, from the hous
 
 ___________________________
 
e of
bondage.

5:7 thou shalt have none other gods before me.

5:8 thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 5:9 thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serve them: for i the lord thy god am a jealous
god, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, 5:10 and shewing
mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

5:11 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain: for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

5:12 keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the lord thy god hath
commanded thee.

5:13 six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work: 5:14 but the
s
 
 ___________________________
 
eventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

5:15 and remember that thou wast a servant in the land of egypt, and
that the lord thy god brought thee out thence through a mighty hand
and by a stretched out arm: therefore the lord thy god commanded thee
to keep the sabbath day.

5:16 honour thy father and thy mother, as the lord thy god hath
commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go
well with thee, in the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

5:17 thou shalt not kill.

5:18 neither shalt thou commit adultery.

5:19 neither shalt thou steal.

5:20 neither shalt thou bear false witness aga
 
 ___________________________
 
:22 these words the lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount
out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness,
with a great voice: and he added no more. and he wrote them in two
tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.

5:23 and it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of
the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near
unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; 5:24 and
ye said, behold, the lord our god hath shewed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire:
we have seen this day that god doth talk with man, and he liveth.

5:25 now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
us: if we hear the voice of the lord our god any more, then we shall
die.

5:26 for who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the
living god speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived?  5:27 go thou near, and hear all
 
 ___________________________
 
 that the lord our god shall
say: and speak thou unto us all that the lord our god shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

5:28 and the lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto
me; and the lord said unto me, i have heard the voice of the words of
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all
that they have spoken.

5:29 o that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children for ever!  5:30 go say to them, get
 
 ___________________________
 
 you into
your tents again.

5:31 but as for thee, stand thou here by me, and i will speak unto
thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which i give
them to possess it.

5:32 ye shall observe to do therefore as the lord your god hath
commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the
left.

5:33 ye shall walk in all the ways which the lord your god hath
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and
that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

6:1 now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
which the lord your god commanded to teach you, that ye might do them
in the land whither ye go to possess it: 6:2 that thou mightest fear
the lord thy god, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which
i command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of
 
 ___________________________
 

thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

6:3 hear therefore, o israel, and observe to do it; that it may be
well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the lord god of
thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
honey.

6:4 hear, o israel: the lord our god is one lord: 6:5 and thou shalt
love the lord thy god with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.

6:6 and these words, which i command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart: 6:7 and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them
 
 ___________________________
 
 upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thy god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 then beware lest thou forget the lord, which brought
thee forth out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondag
 
 ___________________________
 
e.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thy god, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.

6:14 ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which
are round about you; 6:15 (for the lord thy god is a jealous god among
you) lest the anger of the lord thy god be kindled against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

6:16 ye shall not tempt the lord your god, as ye tempted him in
massah.

6:17 ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the lord your god,
and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

6:18 and thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
the lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in
and possess the good land which the lord sware unto thy fathers.

6:19 to cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the lord hath
spoken.

6:20 and when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what mean
the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d
our god hath commanded you?  6:21 then thou shalt say unto thy son, we
were pharaoh's bondmen in egypt; and the lord brought us out of egypt
with a mighty hand: 6:22 and the lord shewed signs and wonders, great
and sore, upon egypt, upon pharaoh, and upon all his household, before
our eyes: 6:23 and he brought us out from thence, that he might bring
us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

6:24 and the lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the
lord our god, for
 
 ___________________________
 
 our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as
it is at this day.

6:25 and it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments before the lord our god, as he hath commanded us.

7:1 when the lord thy god shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the
hittites, and the girgashites, and the amorites, and the canaanites,
and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites, seven nations
greater and mightier than thou; 7:2 and when the lord thy god shall
deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy
them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
7:3 neither shalt thou make marr
 
 ___________________________
 
iages with them; thy daughter thou
shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy
son.

7:4 for they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the lord be kindled against
you, and destroy thee suddenly.

7:5 but thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars,
and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire.

7:6 for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy god: the lord thy
god hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all
people that are upon the face of the earth.

7:7 the lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u, because ye
were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all
people: 7:8 but because the lord loved you, and because he would keep
the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the lord brought
you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondmen, from the hand of pharaoh king of egypt.

7:9 know therefore that the lord thy god, he is god, the faithful god,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his
commandments to a thousand generations; 7:10 and repayeth them that
hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him
that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.

7:11 thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
the judgments, which i command thee this day, to do them.

7:12 wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, that th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord thy god shall keep
unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
7:13 and he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn,
and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

7:14 thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male
or female barren among you, or among your cattle.

7:
 
 ___________________________
 
15 and the lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

7:16 and thou shalt consume all the people which the lord thy god
shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither
shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

7:17 if thou shalt say in thine heart, these nations are more than i;
how can i dispossess them?  7:18 thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well remember what the lord thy god did unto pharaoh, and unto
all egypt; 7:19 the great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the
signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out
arm, whereby the lord thy god brought thee out: so shall the lord thy
god do unto all the people of whom th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou art afraid.

7:20 moreover the lord thy god will send the hornet among them, until
they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

7:21 thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the lord thy god is
among you, a mighty god and terrible.

7:22 and the lord thy god will put out those nations before thee by
little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the
beasts of the field increase upon thee.

7:23 but the lord thy god shall deliver them unto thee, and shall
destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

7:24 and he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to
stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

7:25 the graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou
shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abominatio
 
 ___________________________
 
n to the lord
thy god.

7:26 neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest
thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and
thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.

8:1 all the commandments which i command thee this day shall ye
observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess
the land which the lord sware unto your fathers.

8:2 and thou shalt remember all the way which the lord thy god led
thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
commandments, or no.

8:3 and he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that
he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the lord doth man live.

8:4 thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, ne
 
 ___________________________
 
ither did thy foot swell,
these forty years.

8:5 thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
his son, so the lord thy god chasteneth thee.

8:6 therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the lord thy god, to
walk in his ways, and to fear him.

8:7 for the lord thy god bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys
and hills; 8:8 a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 8:9 a land wherein
thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing
in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig brass.

8:10 when thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the lord
thy god for the
 
 ___________________________
 
 good land which he hath given thee.

8:11 beware that thou forget not the lord thy god, in not keeping his
commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which i command
thee this day: 8:12 lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 8:13 and when thy herds and
thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou hast is multiplied; 8:14 then thine heart be lifted up,
and thou forget the lord thy god, which brought thee forth out of the
land of egypt, from the house of bondage; 8:15 who led thee through
that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint; 8:16 who fed thee in the
wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
latter end; 8:17 and thou say in thine heart, my power an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the might
of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

8:18 but thou shalt remember the lord thy god: for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant
which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

8:19 and it shall be, if thou do at all forget the lord thy god, and
walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, i testify
against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

8:20 as the nations which the lord destroyeth before your face, so
shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of
the lord your god.

9:1 hear, o israel: thou art to pass over jordan this day, to go in to
possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and
fenced up to heaven, 9:2 a people great and tall, the children of the
anakims, whom thou knowest, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and of whom thou hast heard say, who can
stand before the children of anak!  9:3 understand therefore this day,
that the lord thy god is he which goeth over before thee; as a
consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them
quickly, as the lord hath said unto thee.

9:4 speak not thou in thine heart, after that the lord thy god hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness the lord
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the lord doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the lord thy god doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thy fathers,
abraham, isaa
 
 ___________________________
 
c, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thy god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thy god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angry with you to have destroyed you.

9:9 when i was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant which the lord made with you, then i
abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, i neither did eat
bread nor 
 
 ___________________________
 
drink water: 9:10 and the lord delivered unto me two tables
of stone written with the finger of god; and on them was written
according to all the words, which the lord spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

9:11 and it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights,
that the lord gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant.

9:12 and the lord said unto me, arise, get thee down quickly from
hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of egypt have
corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned asid
 
 ___________________________
 
 molten image.

9:13 furthermore the lord spake unto me, saying, i have seen this
people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 9:14 let me alone,
that i may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven:
and i will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

9:15 so i turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned
with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.

9:16 and i looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the lord your
god, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out
of the way which the lord had commanded you.

9:17 and i took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
brake them before your eyes.

9:18 and i fell down before the lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: i did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the lord,
to provoke him to anger.

9:19 for i was afraid of the anger and
 
 ___________________________
 
i took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was
as small as dust: and i cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descended out of the mount.

9:22 and at taberah, and at massah, and at kibrothhattaavah, ye
provoked the lord to wrath.

9:23 likewise when the lord sent you from kadeshbarnea, saying, go up
and possess the land which i have given you; then ye rebelled against
the commandment of the lord your god, and ye believed him not, nor
hearkened to his voice.

9:24 ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that i knew
you.

9:25 thus i fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights, as
i fell down at the first; because the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 i prayed therefore unto the lord, and said, o lord god, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
migh
 
 ___________________________
 
f
the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the lord gave
them unto me.

10:5 and i turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tables in the ark which i had made; and there they be, as the lord
commanded me.

10:6 and the children of israel took their journey from beeroth of the
children of jaakan to mosera: there aaron died, and there he was
buried; and eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

10:7 from thence they journeyed unto gudgodah; and from gudgodah to
jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

10:8 at that time the lord separated the tribe of levi, to bear the
ark of the covenant of the lord, to stand before the lord to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

10:9 wherefore levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren;
the lord is his inheritance, according as the lord thy god promised
him.

10:10 and i stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty
days and forty nights; an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the lord hearkened unto me at that time
also, and the lord would not destroy thee.

10:11 and the lord said unto me, arise, take thy journey before the
people, that they may go in and possess the land, which i sware unto
their fathers to give unto them.

10:12 and now, israel, what doth the lord thy god require of thee, but
to fear the lord thy god, to walk in all his ways, and to love him,
and to serve the lord thy god with all thy heart and with all thy
soul, 10:13 to keep the commandments of the lord, and his statutes,
which i command thee this day for thy good?  10:14 behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heavens is the lord's thy god, the earth also, with
all that therein is.

10:15 only the lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he
chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this
day.

10:16 circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiffn
 
 ___________________________
 
ecked.

10:17 for the lord your god is god of gods, and lord of lords, a great
god, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
reward: 10:18 he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

10:19 love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the
land of egypt.

10:20 thou shalt fear the lord thy god; him shalt thou serve, and to
him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

10:21 he is thy praise, and he is thy god, that hath done for thee
these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.

10:22 thy fathers went down into egypt with threescore and ten
persons; and now the lord thy god hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

11:1 therefore thou shalt love the lord thy god, and keep his charge,
and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, al
 
 ___________________________
 
way.

11:2 and know ye this day: for i speak not with your children which
have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the lord
your god, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
11:3 and his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of
egypt unto pharaoh the king of egypt, and unto all his land; 11:4 and
what he did unto the army of egypt, unto their horses, and to their
chariots; how he made the water of the red sea to overflow them as
they pursued after you, and how the lord hath destroyed them unto this
day; 11:5 and what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came
into this place; 11:6 
 
 ___________________________
 
 your days in
the land, which the lord sware unto your fathers to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 for the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 but the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 a land which the lord thy
god careth for: the eyes of the lord thy god are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 and it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which i command you this day, to love the lord your
god, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 that i will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thy wine, and thine
 
 ___________________________
 
 oil.

11:15 and i will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 11:17 and then the
lord's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the lord giveth you.

11:18 therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes.

11:19 and ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when
thou sitt
 
 ___________________________
 
est in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 and thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates: 11:21 that your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, in the land which the lord sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 for if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which i
command you, to do them, to love the lord your god, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleave unto him; 11:23 then will the lord drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilderness and lebanon, from the river, the river
euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 there shall no man be able to stand before you: for the lord
your god shall lay the fear of you an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 behold, i set before you this day a blessing and a curse; 11:27
a blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the lord your god, which i
command you this day: 11:28 and a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the lord your god, but turn aside out of the way which
i command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 and it shall come to pass, when the lord thy god hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the blessing upon mount gerizim, and the curse upon mount
ebal.

11:30 are they not on the other side jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against gilgal, beside the plains of moreh?  11:31 for
ye shall pass over jordan to go in to possess the
 
 ___________________________
 
 land which the lord
your god giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 and ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which
i set before you this day.

12:1 these are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to
do in the land, which the lord god of thy fathers giveth thee to
possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under every green tree: 12:3 and ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

12:4 ye shall not do so unto the lord your god.

12:5 but unto the place which the lord your god shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall
ye seek, and thither t
 
 ___________________________
 
hou shalt come: 12:6 and thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings,
and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 12:7 and there ye
shall eat before the lord your god, and ye shall rejoice in all that
ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the lord thy
god hath blessed thee.

12:8 ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

12:9 for ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the lord your god giveth you.

12:10 but when ye go over jordan, and dwell in the land which the lord
your god giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 then there
shall be a place which the lord your
 
 ___________________________
 
 god shall choose to cause his
name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that i command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the
lord: 12:12 and ye shall rejoice before the lord your god, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as
he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

12:13 take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
every place that thou seest: 12:14 but in the place which the lord
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that i command thee.

12:15 notwithstanding thou mayest kill a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
lord thy god which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
as water.

12:17 thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave offering of thine hand: 12:18 but thou must eat
them before the lord thy god 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the place which the lord thy god shall
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and
thy maidservant, and the levite that is within thy gates: and thou
shalt rejoice before the lord thy god in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto.

12:19 take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the levite as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 when the lord thy god shall enlarge thy border, as he hath
promised thee, and thou shalt say, i will eat flesh, because thy soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after.

12:21 if the place which the lord thy god hath chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of
thy flock, which the lord hath given thee, as i have commanded thee,
and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

12:22 even as the roebuck 
 
 ___________________________
 
e life with the flesh.

12:24 thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the lord.

12:26 only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the lord shall choose: 12:27 and
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of the lord thy god: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall
be poured out upon the altar of the lord thy god, and thou shalt eat
the flesh.

12:28 observe and hear all these words which i command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the lord thy
god.

12:29 when the lord thy god shall cut off the nations from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in the
 
 ___________________________
 
ir land; 12:30 take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, how did
these nations serve their gods? even so will i do likewise.

12:31 thou shalt not do so unto the lord thy god: for every
abomination to the lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods.

12:32 what thing soever i command you, observe to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 if there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 and the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 13:3 thou
shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the lord your god proveth 
 
 ___________________________
 
you, to know whether ye love the
lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 ye shall walk after the lord your god, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 and that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the lord your god,
which brought you out of the land of egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the lord thy
god commanded thee to walk in. so shalt thou put the evil away from
the midst of thee.

13:6 if thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 13:7 nam
 
 ___________________________
 
ely,
of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; 13:8 thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 but thou shalt surely kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.

13:10 and thou shalt stone him with stones, that he di
 
 ___________________________
 
e; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the lord thy god, which brought
thee out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

13:11 and all israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.

13:12 if thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the lord thy
god hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 certain men, the
children of belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 13:15 thou shalt
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword,
destroying it 
 
 ___________________________
 
utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edge of the sword.

13:16 and thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the lord thy god: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 and there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
that the lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
sworn unto thy fathers; 13:18 when thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the lord thy god, to keep all his commandments which i command thee
this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the lord thy god.

14:1 y
 
 ___________________________
 
e are the children of the lord your god: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

14:2 for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy god, and the lord
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
nations that are upon the earth.

14:3 thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

14:4 these are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
the goat, 14:5 the hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 and every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, t
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 and the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 and every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shall not be eaten.

14:20 but of all clean fowls ye may eat.

14:21 ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto
the lord thy god.

thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

14:22 thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 and thou shalt eat before the lord thy god, in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the lord thy god always.

14:24 and if the way be too long for thee, so that thou ar
 
 ___________________________
 
t not able
to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the lord thy
god shall choose to set his name there, when the lord thy god hath
blessed thee: 14:25 then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the lord
thy god shall choose: 14:26 and thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the lord thy god, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 and the levite that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 at the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine i
 
 ___________________________
 
ncrease the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
14:29 and the levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
lord thy god may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 at the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

15:2 and this is the manner of the release: every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact
it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the
lord's release.

15:3 of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 save when there
shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
be no poor among you; for the lord shall greatly bless thee in
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance to
possess it: 15:5 only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the
lord thy god, to observe to do all these commandments which i command
thee this day.

15:6 for the lord thy god blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 if there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the lord thy god giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother: 15:8 but thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
surely lend him sufficient for his need,
 
 ___________________________
 
 in that which he wanteth.

15:9 beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying,
the seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the lord thy
god shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest
thine hand unto.

15:11 for the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore i
command thee, saying, thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

15:12 and if thy brother, an hebrew man, or an hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 and when thou sendest him out free from thee, t
 
 ___________________________
 
hou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that
wherewith the lord thy god hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
egypt, and the lord thy god redeemed thee: therefore i command thee
this thing to day.

15:16 and it shall be, if he say unto thee, i will not go away from
thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with
thee; 15:17 then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. and also unto thy
maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 it shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
free from thee; for he hath been worth a doub
 
 ___________________________
 
le hired servant to thee,
in serving thee six years: and the lord thy god shall bless thee in
all that thou doest.

15:19 all the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the lord thy god: thou shalt do no work with
the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

15:20 thou shalt eat it before the lord thy god year by year in the
place which the lord shall choose, thou and thy household.

15:21 and if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the lord thy
god.

15:22 thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 observe the month of abib, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d keep the passover unto the lord
thy god: for in the month of abib the lord thy god brought thee forth
out of egypt by night.

16:2 thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the lord thy
god, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the lord shall
choose to place his name there.

16:3 thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou
eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of egypt in haste: that thou mayest
remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of egypt all
the days of thy life.

16:4 and there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither sha
 
 ___________________________
 
ll there any thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,
which the lord thy god giveth thee: 16:6 but at the place which the
lord thy god shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of egypt.

16:7 and thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the lord thy
god shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be a solemn assembly to the lord thy god: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 seven weeks shalt t
 
 ___________________________
 
hou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the
corn.

16:10 and thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the lord thy god
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt
give unto the lord thy god, according as the lord thy god hath blessed
thee: 16:11 and thou shalt rejoice before the lord thy god, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
lord thy god hath chosen to place his name there.

16:12 and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in egypt: and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

16:13 thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and th
 
 ___________________________
 
y wine: 16:14 and thou shalt
rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

16:15 seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the lord thy god
in the place which the lord shall choose: because the lord thy god
shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine
hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

16:16 three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the lord
thy god in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear before the lord empty: 16:17 every man shall
give as he is able, according to the blessing of the lord thy god
which he hath given thee.


 
 ___________________________
 
16:18 judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the lord thy god giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.

16:19 thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.

16:20 that which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

16:21 thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the lord thy god, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the lord thy god
hateth.

17:1 thou shalt not sacrifice unto the lord thy god any bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomination unto the lord thy god.

17:2 if there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the
lord thy god giveth thee, man 
 
 ___________________________
 
or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the lord thy god, in transgressing his covenant, 17:3
and hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which i have not
commanded; 17:4 and it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in israel: 17:5 then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing,
unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 at the mouth of t
 
 ___________________________
 
ut at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death.

17:7 the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people. so thou shalt put
the evil away from among you.

17:8 if there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the lord thy god shall choose;
17:9 and thou shalt come unto the priests the levites, and unto the
judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
thee the sentence of judgment: 17:10 and thou shalt do according to
the sentence, which they of that place which the lord shall choose
shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 according to the sentence of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
t
 
 ___________________________
 
ell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 and the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the lord thy
god, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from israel.

17:13 and all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 when thou art come unto the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, i
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
17:15 thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the lord thy
god shall choose: one from among thy bre
 
 ___________________________
 
ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 and it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the levites: 17:19 and it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the lord his god, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 that his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of israel.

18:1 the priests the levites, and all the tribe of levi, shall have no
part nor inheritance with israel: they shall eat the offerings of the
lord made by fire, and his inheritance
 
 ___________________________
 
.

18:2 therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren:
the lord is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 and this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 the firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 for the lord thy god hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to
stand to minister in the name of the lord, him and his sons for ever.

18:6 and if a levite come from any of thy gates out of all israel,
where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the
place which the lord shall choose; 18:7 then he shall minister in the
name of the lord his god, as all his brethren the levites do, which
stand there before the lord.

18:8 they shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of

 
 ___________________________
 
the sale of his patrimony.

18:9 when thou art come into the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those
nations.

18:10 there shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 for all that do these things are an abomination unto the lord:
and because of these abominations the lord thy god dot
 
 ___________________________
 
h drive them out
from before thee.

18:13 thou shalt be perfect with the lord thy god.

18:14 for these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the lord thy
god hath not suffered thee so to do.

18:15 the lord thy god will raise up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 according to all that thou desiredst of the lord thy
god in horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, let me not hear again
the voice of the lord my god, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that i die not.

18:17 and the lord said unto me, they have well spoken that which they
have spoken.

18:18 i will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that i shall command him.

18:19 and it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unt
 
 ___________________________
 
o
my words which he shall speak in my name, i will require it of him.

18:20 but the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which i have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 and if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the word which
the lord hath not spoken?  18:22 when a prophet speaketh in the name
of the lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 when the lord thy god hath cut off the nations, whose land the
lord thy god giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwelles
 
 ___________________________
 
t in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 thou shalt separate three
cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the lord thy god
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
which the lord thy god giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
every slayer may flee thither.

19:4 and this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hated not in time past; 19:5 as when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
those c
 
 ___________________________
 
ities, and live: 19:6 lest the avenger of the blood pursue the
slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

19:7 wherefore i command thee, saying, thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.

19:8 and if the lord thy god enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto
thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto
thy fathers; 19:9 if thou shalt keep all these commandments to do
them, which i command thee this day, to love the lord thy god, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three: 19:10 that innocent blood be not shed in thy land,
which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 but if any 
 
 ___________________________
 
lly that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innocent blood from israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
the land that the lord thy god giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 one witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 if a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the lord, before the priests and
the judges, which shall be in those days; 19:
 
 ___________________________
 
had thought to have done unto his brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 and those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

19:21 and thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 when thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the lord thy god is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of egypt.

20:2 and it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 and shall say
unto them, hear, o israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them; 20:4 for the lord your god is
he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.


 
 ___________________________
 
e that they shall make captains of the armies to lead
the people.

20:10 when thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.

20:11 and it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

20:12 and if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: 20:13 and when the lord thy
god hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: 20:14 but the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the lord thy god hath given thee.

20:15 thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

20:16 but of the cities of thes
 
 ___________________________
 
e people, which the lord thy god doth
give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that
breatheth: 20:17 but thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the
hittites, and the amorites, the canaanites, and the perizzites, the
hivites, and the jebusites; as the lord thy god hath commanded thee:
20:18 that they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
lord your god.

20:19 when thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by
forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 only the trees which thou knowest that
they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it b
 
 ___________________________
 
e subdued.

21:1 if one be found slain in the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and
they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 and it shall be, that the city which is next unto the
slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
val
 
 ___________________________
 
ley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer's neck there in the valley: 21:5 and the priests the sons of
levi shall come near; for them the lord thy god hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the lord; and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried: 21:6 and all
the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 21:7 and
they shall answer and say, our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

21:8 be merciful, o lord, unto thy people israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innocent blood 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto thy people of israel's
charge. and the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 so shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the lord.

21:10 when thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the lord
thy god hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 and seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 21:12
then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 and she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, a
 
 ___________________________
 

rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 and all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 and if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to
be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 his body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him
that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of god;) that thy land be
not defiled, which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and
hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto
thy brother.

22:2 and if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it
to him again.

22:3 in like manner shalt th
 
 ___________________________
 
so shalt thou do
with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 the woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are
abomination unto the lord thy god.

22:6 if a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 but thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thy days.

22:8 when thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon 
 
 ___________________________
 
n
to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of
the lord.

23:3 an ammonite or moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the lord for ever: 23:4 because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of egypt; and
because they hired against thee balaam the son of beor of pethor of
mesopotamia, to curse thee.

23:5 nevertheless the lord thy god would not hearken unto balaam; but
the lord thy god turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because
the lord thy god loved thee.

23:6 thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.

23:7 thou shalt not abhor an edomite; for he is thy brother: thou
shalt not abhor an egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

23:8 the children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the lord in their third generation.

23:9 when the 
 
 ___________________________
 

the camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 but it shall be,
when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 and thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 for the lord thy god walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee;
therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee: 23:16 he shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 there shall be no whore of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
daughters of israel, nor a
sodomite of the sons of israel.

23:18 thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the lord thy god for any vow: for even both these
are abomination unto the lord thy god.

23:19 thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money,
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the lord thy god may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 when thou shalt vow a vow unto the lord thy god, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the lord thy god will surely require 
 
 ___________________________
 
it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 but if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 that which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the lord
thy god, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

23:24 when thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thy vessel.

23:25 when thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn.

24:1 when a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his ey
 
 ___________________________
 
hen she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man's wife.

24:3 and if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
24:4 her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
before the lord: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the
lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 when a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at
home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

24:6 no man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge:
for he taketh a man's life to pledge.

24:7 if a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
sha
 
 ___________________________
 
ll die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,
and do according to all that the priests the levites shall teach you:
as i commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

24:9 remember what the lord thy god did unto miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of egypt.

24:10 when thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.

24:11 thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

24:12 and if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
24:13 in any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless 
 
 ___________________________
 
thee: and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before the lord thy god.

24:14 thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy
land within thy gates: 24:15 at his day thou shalt give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the lord, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 the fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every 
 
 ___________________________
 
man shall be
put to death for his own sin.

24:17 thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge: 24:18 but thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in egypt, and the lord thy god
redeemed thee thence: therefore i command thee to do this thing.

24:19 when thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
the lord thy god may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 when thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.
 
 ___________________________
 
 out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
pity her.

25:13 thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the
land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

25:16 for all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomination unto the lord thy god.

25:17 remember what amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of egypt; 25:18 how he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not god.

25:19 therefore it shall be, when the lord thy god hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about, in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e land which the lord
thy god giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 and it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 that thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the lord
thy god giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
the place which the lord thy god shall choose to place his name there.

26:3 and thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, i profess this day unto the lord thy god, that i am
come unto the country which the lord sware unto our fathers for to
give us.

26:4 and the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down before the altar of the lord thy god.

26:5 and thou shalt spea
 
 ___________________________
 
k and say before the lord thy god, a syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he went down into egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 and the egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 and when we cried unto the
lord god of our fathers, the lord heard our voice, and looked on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 and the lord
brought us forth out of egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 and he hath brought us into this place, and hath
given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 and now, behold, i have brought the firstfruits of the land,
which thou, o lord, hast given me.
 
 ___________________________
 
 and thou shalt set it before the
lord thy god, and worship before the lord thy god: 26:11 and thou
shalt rejoice in every good thing which the lord thy god hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the levite, and the
stranger that is among you.

26:12 when thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thy gates, and be filled; 26:13 then thou shalt
say before the lord thy god, i have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given the
 
 ___________________________
 
m unto the levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all
thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: i have not transgressed
thy commandments, neither have i forgotten them.

26:14 i have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have i taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
the dead: but i have hearkened to the voice of the lord my god, and
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

26:15 look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 this day the lord thy god hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

26:17 thou hast avouched the lord this day to be thy go
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 and the lord hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 and to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
lord thy god, as he hath spoken.

27:1 and moses with the elders of israel commanded the people, saying,
keep all the commandments which i command you this day.

27:2 and it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over jordan unto
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 and thou shalt
write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the lord thy god giv
 
 ___________________________
 
eth
thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the lord god of thy
fathers hath promised thee.

27:4 therefore it shall be when ye be gone over jordan, that ye shall
set up these stones, which i command you this day, in mount ebal, and
thou shalt plaister them with plaister.

27:5 and there shalt thou build an altar unto the lord thy god, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

27:6 thou shalt build the altar of the lord thy god of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the lord thy god:
27:7 and thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoice before the lord thy god.

27:8 and thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.

27:9 and moses and the priests the levites spake unto all israel,
saying, take heed, and hearken, o israel; this day thou art become the
people of the lord thy god.

27:10 thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd thy god, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which i command thee this day.

27:11 and moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 these
shall stand upon mount gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over jordan; simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and joseph,
and benjamin: 27:13 and these shall stand upon mount ebal to curse;
reuben, gad, and asher, and zebulun, dan, and naphtali.

27:14 and the levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of israel
with a loud v
 
 ___________________________
 
ed be he that lieth with his mother in law. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:24 cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:25 cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. and
all the people shall say, amen.

27:26 cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them. and all the people shall say, amen.

28:1 and it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto
the voice of the lord thy god, to observe and to do all his
commandments which i command thee this day, that the lord thy god will
set thee on high above all nations of the earth: 28:2 and all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken
unto the voice of the lord thy god.

28:3 blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in
the field.

28:4 blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, an
 
 ___________________________
 
8:5 blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:6 blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:7 the lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to
be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way,
and flee before thee seven ways.

28:8 the lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses,
and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee
in the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

28:9 the lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the lord
thy god, and walk in his ways.

28:10 and all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of the lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.

28:11 and the lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of
thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy
ground, in the land which the lord sware
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto thy fathers to give
thee.

28:12 the lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt
not borrow.

28:13 and the lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
hearken unto the commandments of the lord thy god, which i command
thee this day, to observe and to do them: 28:14 and thou shalt not go
aside from any of the words which i command thee this day, to the
right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.

28:15 but it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the lord thy god, to observe to do all his commandments and
his statutes which i command thee this day; that all these curses
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: 28:16 cursed shalt thou be i
 
 ___________________________
 

thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed
alway: 28:34 so that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

28:35 the lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the
top of thy head.

28:36 the lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set
over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

28:37 and thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
among all nations whither the lord shall lead thee.

28:38 thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather
but little in; for the locust shall consume it.

28:39 thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither
drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat
them.

28:40 thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou
shalt not anoi
 
 ___________________________
 
into captivity.

28:42 all thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

28:43 the stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high; and thou shalt come down very low.

28:44 he shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall
be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

28:45 moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou
hearkenedst not unto the voice of the lord thy god, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee: 28:46 and they
shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever.

28:47 because thou servedst not the lord thy god with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; 28:48
therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck
 
 ___________________________
 
vour to the young:
28:51 and he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either
corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy
sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

28:52 and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy
land, which the lord thy god hath given thee.

28:53 and thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters, which the lord thy god hath given thee, in
the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee: 28:54 so that the man that is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward
the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he
shall leave: 28:55 so that he will not give to any of them of 
 
 ___________________________
 
d the husband of her bosom,
and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 28:57 and toward her
young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her
children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all
things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shall distress thee in thy gates.

28:58 if thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that
are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and
fearful name, the lord thy god; 28:59 then the lord will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues,
and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

28:60 moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of egypt,
which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.

28:61 also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in
the book of this law, them will the lord bring upon thee, until thou
be destroyed.

28:62 and ye shall be left few in
 
 ___________________________
 
 number, whereas ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of
the lord thy god.

28:63 and it shall come to pass, that as the lord rejoiced over you to
do you good, and to multiply you; so the lord will rejoice over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from
off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

28:64 and the lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one
end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other
gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and
stone.

28:65 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall
the sole of thy foot have rest: but the lord shall give thee there a
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind: 28:66 and
thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and
night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life: 28:67 in the morning
thou shalt say, would god it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
would god it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

28:68 and the lord shall bring thee into egypt again with ships, by
the way whereof i spake unto thee, thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 these are the words of the covenant, which the lord commanded
moses to make with the children of israel in the land of moab
 
 ___________________________
 
ants, and unto all his land; 29:3 the
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 yet the lord hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

29:5 and i have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes
are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy
foot.

29:6 ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink: that ye might know that i am the lord your god.

29:7 and when ye came unto this place, sihon the king of heshbon, and
og the king of bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote
them: 29:8 and we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto
the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to the half tribe of manasseh.

29:9 keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.

29:10 ye stand this day all of you before the lord your god; your
captains of your tribes, your elders,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and your officers, with all the
men of israel, 29:11 your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy
god, and into his oath, which the lord thy god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you only do i make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us this day before the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and st
 
 ___________________________
 
one, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the lord
our god, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should
be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood; 29:19 and it come
to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, i shall have peace, though i walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: 29:20 the
lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord hath laid upon it; 29:23
and that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
the overthrow of sodom, and gomorrah, admah, and zeboim, which the
lord overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: 29:24 even all nations
shall say, wherefore hath the lord done thus unto this land? what
meaneth the heat of this great anger?  29:25 then men shall say,
because they have forsaken the covenant of the lord god of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the
land of egypt: 29:26 for they went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them: 29:27 and the anger of the lord was kindled against this
land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
29:28 and the lord rooted them out of their land in anger, and in
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as
it is thi
 
 ___________________________
 
s day.

29:29 the secret things belong unto the lord our god: but those things
which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that
we may do all the words of this law.

30:1 and it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon
thee, the blessing and the curse, which i have set before thee, and
thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the lord
thy god hath driven thee, 30:2 and shalt return unto the lord thy god,
and shalt obey his voice according to all that i command thee this
day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul; 30:3 that then the lord thy god will turn thy captivity, and
have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all
the nations, whither the lord thy god hath scattered thee.

30:4 if any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven,
from thence will the lord thy god gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee: 30:5 and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord thy god will bring thee into the land
which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

30:6 and the lord thy god will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the lord thy god with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

30:7 and the lord thy god will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

30:8 and thou shalt return and obey the voice of the lord, and do all
his commandments which i command thee this day.

30:9 and the lord thy god will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle,
and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the lord will again
rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: 30:10 if

 
 ___________________________
 
thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the lord thy god, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the
law, and if thou turn unto the lord thy god with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul.

30:11 for this commandment which i command thee this day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off.

30:12 it is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
it?  30:13 neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it?  30:14 but the word is very nigh unto thee,
 
 ___________________________
 
 in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

30:15 see, i have set before thee this day life and good, and death
and evil; 30:16 in that i command thee this day to love the lord thy
god, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
the lord thy god shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

30:17 but if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but
shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; 30:18 i
denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye
shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cur
 
 ___________________________
 
sing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.


 
 ___________________________
 
31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto them as he did to sihon and to og,
kings of the amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 and the lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which i have commanded
you.

31:6 be strong and of a good 
 
 ___________________________
 
courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the lord thy god, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

31:7 and moses called unto joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all israel, be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the lord hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 and the lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed
 
 ___________________________
 
.

31:9 and moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, and unto
all the elders of israel.

31:10 and moses commanded them, saying, at the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 when all israel is come to appear before the lord
thy god in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all israel in their hearing.

31:12 gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the lord your god, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 and that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the lord your god, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over jordan to
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
thou must die: call joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that i may give him a charge. and moses and
joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 and the lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which i have made with them.

31:17 then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and i
will forsake them, and i will hide my face from them, and they shall
be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, are not these evils come upon us, because
our god is not among us?  31:18 and i will surely hide my face in that
day fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods.

31:19 now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the
children of israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a
witness for me against the children of israel.

31:20 for when i shall have brought them into the land which i sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 and it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for i
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before i have
brought them into the land which i sware.

31:22 moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of israel.

31:23 and he gave jos
 
 ___________________________
 
on of nun a charge, and said, be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of israel
into the land which i sware unto them: and i will be with thee.

31:24 and it came to pass, when moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 that
moses commanded the levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lord, saying, 31:26 take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the lord your god, that it may be there
for a witness against thee.

31:27 for i know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while i am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the lord;
and how much more after my death?  31:28 gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that i may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 for i know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from th
 
 ___________________________
 
voke him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 and moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of israel
the words of this song, until they were ended.

32:1 give ear, o ye heavens, and i will speak; and hear, o earth, the
words of my mouth.

32:2 my doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 because i will publish the name of the lord: ascribe
ye greatness unto our god.

32:4 he is the rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
judgment: a god of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

32:5 they have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.

32:6 do ye thus requite the lord, o foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee?  32:7 remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask
 
 ___________________________
 
 people
according to the number of the children of israel.

32:9 for the lord's portion is his people; jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 he found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye.

32:11 as an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 so the lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him.

32:13 he made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 32:14 butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape.

32:15 but jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art covered with f
 
 ___________________________
 
atness; then he forsook god which
made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

32:16 they provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger.

32:17 they sacrificed unto devils, not to god; to gods whom they knew
not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

32:18 of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten god that formed thee.

32:19 and when the lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.

32:20 and he said, i will hide my face from them, i will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children
in whom is no faith.

32:21 they have moved me to jealousy with that which is not god; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and i will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people; i will provoke t
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the cruel venom of
asps.

32:34 is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures?  32:35 to me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them make haste.

32:36 for the lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left.

32:37 and he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
be your protection.

32:39 see now that i, even i, am he, and there is no god with me: i
kill, and i make alive; i wound, and i heal: neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand.

32:40 for i lift up my hand to heaven, and say, i live for ever.

32:41 if i whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judg
 
 ___________________________
 
and be gathered unto
thy people; as aaron thy brother died in mount hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 because ye trespassed against me among the
children of israel at the waters of meribahkadesh, in the wilderness
of zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
israel.

32:52 yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which i give the children of israel.

33:1 and this is the blessing, wherewith moses the man of god blessed
the children of israel before his death.

33:2 and he said, the lord came from sinai, and rose up from seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of jacob.

33:5 and he was kin
 
 ___________________________
 
srael.

33:22 and of dan he said, dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from
bashan.

33:23 and of naphtali he said, o naphtali, satisfied with favour, and
full with the blessing of the lord: possess thou the west and the
south.

33:24 and of asher he said, let asher be blessed with children; let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

33:25 thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 there is none like unto the god of jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

33:27 the eternal god is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, destroy them.

33:28 israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 happy art thou, o israel: who is like unto thee, o people saved
by the lord, the shiel
 
 ___________________________
 

turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest.

1:8 this book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 have not i commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the lord thy god is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 then joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
pass through the host, and command the people, saying, prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the lord your god giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 and to the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to half the tribe
of manasseh, spake joshua, saying, 1:13 remember the word which moses
the servant of the lord comm
 
 ___________________________
 
anded you, saying, the lord your god hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land.

1:14 your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which moses gave you on this side jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 until the lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the lord your
god giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which moses the lord's servant gave you on
this side jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 and they answered joshua, saying, all that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 according as we hearkened unto moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the lord thy god be with thee, as he was with
moses.

1:18 whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy c
 
 ___________________________
 
at your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you.

2:10 for we have heard how the lord dried up the water of the red sea
for you, when ye came out of egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the amorites, that were on the other side jordan, sihon and og,
whom ye utterly destroyed.

2:11 and as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
for the lord your god, he is god in heaven above, and in earth
beneath.

2:12 now therefore, i pray you, swear unto me by the lord, since i
have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my
father's house, and give me a true token: 2:13 and that ye will save
alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.

2:14 and the men answered her, our life for yours, if ye utter not
this our business. and it shall be, when the 
 
 ___________________________
 
nto joshua, truly the
lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.

3:1 and joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
shittim, and came to jordan, he and all the children of israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.

3:2 and it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 and they commanded the people, saying, when ye
see the ark of the covenant of the lord your god, and the priests the
levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 and joshua said unto the people, sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the lord will do wonders among you.

3:6 and joshua spake unto the priests, saying, take up the ark of the
covenant
 
 ___________________________
 
rk of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 and the lord said unto joshua, this day will i begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all israel, that they may know that, as i was
with moses, so i will be with thee.

3:8 and thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, when ye are come to the brink of the water of
jordan, ye shall stand still in jordan.

3:9 and joshua said unto the children of israel, come hither, and hear
the words of the lord your god.

3:10 and joshua said, hereby ye shall know that the living god is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the hivites, and the perizzites, and
the girgashites, and the amorites, and the jebusites.

3:11 behold, the ark of the covenant of the lord of all the earth
passeth over before you into jordan.

3:12 now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of israel,
out of every tribe a man.

3:13 and it shall come
 
 ___________________________
 
e
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 and command ye
them, saying, take you hence out of the midst of jordan, out of the
place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night.

4:4 then joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 and joshua said unto
them, pass over before the ark of the lord your god into the midst of
jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according unto the number of the tribes of the children of israel: 4:6
that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, what mean ye by these stones?  4:7
then ye shall answer them, that the waters of jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the lord; when it passed over
jordan, the waters of jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
 
 ___________________________
 
:19 and the people came up out of jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in gilgal, in the east border of jericho.

4:20 and those twelve stones, which they took out of jordan, did
joshua pitch in gilgal.

4:21 and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean
these stones?  4:22 then ye shall let your children know, saying,
israel came over this jordan on dry land.

4:23 for the lord your god dried up the waters of jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the lord your god did to the red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
that all the people of the earth might know the hand of the lord, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the lord your god for ever.

5:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings of the amorites, which
were on the side of jordan westward, and all the kings of the
canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ee thousand men:
and they fled before the men of ai.

7:5 and the men of ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
as water.

7:6 and joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the lord until the eventide, he and the elders of
israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 and joshua said, alas, o lord god, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
amorites, to destroy us? would to god we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side jordan!  7:8 o lord, what shall i say, when israel
turneth their backs before their enemies!  7:9 for the canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name?  7:10 and the lord said unto j
 
 ___________________________
 
manded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 therefore the children of israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will i be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you.

7:13 up, sanctify the people, and say, sanctify yourselves against to
morrow: for thus saith the lord god of israel, there is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, o israel: thou canst not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

7:14 in the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the lord taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the lord
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the lord
shall take shall come man by man.

7:15 and i
 
 ___________________________
 
 so joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of judah was taken: 7:17 and he brought
the family of judah; and he took the family of the zarhites: and he
brought the family of the zarhites man by man; and zabdi was taken:
7:18 and he brought his household man by man; and achan, the son of
carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of zerah, of the tribe of judah, was
taken.

7:19 and joshua said unto achan, my son, give, i pray thee, glory to
the lord god of israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 and achan answered joshua, and said, indeed i have sinned against
the lord god of israel, and thus and thus have i done: 7:21 when i saw
among the spoils a goodly babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then i coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it
 
 ___________________________
 
o not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 and i, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(for they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, they flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them.

8:7 then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the lord your god will deliver it into your hand.

8:8 and it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the lord shall ye
do. see, i have commanded you.

8:9 joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between bethel and ai, on the west side of ai: but joshua
lodged that night among the people.

8:10 and joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of israel,
 
 ___________________________
 
cording unto the word of the lord which he
commanded joshua.

8:28 and joshua burnt ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 and the king of ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 then joshua built an altar unto the lord god of israel in mount
ebal, 8:31 as moses the servant of the lord commanded the children of
israel, as it is written in the book of the law of moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the lord, and sacrificed peace
offerings.

8:32 and he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of israel.

8:33 and all israel, and their elders, and officers, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
nto the camp at gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of israel, we be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us.

9:7 and the men of israel said unto the hivites, peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you?  9:8 and they said
unto joshua, we are thy servants. and joshua said unto them, who are
ye? and from whence come ye?  9:9 and they said unto him, from a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the lord thy
god: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in egypt,
9:10 and all that he did to the two kings of the amorites, that were
beyond jordan, to sihon king of heshbon, and to og king of bashan,
which was at ashtaroth.

9:11 wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake
to us, saying, take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, we are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.

9:12 this our bread we took hot f
 
 ___________________________
 
congregation sware unto them.

9:16 and it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 and the children of israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. now their cities were gibeon, and chephirah, and
beeroth, and kirjathjearim.

9:18 and the children of israel smote them not, because the princes of
the congregation had sworn unto them by the lord god of israel. and
all the congregation murmured against the princes.

9:19 but all the princes said unto all the congregation, we have sworn
unto them by the lord god of israel: now therefore we may not touch
them.

9:20 this we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 and the princes said unto them, let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes 
 
 ___________________________
 
had promised them.

9:22 and joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, we are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us?  9:23 now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my god.

9:24 and they answered joshua, and said, because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the lord thy god commanded his servant moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 and now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 and so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 and joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers o
 
 ___________________________
 
joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

10:16 but these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
makkedah.

10:17 and it was told joshua, saying, the five kings are found hid in
a cave at makkedah.

10:18 and joshua said, roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 and stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the lord your god hath delivered them
into your hand.

10:20 and it came to pass, when joshua and the children of israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities.

10:21 and all the people returned to the camp to joshua at makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of israel.

10:22 then said joshua, open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me o
 
 ___________________________
 
ng thereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to hebron, so he did to debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to libnah, and to her king.

10:40 so joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the lord god of
israel commanded.

10:41 and joshua smote them from kadeshbarnea even unto gaza, and all
the country of goshen, even unto gibeon.

10:42 and all these kings and their land did joshua take at one time,
because the lord god of israel fought for israel.

10:43 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jabin king of hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to jobab king of madon, and to the king of
shimron, and to the k
 
 ___________________________
 
tes, and all mount hermon, and all bashan unto salcah; 13:12
all the kingdom of og in bashan, which reigned in ashtaroth and in
edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 nevertheless the children of israel expelled not the geshurites,
nor the maachathites: but the geshurites and the maachathites dwell
among the israelites until this day.

13:14 only unto the tribes of levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the lord god of israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 and moses gave unto the tribe of the children of reuben
inheritance according to their families.

13:16 and their coast was from aroer, that is on the bank of the river
arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by medeba; 13:17 heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; dibon, and bamothbaal, and bethbaalmeon, 13:18 and jahaza, and
kedemoth, and mephaath, 13:19 and kirjath
 
 ___________________________
 
 of jair, which are in bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 and half gilead, and ashtaroth, and edrei,
cities of the kingdom of og in bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of machir the son of manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of machir by their families.

13:32 these are the countries which moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of moab, on the other side jordan, by
jericho, eastward.

13:33 but unto the tribe of levi moses gave not any inheritance: the
lord god of israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 and these are the countries which the children of israel
inherited in the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 by lot was their inheritance, as the lord commanded by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for moses had given the inheritance of two trib
 
 ___________________________
 
:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 as the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
the son of jephunneh the kenezite said unto him, thou knowest the
thing that the lord said unto moses the man of god concerning me and
thee in kadeshbarnea.

14:7 forty years old was i when moses the servant of the lord sent me
from kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and i brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but i wholly followed the lord my god.

14:9 and moses sware on that day, saying, surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for
ever, because th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou hast wholly followed the lord my god.

14:10 and now, behold, the lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the lord spake this word unto moses,
while the children of israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
i am this day fourscore and five years old.

14:11 as yet i am as strong this day as i was in the day that moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the lord will be
with me, then i shall be able to drive them out, as the lord said.

14:13 and joshua blessed him, and gave unto caleb the son of jephunneh
hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 hebron therefore became the inheritance of caleb the son of
jephunneh the kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the lord god of israel.

14:15 and the name of hebron before was kirjatharba; which arba was a
great man among the anakims. and the land had rest from war.

15:1 this then was the lot of the tribe of the children of judah by
their families; even to the border of edom the wilderness of zin
southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.

15:2 and their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from
the bay that looketh southward: 15:3 and it went out to the south side
to maalehacrabbim
 
 ___________________________
 
 out the canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 and the whole congregation of the children of israel assembled
together at shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. and the land was subdued before them.

18:2 and there remained among the children of israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance.

18:3 and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and i will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 and they shall divide it into seven parts: judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the descript
 
 ___________________________
 
ion hither to me, that i may cast lots for you here before
the lord our god.

18:7 but the levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond jordan on the east,
which moses the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, and went away: and joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that i may here cast lots for you
before the lord in shil
 
 ___________________________
 

hand.

21:45 there failed not ought of any good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the house of israel; all came to pass.

22:1 then joshua called the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, 22:2 and said unto them, ye have kept all that
moses the servant of the lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that i commanded you: 22:3 ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the lord your god.

22:4 and now the lord your god hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which moses the servant
of the lord gave you on the other side jordan.

22:5 but take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
moses the servant of the lord charged you, to love the lord your god,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve 
 
 ___________________________
 
n of eleazar the priest, 22:14 and with
him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the
tribes of israel; and each one was an head of the house of their
fathers among the thousands of israel.

22:15 and they came unto the children of reuben, and to the children
of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, unto the land of gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 thus saith the whole
congregation of the lord, what trespass is this that ye have committed
against the god of israel, to turn away this day from following the
lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the lord?  22:17 is the iniquity of peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was
a plague in the congregation of the lord, 22:18 but that ye must turn
away this day from following the lord? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whole congregation of isra
 
 ___________________________
 
el.

22:19 notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the lord, wherein the
lord's tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the lord our god.

22:20 did not achan the son of zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity.

22:21 then the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half
tribe of manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands
of israel, 22:22 the lord god of gods, the lord god of gods, he
knoweth, and israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the lord, (save 
 
 ___________________________
 
us not this day,) 22:23 that we
have built us an altar to turn from following the lord, or if to offer
thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace
offerings thereon, let the lord himself require it; 22:24 and if we
have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, in time to
come your children might speak unto our children, saying, what have ye
to do with the lord god of israel?  22:25 for the lord hath made
jordan a border between us and you, ye children of reuben and children
of gad; ye have no part in the lord: so shall your children make our
children cease from fearing the lord.

22:26 therefore we said, let us now prepare to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 but that it may be a
witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the lord before him with our burnt offerings
 
 ___________________________
 
,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, ye have no part
in the lord.

22:28 therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again,
behold the pattern of the altar of the lord, which our fathers made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you.

22:29 god forbid that we should rebel against the lord, and turn this
day from following the lord, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the lord
our god that is before his tabernacle.

22:30 and when phinehas the priest, and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of israel which were with him,
heard the words that the children of reuben and the children of gad
and the children of manasseh spake, it pleased them.

2
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord is among us, because ye
have not committed this trespass against the lord: now ye have
delivered the children of israel out of the hand of the lord.

22:32 and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest, and the princes,
returned from the children of reuben, and from the children of gad,
out of the land of gilead, unto the land of canaan, to the children of
israel, and brought them word again.

22:33 and the thing pleased the children of israel; and the children
of israel blessed god, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of reuben and gad
dwelt.

22:34 and the children of reuben and the children of gad called the
altar ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the lord is god.

23:1 and it came to pass a long time after that the lord had given
rest unto israel from all their enemies round about, that joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 and joshua called for all israel, and for their elders, and f
 
 ___________________________
 
or
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, i am old and stricken in age: 23:3 and ye have seen all
that the lord your god hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the lord your god is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 behold, i have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from jordan, with all the
nations that i have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 and the lord your god, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the lord your god hath promised unto you.

23:6 be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 that ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serv
 
 ___________________________
 
e
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 but cleave unto the lord your
god, as ye have done unto this day.

23:9 for the lord hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day.

23:10 one man of you shall chase a thousand: for the lord your god, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.

23:11 take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the lord
your god.

23:12 else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 know
for a certainty that the lord your god will no more drive out any of
these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto
you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23
 
 ___________________________
 
:14 and, behold, this day i am going the way of all the earth: and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the lord your god spake
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof.

23:15 therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are
come upon you, which the lord your god promised you; so shall the lord
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:16 when ye have transgressed the covenant of the lord your god,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the lord be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 and joshua gathered all the tr
 
 ___________________________
 
ibes of israel to shechem, and
called for the elders of israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and
 
 ___________________________
 
and
the jebusites; and i delivered them into your hand.

24:12 and i sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from
before you, even the two kings of the amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thy bow.

24:13 and i have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.

24:14 now therefore fear the lord, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in egypt; and serve ye the lord.

24:15 and if it seem evil unto you to serve the lord, choose you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
lord.

24:16 and the people answered and said, god forbid that we should
forsake the lord, to serve other gods; 24
 
 ___________________________
 
:17 for the lord our god, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 and the lord drave out from
before us all the people, even the amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the lord; for he is our god.

24:19 and joshua said unto the people, ye cannot serve the lord: for
he is an holy god; he is a jealous god; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins.

24:20 if ye forsake the lord, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 and the people said unto joshua, nay; but we will serve the
lord.

24:22 and joshua said unto the people, ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ord, to serve him. and they
said, we are witnesses.

24:23 now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the lord god of israel.

24:24 and the people said unto joshua, the lord our god will we serve,
and his voice will we obey.

24:25 so joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in shechem.

24:26 and joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of god, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the lord.

24:27 and joshua said unto all the people, behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the lord which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your god.

24:28 so joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

24:29 and it came to pass after these things, that joshua the son of
nun, the servant of the
 
 ___________________________
 
he canaanites and the
perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in bezek ten
thousand men.

1:5 and they found adonibezek in bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the canaanites and the perizzites.

1:6 but adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

1:7 and adonibezek said, threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as i
have done, so god hath requited me. and they brought him to jerusalem,
and there he died.

1:8 now the children of judah had fought against jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city
on fire.

1:9 and afterward the children of judah went down to fight against the
canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley.

1:10 and judah went against the canaanites that dwelt in hebron: (now
the name of hebron before was kirjatharba:) and
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the lord came up from gilgal to bochim, and said,
i made you to go up out of egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which i sware unto your fathers; and i said, i will never break my
covenant with you.

2:2 and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this?  2:3 wherefore i also said, i will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 and it came to pass, when the angel of the lord spake these words
unto all the children of israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 and they called the name of that place bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the lord.

2:6 and when joshua had let the people go, the children of israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

2:7 and the people served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elde
 
 ___________________________
 
, died, being an
hundred and ten years old.

2:9 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathheres, in the mount of ephraim, on the north side of the hill
gaash.

2:10 and also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers:
and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
lord, nor yet the works which he had done for israel.

2:11 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
served baalim: 2:12 and they forsook the lord god of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of egypt, and followed other gods,
of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
themselves unto them, and provoked the lord to anger.

2:13 and they forsook the lord, and served baal and ashtaroth.

2:14 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they
could not any longer
 
 ___________________________
 
 stand before their enemies.

2:15 whithersoever they went out, the hand of the lord was against
them for evil, as the lord had said, and as the lord had sworn unto
them: and they were greatly distressed.

2:16 nevertheless the lord raised up judges, which delivered them out
of the hand of those that spoiled them.

2:17 and yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the lord; but they did not so.

2:18 and when the lord raised them up judges, then the lord was with
the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the
days of the judge: for it repented the lord because of their groanings
by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

2:19 and it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they ret
 
 ___________________________
 
urned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel; and he said,
because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which i
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 i
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which joshua left when he died: 2:22 that through them i may prove
israel, whether they will keep the way o
 
 ___________________________
 
that dwelt in mount lebanon, from mount
baalhermon unto the entering in of hamath.

3:4 and they were to prove israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the lord, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of moses.

3:5 and the children of israel dwelt among the canaanites, hittites,
and amorites, and perizzites, and hivites, and jebusites: 3:6 and they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods.

3:7 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
forgat the lord their god, and served baalim and the groves.

3:8 therefore the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he
sold them into the hand of chushanrishathaim king of mesopotamia: and
the children of israel served chushanrishathaim eight years.

3:9 and when the children of israel cried unto the lord, the lord
raised up a deliverer to the children of israel, who delivered them,
even othniel the so
 
 ___________________________
 
o eglon king of moab: and eglon was
a very fat man.

3:18 and when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present.

3:19 but he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
gilgal, and said, i have a secret errand unto thee, o king: who said,
keep silence. and all that stood by him went out from him.

3:20 and ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. and ehud said, i have a message from
god unto thee.

and he arose out of his seat.

3:21 and ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 3:22 and the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.

3:23 then ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them.

3:24 when he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw 
 
 ___________________________
 
en of israel cried unto the lord: for he had nine
hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
children of israel.

4:4 and deborah, a prophetess, the wife of lapidoth, she judged israel
at that time.

4:5 and she dwelt under the palm tree of deborah between ramah and
bethel in mount ephraim: and the children of israel came up to her for
judgment.

4:6 and she sent and called barak the son of abinoam out of
kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, hath not the lord god of israel
commanded, saying, go and draw toward mount tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of naphtali and of the children of
zebulun?  4:7 and i will draw unto thee to the river kishon sisera,
the captain of jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and
i will deliver him into thine hand.

4:8 and barak said unto her, if thou wilt go with me, then i will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then i will not go.

4:9 and she said, i will surely go with th
 
 ___________________________
 
u shalt say, no.

4:21 then jael heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into
his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep
and weary. so he died.

4:22 and, behold, as barak pursued sisera, jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, come, and i will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. and when he came into her tent, behold, sisera lay dead, and
the nail was in his temples.

4:23 so god subdued on that day jabin the king of canaan before the
children of israel.

4:24 and the hand of the children of israel prospered, and prevailed
against jabin the king of canaan, until they had destroyed jabin king
of canaan.

5:1 then sang deborah and barak the son of abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 praise ye the lord for the avenging of israel, when the
people willingly offered themselves.

5:3 hear, o ye kings; give ear, o ye princes; i, even i, will sing
unto the lord; i will 
 
 ___________________________
 
sing praise to the lord god of israel.

5:4 lord, when thou wentest out of seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the
clouds also dropped water.

5:5 the mountains melted from before the lord, even that sinai from
before the lord god of israel.

5:6 in the days of shamgar the son of anath, in the days of jael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

5:7 the inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in israel,
until that i deborah arose, that i arose a mother in israel.

5:8 they chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield
or spear seen among forty thousand in israel?  5:9 my heart is toward
the governors of israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
 
 ___________________________
 
ir cattle and their tents, and they came
as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were
without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

6:6 and israel was greatly impoverished because of the midianites; and
the children of israel cried unto the lord.

6:7 and it came to pass, when the children of israel cried unto the
lord because of the midianites, 6:8 that the lord sent a prophet unto
the children of israel, which said unto them, thus saith the lord god
of israel, i brought you up from egypt, and brought you forth out of
the house of bondage; 6:9 and i delivered you out of the hand of the
egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave
them out from before you, and gave you their land; 6:10 and i said
unto you, i am the lord your god; fear not the gods of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

6:11 and there came an angel of the lord, and sat under an oak which
was in ophrah, that p
 
 ___________________________
 
im, if now i have found grace in thy sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

6:18 depart not hence, i pray thee, until i come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it before thee. and he said, i will tarry
until thou come again.

6:19 and gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

6:20 and the angel of god said unto him, take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.
and he did so.

6:21 then the angel of the lord put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. then the angel of the lord departed out of his
sight.

6:22 and when gideon perceived that he was an angel of the lord,
gideon said, alas, o 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord god! for because i have seen an angel of the
lord face to face.

6:23 and the lord said unto him, peace be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die.

6:24 then gideon built an altar there unto the lord, and called it
jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in ophrah of the abiezrites.

6:25 and it came to pass the same night, that the lord said unto him,
take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
years old, and throw down the altar of baal that thy father hath, and

 
 ___________________________
 
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 and build an altar unto the
lord thy god upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take
the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shalt cut down.

6:27 then gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the lord had
said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night.

6:28 and when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold,
the altar of baal was cast down,
 
 ___________________________
 
er, who hath done this thing? and when
they enquired and asked, they said, gideon the son of joash hath done
this thing.

6:30 then the men of the city said unto joash, bring out thy son, that
he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of baal, and because
he hath cut down the grove that was by it.

6:31 and joash said unto all that stood against him, will ye plead for
baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

6:32 therefore on that day he called him jerubbaal, saying, let baal
plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

6:33 then all the midianites and the amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the
valley of jezreel.

6:34 but the spirit of the lord came upon gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and abiezer was gathered after him.

6:35 and he sent messenger
 
 ___________________________
 
s throughout all manasseh; who also was
gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto asher, and unto
zebulun, and unto naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

6:36 and gideon said unto god, if thou wilt save israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said, 6:37 behold, i will put a fleece of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all
the earth beside, then shall i know that thou wilt save israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said.

6:38 and it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water.

6:39 and gideon said unto god, let not thine anger be hot against m
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
and i will speak but this once: let me prove, i pray thee, but this
once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon
all the ground let there be dew.

6:40 and god did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only,
and there was dew on all the ground.

7:1 then jerubbaal, who is gideon, and all the people that were with
him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of harod: so that the
host of the midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of
moreh, in the valley.

7:2 and the lord said unto gideon, the people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the midianites into their hands, lest israel
vaunt themselves against 
 
 ___________________________
 
without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude.

7:13 and when gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow, and said, behold, i dreamed a dream, and, lo, a
cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along.

7:14 and his fellow answered and said, this is nothing else save the
sword of gideon the son of joash, a man of israel: for into his hand
hath god delivered midian, and all the host.

7:15 and it was so, when gideon heard the telling of the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the
host of israel, and said, arise; for the lord hath delivered into your
hand the host of midian.

7:16 and he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers.

7:17 and he said unto them, look on me, and do likewise: 
 
 ___________________________
 
 oreb, and zeeb they slew at the winepress
of zeeb, and pursued midian, and brought the heads of oreb and zeeb to
gideon on the other side jordan.

8:1 and the men of ephraim said unto him, why hast thou served us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
midianites?  and they did chide with him sharply.

8:2 and he said unto them, what have i done now in comparison of you?
is not the gleaning of the grapes of ephraim better than the vintage
of abiezer?  8:3 god hath delivered into your hands the princes of
midian, oreb and zeeb: and what was i able to do in comparison of you?
then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

8:4 and gideon came to jordan, and passed over, he, and the three
hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

8:5 and he said unto the men of succoth, give, i pray you, loaves of
bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and i am
pursuing after zebah and zalmunna, kings of midia
 
 ___________________________
 

8:30 and gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for
he had many wives.

8:31 and his concubine that was in shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called abimelech.

8:32 and gideon the son of joash died in a good old age, and was
buried in the sepulchre of joash his father, in ophrah of the
abiezrites.

8:33 and it came to pass, as soon as gideon was dead, that the
children of israel turned again, and went a whoring after baalim, and
made baalberith their god.

8:34 and the children of israel remembered not the lord their god, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every
side: 8:35 neither shewed they kindness to the house of jerubbaal,
namely, gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto
israel.

9:1 and abimelech the son of jerubbaal went to shechem unto his
mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of
the house of his mother's father, saying, 9:2 speak, i pray you, in

 
 ___________________________
 
rubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon
one stone: notwithstanding yet jotham the youngest son of jerubbaal
was left; for he hid himself.

9:6 and all the men of shechem gathered together, and all the house of
millo, and went, and made abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in shechem.

9:7 and when they told it to jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
hearken unto me, ye men of shechem, that god may hearken unto you.

9:8 the trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the olive tree, reign thou over us.

9:9 but the olive tree said unto them, should i leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour god and man, and go to be promoted over
the trees?  9:10 and the trees said to the fig tree, come thou, and
reign over us.

9:11 but the fig tree said unto them, should i forsake my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9
 
 ___________________________
 
:12 then
said the trees unto the vine, come thou, and reign over us.

9:13 and the vine said unto them, should i leave my wine, which
cheereth god and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9:14 then
said all the trees unto the bramble, come thou, and reign over us.

9:15 and the bramble said unto the trees, if in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of lebanon.

9:16 now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye
have made abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with jerubbaal and
his house, and have
 
 ___________________________
 
ely with
jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in abimelech,
and let him also rejoice in you: 9:20 but if not, let fire come out
from abimelech, and devour the men of shechem, and the house of millo;
and let fire come out from the men of shechem, and from the house of
millo, and devour abimelech.

9:21 and jotham ran away, and fled, and went to beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of abimelech his brother.

9:22 when abimelech had reigned three years over israel, 9:23 then god
sent an evil spirit between abimelech and the men of shechem; and the
men of shechem dealt treacherously with abimelech: 9:24 that the
cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of jerubbaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of shechem, which aided him in the killing of his
brethren.

9:25 and the men of shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them:
 
 ___________________________
 

and it was told abimelech.

9:26 and gaal the son of ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
shechem: and the men of shechem put their confidence in him.

9:27 and they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their
god, and did eat and drink, and cursed abimelech.

9:28 and gaal the son of ebed said, who is abimelech, and who is
shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of jerubbaal? and
zebul his officer? serve the men of hamor the father of shechem: for
why should we serve him?  9:29 and would to god this people were under
my hand! then would i remove abimelech. and he said to abimelech,
increase thine army, and come out.

9:30 and when zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of gaal
 
 ___________________________
 

9:44 and abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
them.

9:45 and abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the
city, and sowed it with salt.

9:46 and when all the men of the tower of shechem heard that, they
entered into an hold of the house of the god berith.

9:47 and it was told abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
shechem were gathered together.

9:48 and abimelech gat him up to mount zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder,
and said unto the people that were with him, what ye have seen me do,
make haste, and do as i have done.

9:49 and all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and

 
 ___________________________
 
nd
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

9:53 and a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon abimelech's
head, and all to brake his skull.

9:54 then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and
said unto him, draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, a
women slew him. and his young man thrust him through, and he died.

9:55 and when the men of israel saw that abimelech was dead, they
departed every man unto his place.

9:56 thus god rendered the wickedness of abimelech, which he did unto
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 9:57 and all the evil of
the men of shechem did god render upon their heads: and upon them came
the curse of jotham the son of jerubbaal.

10:1 and after abimelech there arose to defend israel tola the son of
puah, the son of dodo, a man of issachar; and he dwelt in shamir in
mount ephraim.

10:2 and he judged israel twenty and three years, and died, and was
buried in shamir.

10:3 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd after him arose jair, a gileadite, and judged israel twenty
and two years.

10:4 and he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they
had thirty cities, which are called havothjair unto this day, which
are in the land of gilead.

10:5 and jair died, and was buried in camon.

10:6 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord, and served baalim, and ashtaroth, and the gods of syria, and the
gods of zidon, and the gods of moab, and the gods of the children of
ammon, and the gods of the philistines, and forsook the lord, and
served not him.

10:7 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he sold
them into the hands of the philistines, and into the hands of the
children of ammon.

10:8 and that year they vexed and oppressed the children of israel:
eighteen years, all the children of israel that were on the other side
jordan in the land of the amorites, which is in gilead.

10:9 moreover the children of ammon
 
 ___________________________
 
 passed over jordan to fight also
against judah, and against benjamin, and against the house of ephraim;
so that israel was sore distressed.

10:10 and the children of israel cried unto the lord, saying, we have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our god, and also
served baalim.

10:11 and the lord said unto the children of israel, did not i deliver
you from the egyptians, and from the amorites, from the children of
ammon, and from the philistines?  10:12 the zidonians also, and the
amalekites, and the maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and
i delivered you out of their hand.

10:13 yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore i will
deliver you no more.

10:14 go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; l
 
 ___________________________
 
et them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation.

10:15 and the children of israel said unto the lord, we have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
pray thee, this day.

10:16 and they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the lord: and his soul was grieved for the misery of israel.

10:17 then the children of ammon were gathered together, and encamped
in gilead. and the children of israel assembled themselves together,
and encamped in mizpeh.

10:18 and the people and princes of gilead said one to another, what
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of ammon? he
shall be head over all the inhabitants of gilead.

11:1 now jephthah the gileadite was a mighty
 
 ___________________________
 
ide of the
land of moab, and pitched on the other side of arnon, but came not
within the border of moab: for arnon was the border of moab.

11:19 and israel sent messengers unto sihon king of the amorites, the
king of heshbon; and israel said unto him, let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land into my place.

11:20 but sihon trusted not israel to pass through his coast: but
sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in jahaz, and
fought against israel.

11:21 and the lord god of israel delivered sihon and all his people
into the hand of israel, and they smote them: so israel possessed all
the land of the amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

11:22 and they possessed all the coasts of the amorites, from arnon
even unto jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto jordan.

11:23 so now the lord god of israel hath dispossessed the amorites
from before his people israel, and shouldest thou possess it?  11:24
wilt not thou possess that which chemosh thy god g
 
 ___________________________
 
iveth thee to
possess? so whomsoever the lord our god shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess.

11:25 and now art thou any thing better than balak the son of zippor,
king of moab? did he ever strive against israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 while israel dwelt in heshbon and her towns, and
in aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the
coasts of arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover
them within that time?  11:27 wherefore i have not sinned against
thee, but thou doest m
 
 ___________________________
 
f the family of the
danites, whose name was manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

13:3 and the angel of the lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto
her, behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 now therefore beware, i pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 13:5 for, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a nazarite unto god from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliver israel out of the hand of the philistines.

13:6 then the woman came and told her husband, saying, a man of god
came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel
of god, very terrible: but i asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name: 13:7 but he said unto me, behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
any unclean thing: for the child shall be a nazarite 
 
 ___________________________
 
to god from the
womb to the day of his death.

13:8 then manoah intreated the lord, and said, o my lord, let the man
of god which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shall do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 and god hearkened to the voice of manoah; and the angel of god
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but manoah her
husband was not with her.

13:10 and the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and
said unto him, behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto
me the other day.

13:11 and manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? and
he said, i am.

13:12 and manoah said, now let thy words come to pass. how shall we
order the chi
 
 ___________________________
 
 did
wonderously; and manoah and his wife looked on.

13:20 for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the lord ascended in the flame of the
altar. and manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 but the angel of the lord did no more appear to manoah and to
his wife. then manoah knew that he was an angel of the lord.

13:22 and manoah said unto his wife, we shall surely die, because we
have seen god.

13:23 but his wife said unto him, if the lord were pleased to kill us,
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
at this time have told us such things as these.

13:24 and the woman bare a son, and called his name samson: and the
child grew, and the lord blessed him.

13:25 and the spirit of the lord began to move him at times in the
camp of dan between zorah and eshtaol.

14:1 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
15:16 and samson said, with the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have i slain a thousand men.

15:17 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
ramathlehi.

15:18 and he was sore athirst, and called on the lord, and said, thou
hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and
now shall i die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised?  15:19 but god clave an hollow place that was in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit
came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof
enhakkore, which is in lehi unto this day.

15:20 and he judged israel in the days of the philistines twenty
years.

16:1 then went samson to gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 and it was told the gazites, saying, samson is come hither. and
they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all 
 
 ___________________________
 
ith the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 and she said unto him, how canst thou say, i love thee, when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

16:16 and it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,
and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 16:17 that he
told her all his heart, and said unto her, there hath not come a razor
upon mine head; for i have been a nazarite unto god from my mother's
womb: if i be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and i shall
become weak, and be like any other man.

16:18 and when delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the philistines, saying, come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. then the lords of the
philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 and she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to sha
 
 ___________________________
 
 of his sleep, and said, i will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. and he wist not that the lord was departed from him.

16:21 but the philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 then the lords of the philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrifice unto dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, our god hath delivered samson our enemy into our hand.

16:24 and when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

16:25 and it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, call for samson, that he may make us sport. and they called for
samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between th
 
 ___________________________
 
e pillars.

16:26 and samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, suffer
me that i may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that i
may lean upon them.

16:27 now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while samson made sport.

16:28 and samson called unto the lord, and said, o lord god, remember
me, i pray thee, and strengthen me, i pray thee, only this once, o
god, that i may be at once avenged of the philistines for my two eyes.

16:29 and samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 and samson said, let me die with the philistines. and he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that wer
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, i had wholly dedicated the silver unto
the lord from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
image: now therefore i will restore it unto thee.

17:4 yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took
two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
of micah.

17:5 and the man micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

17:6 in those days there was no king in israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.

17:7 and there was a young man out of bethlehemjudah of the family of
judah, who was a levite, and he sojourned there.

17:8 and the man departed out of the city from bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount ephraim to
the house of micah, as he journeyed.
 
 ___________________________
 
, search the land:
who when they came to mount ephraim, to the house of micah, they
lodged there.

18:3 when they were by the house of micah, they knew the voice of the
young man the levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
hast thou here?  18:4 and he said unto them, thus and thus dealeth
micah with me, and hath hired me, and i am his priest.

18:5 and they said unto him, ask counsel, we pray thee, of god, that
we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

18:6 and the priest said unto them, go in peace: before the lord is
your way wherein ye go.

18:7 then the five men departed, and came to laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
zidonians, and had no business with any man.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
8:8 and they came unto their brethren to zorah and eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, what say ye?  18:9 and they said, arise, that
we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land.

18:10 when ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large
land: for god hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of any thing that is in the earth.

18:11 and there went from thence of the family of the danites, out of
zorah and out of eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
war.

18:12 and they went up, and pitched in kirjathjearim, in judah:
wherefore they called that place mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it
is behind kirjathjearim.

18:13 and they passed thence unto mount ephraim, and came unto the
house of micah.

 
 ___________________________
 
f the people.

18:21 so they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them.

18:22 and when they were a good way from the house of micah, the men
that were in the houses near to micah's house were gathered together,
and overtook the children of dan.

18:23 and they cried unto the children of dan. and they turned their
faces, and said unto micah, what aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company?  18:24 and he said, ye have taken away my gods which i
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have i more? and
what is this that ye say unto me, what aileth thee?  18:25 and the
children of dan said unto him, let not thy voice be heard among us,
lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the
lives of thy household.

18:26 and the children of dan went their way: and when micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

18:27 and they took the things which micah
 
 ___________________________
 
city, and dwelt therein.

18:29 and they called the name of the city dan, after the name of dan
their father, who was born unto israel: howbeit the name of the city
was laish at the first.

18:30 and the children of dan set up the graven image: and jonathan,
the son of gershom, the son of manasseh, he and his sons were priests
to the tribe of dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

18:31 and they set them up micah's graven image, which he made, all
the time that the house of god was in shiloh.

19:1 and it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in
israel, that there was a certain levite sojourning on the side of
mount ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of bethlehemjudah.

19:2 and his concubine played the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father's house to bethlehemjudah, and was there four
whole months.

19:3 and her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
her, and to bring her again, having his servant w
 
 ___________________________
 
aid, there was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of israel came up out of
the land of egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds.

20:1 then all the children of israel went out, and the congregation
was gathered together as one man, from dan even to beersheba, with the
land of gilead, unto the lord in mizpeh.

20:2 and the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of
israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of god,
four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.

20:3 (now the children of benjamin heard that the children of israel
were gone up to mizpeh.) then said the children of israel, tell us,
how was this wickedness?  20:4 and the levite, the husband of the
woman that was slain, answered and said, i came into gibeah that
belongeth to benjamin, i and my concubine, to lodge.

20:5 and the men of gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slai
 
 ___________________________
 
time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
inhabitants of gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

20:16 among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
miss.

20:17 and the men of israel, beside benjamin, were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

20:18 and the children of israel arose, and went up to the house of
god, and asked counsel of god, and said, which of us shall go up first
to the battle against the children of benjamin? and the lord said,
judah shall go up first.

20:19 and the children of israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against gibeah.

20:20 and the men of israel went out to battle against benjamin; and
the men of israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
gibeah.

20:21 and the children of benjamin came forth out of gibeah, and
destroyed down to the ground o
 
 ___________________________
 
hall i go up again
to battle against the children of benjamin my brother? and the lord
said, go up against him.)  20:24 and the children of israel came near
against the children of benjamin the second day.

20:25 and benjamin went forth against them out of gibeah the second
day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 then all the children of israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of god, and wept, and sat there before the
lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the lord.

20:27 and the children of israel enquired of the lord, (for the ark of
the covenant of god was there in those days, 20:28 and phinehas, the
son of eleazar, the son of aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, shall i yet again go out to battle against the children of
benjamin my brother, or shall i cease? and the lord said, go up; for
to morro
 
 ___________________________
 
w i will deliver them into thine hand.

20:29 and israel set liers in wait round about gibeah.

20:30 and the children of israel went up against the children of
benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against gibeah,
as at other times.

20:31 and the children of benjamin went out against the people, and
were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
the house of god, and the other to gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of israel.

20:32 and the children of benjamin said, they are smitten down before
us, as at the first. but the children of israel said, let us flee, and
draw them from the city unto the highways.

20:33 and all the men of israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at baaltamar: and the liers in wait of israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of gibeah.

20:34 and there came against gibe
 
 ___________________________
 
the wilderness unto the
rock rimmon, and abode in the rock rimmon four months.

20:48 and the men of israel turned again upon the children of
benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men
of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the cities that they came to.

21:1 now the men of israel had sworn in mizpeh, saying, there shall
not any of us give his daughter unto benjamin to wife.

21:2 and the people came to the house of god, and abode there till
even before god, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 and
said, o lord god of israel, why is this come to pass in israel, that
there should be to day one tribe lacking in israel?  21:4 and it came
to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an
altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

21:5 and the children of israel said, who is there among all the
tribes of israel that came not up with the congregation unto the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 have hope, if i should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 would ye
tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sakes that the hand of the lord is gone out against me.

1:14 and they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and orpah kissed
her mother in law; but ruth clave unto her.

1:15 and she said, behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

1:16 and ruth said, intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, i will go; and where
thou lodgest, i will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy god
my god: 1:17 where thou diest, will i die, and there will i be buried:
the lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.

1:18 when she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her.
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto him, why have i found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing i am a stranger?  2:11 and boaz
answered and said unto her, it hath fully been shewed me, all that
thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest
not heretofore.

2:12 the lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the lord god of israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

2:13 then she said, let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
thine handmaid, though i be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

2:14 and boaz said unto her, at mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. and she sat beside the
reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left.

 
 ___________________________
 
ore eli thought she had been drunken.

1:14 and eli said unto her, how long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee.

1:15 and hannah answered and said, no, my lord, i am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit: i have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul before the lord.

1:16 count not thine handmaid for a daughter of belial: for out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief have i spoken hitherto.

1:17 then eli answered and said, go in peace: and the god of israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

1:18 and she said, let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. so the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

1:19 and they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
lord, and returned, and came to their house to ramah: and elkanah knew
hannah his wife; and the lord remembered her.

1:20 wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
hannah had conceived, that s
 
 ___________________________
 
child i prayed; and the lord hath given me my petition
which i asked of him: 1:28 therefore also i have lent him to the lord;
as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the lord. and he worshipped
the lord there.

2:1 and hannah prayed, and said, my heart rejoiceth in the lord, mine
horn is exalted in the lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies;
because i rejoice in thy salvation.

2:2 there is none holy as the lord: for there is none beside thee:
neither is there any rock like our god.

2:3 talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of
your mouth: for the lord is a god of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed.

2:4 the bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girded with strength.

2:5 they that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath many children is waxed feeble.

2:6 the lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to 
 
 ___________________________
 
r
evil dealings by all this people.

2:24 nay, my sons; for it is no good report that i hear: ye make the
lord's people to transgress.

2:25 if one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin against the lord, who shall intreat for him? notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the lord
would slay them.

2:26 and the child samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
lord, and also with men.

2:27 and there came a man of god unto eli, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord, did i plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in egypt in pharaoh's house?  2:28 and did i choose him
out of all the tribes of israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did i give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of israel?  2:29 wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at
mine offering, which i have commanded in my habitat
 
 ___________________________
 
ion; and honourest
thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of israel my people?  2:30 wherefore the lord god of israel
saith, i said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father,
should walk before me for ever: but now the lord saith, be it far from
me; for them that honour me i will honour, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.

2:31 behold, the days come, that i will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house.

2:32 and thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which god shall give israel: a
 
 ___________________________
 
t in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, put me, i pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that i may eat a piece of bread.

3:1 and the child samuel ministered unto the lord before eli. and the
word of the lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

3:2 and it came to pass at that time, when eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 and
ere the lamp of god went out in the temple of the lord, where the ark
of god was, and samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 that the lord
called samuel: and he answered, here am i.

3:5 and he ran unto eli, and said, here am i; for thou calledst me.
and he said, i called not; lie down again. and he went and lay down.

3:6 and the lord called yet again, samuel. and samuel arose and went
to eli, and said, here am i; for thou didst call me. and he answered,
i called not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 now samue
 
 ___________________________
 
 restrained them not.

3:14 and therefore i have sworn unto the house of eli, that the
iniquity of eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.

3:15 and samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the lord. and samuel feared to shew eli the vision.

3:16 then eli called samuel, and said, samuel, my son. and he
answered, here am i.

3:17 and he said, what is the thing that the lord hath said unto thee?
i pray thee hide it not from me: god do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

3:18 and samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. and he
said, it is the lord: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 and samuel grew, and the lord was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground.

3:20 and all israel from dan even to beersheba knew that samuel was
established to be a prophet of the lord.

3:21 and the lord appeared again in shiloh: fo
 
 ___________________________
 
camp, the elders of israel
said, wherefore hath the lord smitten us to day before the
philistines? let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the lord out of
shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
the hand of our enemies.

4:4 so the people sent to shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the lord of hosts, which dwelleth between
the cherubims: and the two sons of eli, hophni and phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of god.

4:5 and when the ark of the covenant of the lord came into the camp,
all israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

4:6 and when the philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
what meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the hebrews?
and they understood that the ark of the lord was come into the camp.

4:7 and the philistines were afraid, for they said, god is come into
the camp. and they said, woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
 
 ___________________________
 

thing heretofore.

4:8 woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
gods? these are the gods that smote the egyptians with all the plagues
in the wilderness.

4:9 be strong and quit yourselves like men, o ye philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselves like men, and fight.

4:10 and the philistines fought, and israel was smitten, and they fled
every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
there fell of israel thirty thousand footmen.

4:11 and the ark of god was taken; and the two sons of eli, hophni a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
phinehas, were slain.

4:12 and there ran a man of benjamin out of the army, and came to
shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his
head.

4:13 and when he came, lo, eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of god. and when the man
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

4:14 and when eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, what meaneth
the noise of this tumult? and the man came in hastily, and told eli.

4:15 now eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim,
that he could not see.

4:16 and the man said unto eli, i am he that came out of the army, and
i fled to day out of the army. and he said, what is there done, my
son?  4:17 and the messenger answered and
 
 ___________________________
 
 said, israel is fled before
the philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thy two sons also, hophni and phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of god is taken.

4:18 and it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of god, that
he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. and he had
judged israel forty years.

4:19 and his daughter in law, phinehas' wife, was with child, near to
be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of god was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

4:20 and about the time of her death the women that st
 
 ___________________________
 
ood by her said
unto her, fear not; for thou hast born a son. but she answered not,
neither did she regard it.

4:21 and she named the child ichabod, saying, the glory is departed
from israel: because the ark of god was taken, and because of her
father in law and her husband.

4:22 and she said, the glory is departed from israel: for the ark of
god is taken.

5:1 and the philistines took the ark of god, and brought it from
ebenezer unto ashdod.

5:2 when the philistines took the ark of god, they brought it into the
house of dagon, and set it by dagon.

5:3 and when they of ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the lord. and
they took dagon, and set him in his place again.

5:4 and when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, dagon was
fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the lord; and the
hea
 
 ___________________________
 
d of dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold; only the stump of dagon was left to him.

5:5 therefore neither the priests of dagon, nor any that come into
dagon's house, tread on the threshold of dagon in ashdod unto this
day.

5:6 but the hand of the lord was heavy upon them of ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even ashdod and the
coasts thereof.

5:7 and when the men of ashdod saw that it was so, they said, the ark
of the god of israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore
upon us, and upon dagon our god.

5:8 they sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the philistines
unto them, and said, what shall we do with the ark of the god of
israel? and they answered, let the ark of the god of israel be carried
about unto gath. and they carried the ark of the god of israel about
thither.

5:9 and it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of
the lord was against the city with a very gr
 
 ___________________________
 
eat destruction: and he
smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts.

5:10 therefore they sent the ark of god to ekron. and it came to pass,
as the ark of god came to ekron, that the ekronites cried out, saying,
they have brought about the ark of the god of israel to us, to slay us
and our people.

5:11 so they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
philistines, and said, send away the ark of the god of israel, and let
it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of
god was very heavy there.

5:12 and the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cry of the city went up to heaven.

6:1 and the ark of the lord was in the country of the philistines
seven months.

6:2 and the philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, what shall we do to the ark of the lord? t
 
 ___________________________
 
ell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place.

6:3 and they said, if ye send away the ark of the god of israel, send
it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
removed from you.

6:4 then said they, what shall be the trespass offering which we shall
return to him? they answered, five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, according to the number of the lords of the philistines: for one
plague was on you all, and on your lords.

6:5 wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of 
 
 ___________________________
 
your
mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the god of
israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land.

6:6 wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the egyptians and
pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among
them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?  6:7 now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calves home from them: 6:8 and take the ark of the lord, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him 
 
 ___________________________
 
o the great stone of abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the lord: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
joshua, the bethshemite.

6:19 and he smote the men of bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the lord had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

6:20 and the men of bethshemesh said, who is able to stand before this
holy lord god? and to whom shall he go up from us?  6:21 and they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of kirjathjearim, saying, the
philistines have brought again the ark of the lord; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 and the men of kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
lord, and brought it into the house of abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified eleazar his son to keep the ark of the lord.

7:2 and it came to pass, while the ark abode in kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was twenty years: and all the house of
israel lamented after the lord.

7:3 and samuel spake unto all the house of israel, saying, if ye do
return unto the lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the philistines.

7:4 then the children of israel did put away baalim and ashtaroth, and
served the lord only.

7:5 and samuel said, gather all israel to mizpeh, and i will pray for
you unto the lord.

7:6 and they gathered together to mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, we
have sinned agai
 
 ___________________________
 
nst the lord. and samuel judged the children of israel
in mizpeh.

7:7 and when the philistines heard that the children of israel were
gathered together to mizpeh, the lords of the philistines went up
against israel. and when the children of israel heard it, they were
afraid of the philistines.

7:8 and the children of israel said to samuel, cease not to cry unto
the lord our god for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
philistines.

7:9 and samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the lord: and samuel cried unto the lord for
israel; and the lord heard him.

7:10 and as samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the philistines
drew near to battle against israel: but the lord thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were smitten before israel.

7:11 and the m
 
 ___________________________
 


8:6 but the thing displeased samuel, when they said, give us a king to
judge us. and samuel prayed unto the lord.

8:7 and the lord said unto samuel, hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that i should not reign over them.

8:8 according to all the works which they have done since the day that
i brought them up out of egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 and samuel told all the words of the lord unto the people that
asked of him a king.

8:11 and he said, this will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots.
 
 ___________________________
 
hrough mount ephraim, and passed through the land
of shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the
land of the benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 and when they were come to the land of zuph, saul said to his
servant that was with him, come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 and he said unto him, behold now, there is in this city a man of
god, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go.

9:7 then said saul to his servant, but, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of god: what have we?  9:8 and the
servant answered saul again, and said, behold, i have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will i give to the man
 
 ___________________________
 
 of god,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (beforetime in israel, when a man went to enquire of god, thus he
spake, come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
prophet was beforetime called a seer.)  9:10 then said saul to his
servant, well said; come, let us go. so they went unto the city where
the man of god was.

9:11 and as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, is the seer here?
9:12 and they answered them, and said, he is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 as soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
becaus
 
 ___________________________
 
ty,
samuel communed with saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 and they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that samuel called saul to the top of the house, saying, up, that
i may send thee away. and saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and samuel, abroad.

9:27 and as they were going down to the end of the city, samuel said
to saul, bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that i may shew thee the word of god.

10:1 then samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, is it not because the lord hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance?  10:2 when thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by rachel's sepulchre in the
border of benjamin at zelzah; and they will say unto thee, the asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, what shall i do
for 
 
 ___________________________
 
my son?  10:3 then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
going up to god to bethel, one carrying three kids, and another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
10:4 and they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread;
which thou shalt receive of their hands.

10:5 after that thou shalt come to the hill of god, where is the
garrison of the philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 and the
spirit of the lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man.

10:7 and let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion ser
 
 ___________________________
 
ve thee; for god is with thee.

10:8 and thou shalt go down before me to gilgal; and, behold, i will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till i
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 and it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
samuel, god gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 and when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the spirit of god came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, what is this that is come unto the son of kish? is saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 and one of the same place answ
 
 ___________________________
 
servant, whither went
ye?  and he said, to seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to samuel.

10:15 and saul's uncle said, tell me, i pray thee, what samuel said
unto you.

10:16 and saul said unto his uncle, he told us plainly that the asses
were found. but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 and samuel called the people together unto the lord to mizpeh;
10:18 and said unto the children of israel, thus saith the lord god of
israel, i brought up israel out of egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 and ye have this day rejected your god,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us.
now therefore present yourselves before the lord by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 and when samuel had caused all the tribes of israel to
 
 ___________________________
 
ld not be found.

10:22 therefore they enquired of the lord further, if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered, behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 and they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? and all the
people shouted, and said, god save the king.

10:25 then samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the lord. and samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 and saul also went home to gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts god had touched.

10:27 but the children of belial said, how shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought no presents. but he held his peace.

11:1 then nahash the ammonite came up, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ven days'
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 then came the messengers to gibeah of saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul
said, what aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the
tidings of the men of jabesh.

11:6 and the spirit of god came upon saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 and he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, whosoever cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. and the fear of the lord fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 and when he numbered them in bezek, the children of israel were
three hundred thousand
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of sisera, captain of the host of hazor, and into the hand of the
philistines, and into the hand of the king of moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 and they cried unto the lord, and said, we have sinned, because
we have forsaken the lord, and have served baalim and ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

12:11 and the lord sent jerubbaal, and bedan, and jephthah, and
samuel, and delivered you out of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe.

12:12 and when ye saw that nahash the king of the children of ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the lord your god was your king.

12:13 now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the lord hath set a king over you.

12:14 if ye will fear the lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against the commandment of the lord, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continue following the lord your
god: 12:15 but if ye will not obey the voice of the lord, but rebel
against the commandment of the lord, then shall the hand of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord
will do before your eyes.

12:17 is it not wheat harvest to day? i will call unto the lord, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the lord, in
asking you a king.

12:18 so samuel called unto the lord; and the lord sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the lord and samuel.

12:19 and all the people said unto samuel, pray for thy servants unto
the lord thy god, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 and samuel said unto the people, fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the lord, but serve the
lord with all your heart; 12:21 and turn ye not aside: for then should
ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain.

12:22 for the lord will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because it hath pleased the lord to make 
 
 ___________________________
 
you his people.

12:23 moreover as for me, god forbid that i should sin against the
lord in ceasing to pray for you: but i will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 only fear the lord, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

12:25 but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
israel, 13:2 saul chose him three thousand men of israel; whereof two
thousand were with saul
 
 ___________________________
 
thou done? and saul said, because i
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the philistines gathered
themselves together at michmash; 13:12 therefore said i, the
philistines will come down now upon me to gilgal, and i have not made
supplication unto the lord: i forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 and samuel said to saul, thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the lord thy god, which he commanded thee: for
now would the lord have established thy kingdom upon israel for ever.

13:14 but now thy kingdom shall not continue: the lord hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the lord hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
lord commanded thee.

13:15 and samuel arose, and gat him up from gilgal unto gibeah of
benjamin. and saul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men.

13:1
 
 ___________________________
 
e garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

14:16 and the watchmen of saul in gibeah of benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another.

14:17 then said saul unto the people that were with him, number now,
and see who is gone from us. and when they had numbered, behold,
jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

14:18 and saul said unto ahiah, bring hither the ark of god. for the
ark of god was at that time with the children of israel.

14:19 and it came to pass, while saul talked unto the priest, that the
noise that was in the host of the philistines went on and increased:
and saul said unto the priest, withdraw thine hand.

14:20 and saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

14:21 moreover the hebrews 
 
 ___________________________
 
 not against the lord in eating
with the blood.

and all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 and saul built an altar unto the lord: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the lord.

14:36 and saul said, let us go down after the philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. and they said, do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. then said
the priest, let us draw near hither unto god.

14:37 and saul asked counsel of god, shall i go down after the
philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of israel? but he
answered him not that day.

14:38 and saul said, draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

14:39 for, as the lord liveth, which saveth israel, though it be in
jonathan my son, he shall surely die. but there was not a man among
all the people that answered him.

14:40 then said he unto all 
 
 ___________________________
 
israel, be ye on one side, and i and
jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the people said unto
saul, do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 therefore saul said unto the lord god of israel, give a perfect
lot.

and saul and jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

14:42 and saul said, cast lots between me and jonathan my son. and
jonathan was taken.

14:43 then saul said to jonathan, tell me what thou hast done. and
jonathan told him, and said, i did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, i must die.

14:44 and saul answered, god do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, jonathan.

14:45 and the people 
 
 ___________________________
 
said unto saul, shall jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in israel? god forbid: as the lord
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with god this day. so the people rescued jonathan,
that he died not.

14:46 then saul went up from following the philistines: and the
philistines went to their own place.

14:47 so saul took the kingdom over israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against moab, and against the children of
ammon, and against edom, and against the kings of zobah, and against
the philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

14:48 and he gathered an host, and smote the amale
 
 ___________________________
 
t him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to gilgal.

15:13 and samuel came to saul: and saul said unto him, blessed be thou
of the lord: i have performed the commandment of the lord.

15:14 and samuel said, what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which i hear?  15:15 and saul
said, they have brought them from the amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
lord thy god; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 then samuel said unto saul, stay, and i will tell thee what the
lord hath said to me this night. and he said unto him, say on.

15:17 and samuel said, when thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of israel, and the lord anointed
thee king over israel?  15:18 and the lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, go and utterly destroy the sinners the amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.
 
 ___________________________
 
19 wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the lord, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
15:20 and saul said unto samuel, yea, i have obeyed the voice of the
lord, and have gone the way which the lord sent me, and have brought
agag the king of amalek, and have utterly destroyed the amalekites.

15:21 but the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the lord thy god in gilgal.

15:22 and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the lord? behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. because thou hast rejected the word of the
lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 and saul said unto samuel, i have sinned: for i have
transgressed the comma
 
 ___________________________
 
pon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

15:28 and samuel said unto him, the lord hath rent the kingdom of
israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 and also the strength of israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 then he said, i have sinned: yet honour me now, i pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before israel, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord thy god.

15:31 so samuel turned again after saul; and saul worshipped the lord.

15:32 then said samuel, bring ye hither to me agag the king of the
amalekites. and agag came unto him delicately. and agag said, surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 and samuel said, as the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. and samuel hewed agag in
pieces before the lord in gilgal.

15:34 then samuel went to ramah; and saul went up to his house to
gibeah 
 
 ___________________________
 
ddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 then samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. so samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord departed from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.

16:15 and saul's servants said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 and saul said unto his servants, provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 then answered one of the servants, and said, behold, i have seen
a son of jesse the bethlehemite, that is cunn
 
 ___________________________
 
t messengers unto jesse, and said, send me
david thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 and jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by david his son unto saul.

16:21 and david came to saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 and saul sent to jesse, saying, let david, i pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from god was upon
saul, that david took an harp, and played with his hand: so saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

17:1 now the philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at shochoh, which belongeth to judah, and
pitched between shochoh and azekah, in ephesdammim.

17:2 and saul and the men of israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of elah, and set the battle in array against the
philistines.

17:3 a
 
 ___________________________
 
e ye seen this man that is come
up?  surely to defy israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
israel.

17:26 and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall
be done to the man that killeth this philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from israel? for who is this uncircumcised philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living god?  17:27 and the people
answered him after this manner, saying, so shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 and eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and eliab's anger was kindled against david, and he said, why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? i know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 and david said, what have i now done?
 
 ___________________________
 

of war from his youth.

17:34 and david said unto saul, thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 and i went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, i caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living god.

17:37 david said moreover, the lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this philistine. and saul said unto david, go, and the
lord be with thee.

17:38 and saul armed david with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 and david girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. and david said unto saul, i cann
 
 ___________________________
 
erd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the philistine.

17:41 and the philistine came on and drew near unto david; and the man
that bare the shield went before him.

17:42 and when the philistine looked about, and saw david, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 and the philistine said unto david, am i a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? and the philistine cursed david by his gods.

17:44 and the philistine said to david, come to me, and i will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

17:45 then said david to the philistine, thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but i come to thee in the
name of the lord of hosts, the god of the armies of israel, whom thou
hast defied.

17:46 this day will the lord deliver thee into mine hand; and i will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and i will give
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
carcases of the host of the philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a god in israel.

17:47 and all this assembly shall know that the lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the lord's, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 and it came to pass, when the philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet david, that david hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the philistine.

17:49 and david put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehea
 
 ___________________________
 
oy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 and the women answered one another as they played, and said, saul
hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands.

18:8 and saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, they have ascribed unto david ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 and saul eyed david from that day and forward.

18:10 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from god
came upon saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and david
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
saul's hand.

18:11 and saul cast the javelin; for he said, i will smite david even
to the wall with it. and david avoided out of his presence twice.

18:12 and saul was afraid of david, because the lord was with him, and
was departed from saul.

18:13 therefore saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out 
 
 ___________________________
 
, that he is escaped? and michal answered saul, he
said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?  19:18 so david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it was told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as appointed
over them, the spirit of god was upon the messengers of saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 and when it was told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. and saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, behold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
was upon him also
 
 ___________________________
 
, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan,
what have i done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 and david sware moreover, and said, thy father certainly knoweth
that i have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, let not jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the lord liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 then said jonathan unto david, whatso
 
 ___________________________
 
, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father?  20:9 and jonathan said, far be
it from thee: for if i knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not i tell it thee?  20:10 then
said david to jonathan, who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly?  20:11 and jonathan said unto david, come, and
let us go out into the field. and they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 and jonathan said unto david, o lord god of israel, when i have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward david, and i then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 the lord do so and much more to jonathan: but
if it please my father to do thee evil, then i will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the lord be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 and thou shalt not only while yet i live shew me the kindness of
the lord, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
lam: and when his
brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 and every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto
him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundred men.

22:3 and david went thence to mizpeh of moab: and he said unto the
king of moab, let my father and my mother, i pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till i know what god will do for me.

22:4 and he brought them before the king of moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that david was in the hold.

22:5 and the prophet gad said unto david, abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of judah. then david departed, and
came into the forest of hareth.

22:6 when saul heard that david was discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now saul abode in gibeah under a tree in ramah, having his
spear in his hand, and all his servants were s
 
 ___________________________
 
e him victuals, and
gave him the sword of goliath the philistine.

22:11 then the king sent to call ahimelech the priest, the son of
ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 and saul said, hear now, thou son of ahitub. and he answered,
here i am, my lord.

22:13 and saul said unto him, why have ye conspired against me, thou
and the son of jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquired of god for him, that he should rise against me, to
lie in wait, as at this day?  22:14 then ahimelech answered the king,
and said, and who is so faithful among all thy servants as david,
which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is
honourable in thine house?  22:15 did i then begin to enquire of god
for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his
servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less or more.

22:1
 
 ___________________________
 
red him and said, arise, go down to keilah; for i will
deliver the philistines into thine hand.

23:5 so david and his men went to keilah, and fought with the
philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. so david saved the inhabitants of keilah.

23:6 and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to
david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 and it was told saul that david was come to keilah. and saul
said, god hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

23:8 and saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
keilah, to besiege david and his men.

23:9 and david knew that saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod.

23:10 then said david, o lord god of israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that saul seeketh to come to keilah, to destroy the
city for my sak
 
 ___________________________
 
e.

23:11 will the men of keilah deliver me up into his hand? will saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? o lord god of israel, i beseech
thee, tell thy servant. and the lord said, he will come down.

23:12 then said david, will the men of keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of saul? and the lord said, they will deliver thee up.

23:13 then david and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. and it
was told saul that david was escaped from keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 and david abode in the wilderness in stron
 
 ___________________________
 
g holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of ziph. and saul sought him every
day, but god delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 and david saw that saul was come out to seek his life: and david
was in the wilderness of ziph in a wood.

23:16 and jonathan saul's son arose, and went to david into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in god.

23:17 and he said unto him, fear not: for the hand of saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over israel, and i shall
be next unto thee; and that also saul my father knoweth.

23:18 and they two made a covenant before the lord: and david abode in
the wood, and jonathan went to his house.

23:19 then came up the ziphites to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not
david hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
hachilah, which is on the south of je
 
 ___________________________
 
id unto her servants, go on before me; behold, i come
after you. but she told not her husband nabal.

25:20 and it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, david and his men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 now david had said, surely in vain have i kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

25:22 so and more also do god unto the enemies of david, if i leave of
all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against
the wall.

25:23 and when abigail saw david, she hasted, and lighted off the ass,
and fell before david on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
25:24 and fell at his feet, and said, upon me, my lord, upon me let
this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, i pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

25:25 let not my lord, i pray thee, regar
 
 ___________________________
 
and now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

25:28 i pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the
lord will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord
fighteth the battles of the lord, and evil hath not been found in thee
all thy days.

25:29 yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the lord thy
god; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out
of the middle of a sling.

25:30 and it shall come to pass, when the lord shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee,
and shall have appointed thee ruler over israel; 25:31 that this shall
be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself:
but when the lord shall have dealt well with my lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d, then remember
thine handmaid.

25:32 and david said to abigail, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which sent thee this day to meet me: 25:33 and blessed be thy advice,
and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

25:34 for in very deed, as the lord god of israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to
meet me, surely there had not been left unto nabal by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall.

25:35 so david received of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, go up in peace to thine house; see, i have
hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

25:36 and abigail came to nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a ki
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, i will go down with
thee.

26:7 so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 then said abishai to david, god hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, i pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and i will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 and david said to abishai, destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth his hand against the lord's anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
david said furthermore, as the lord liveth, the lord shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 the lord forbid
 
 ___________________________
 
 is my voice, my lord, o king.

26:18 and he said, wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant?  for what have i done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
now therefore, i pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. if the lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the lord; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the lord, saying, go, serve other gods.

26:20 now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the lord: for the king of israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 then said saul, i have sinned: return, my son david: for i will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, i have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 and david answered and said, behold the king's spear! and let
one of the young men c
 
 ___________________________
 
 to die?  28:10 and saul sware to her by the lord,
saying, as the lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 then said the woman, whom shall i bring up unto thee? and he
said, bring me up samuel.

28:12 and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art saul.

28:13 and the king said unto her, be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and the woman said unto saul, i saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 and he said unto her, what form is he of? and she said, an old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. and saul perceived
that it was samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself.

28:15 and samuel said to saul, why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? and saul answered, i am sore distressed; for the philistines
make war against me, and god is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor b
 
 ___________________________
 
he day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

29:7 wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not
the lords of the philistines.

29:8 and david said unto achish, but what have i done? and what hast
thou found in thy servant so long as i have been with thee unto this
day, that i may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
29:9 and achish answered and said to david, i know that thou art good
in my sight, as an angel of god: notwithstanding the princes of the
philistines have said, he shall not go up with us to the battle.

29:10 wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's
servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the
morning, and have light, depart.

29:11 so david and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to
return into the land of the philistines. and the philistines went up
to jezreel.

30:1 and it came to pass, when david and his men were come to 
 
 ___________________________
 
aughters, were
taken captives.

30:4 then david and the people that were with him lifted up their
voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

30:5 and david's two wives were taken captives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite.

30:6 and david was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning
him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
sons and for his daughters: but david encouraged himself in the lord
his god.

30:7 and david said to abiathar the priest, ahimelech's son, i pray
thee, bring me hither the ephod. and abiathar brought thither the
ephod to david.

30:8 and david enquired at the lord, saying, shall i pursue after this
troop? shall i overtake them? and he answered him, pursue: for thou
shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

30:9 so david went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
came to the brook besor, where those that were left behind stayed.
 
 ___________________________
 

three nights.

30:13 and david said unto him, to whom belongest thou? and whence art
thou? and he said, i am a young man of egypt, servant to an amalekite;
and my master left me, because three days agone i fell sick.

30:14 we made an invasion upon the south of the cherethites, and upon
the coast which belongeth to judah, and upon the south of caleb; and
we burned ziklag with fire.

30:15 and david said to him, canst thou bring me down to this company?
and he said, swear unto me by god, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
deliver me into the hands of my master, and i will bring thee down to
this company.

30:16 and when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
philistines, and out of the land of judah.

30:17 and david smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of
the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, sa
 
 ___________________________
 

when they were come to the hill of ammah, that lieth before giah by
the way of the wilderness of gibeon.

2:25 and the children of benjamin gathered themselves together after
abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

2:26 then abner called to joab, and said, shall the sword devour for
ever?  knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from
following their brethren?  2:27 and joab said, as god liveth, unless
thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following his brother.

2:28 so joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and
pursued after israel no more, neither fought they any more.

2:29 and abner and his men walked all that night through the plain,
and passed over jordan, and went through all bithron, and they came to
mahanaim.

2:30 and joab returned from following abner: and when he had gathered
all the people tog
 
 ___________________________
 
 and saul had a concubine, whose name was rizpah, the daughter of
aiah: and ishbosheth said to abner, wherefore hast thou gone in unto
my father's concubine?  3:8 then was abner very wroth for the words of
ishbosheth, and said, am i a dog's head, which against judah do shew
kindness this day unto the house of saul thy father, to his brethren,
and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of
david, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this
woman?  3:9 so do god to abner, and more also, except, as the lord
hath sworn to david, even so i do to him; 3:10 to translate the
kingdom from the house of saul, and to set up the throne of david over
israel and over judah, from dan even to beersheba.

3:11 and he could not answer abner a word again, because he feared
him.

3:12 and abner sent messengers to david on his behalf, saying, whose
is the land? saying also, make thy league with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all isra
 
 ___________________________
 
wed the bier.

3:32 and they buried abner in hebron: and the king lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of abner; and all the people wept.

3:33 and the king lamented over abner, and said, died abner as a fool
dieth?  3:34 thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters:
as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. and all the
people wept again over him.

3:35 and when all the people came to cause david to eat meat while it
was yet day, david sware, saying, so do god to me, and more also, if i
taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

3:36 and all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as
whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

3:37 for all the people and all israel understood that day that it was
not of the king to slay abner the son of ner.

3:38 and the king said unto his servants, know ye not that there is a
prince and a great man fallen this day in israel?  3:39 and i am this
day weak, though anointed king; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the strong hold of zion: the same is the
city of david.

5:8 and david said on that day, whosoever getteth up to the gutter,
and smiteth the jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated
of david's soul, he shall be chief and captain. wherefore they said,
the blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

5:9 so david dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of david. and
david built round about from millo and inward.

5:10 and david went on, and grew great, and the lord god of hosts was
with him.

5:11 and hiram king of tyre sent messengers to david, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built david an house.

5:12 and david perceived that the lord had established him king over
israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people israel's
sake.

5:13 and david took him more concubines and wives out of jerusalem,
after he was come from hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters
born to david.

5:14 and these be the names of th
 
 ___________________________
 
a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then
shall the lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the
philistines.

5:25 and david did so, as the lord had commanded him; and smote the
philistines from geba until thou come to gazer.

6:1 again, david gathered together all the chosen men of israel,
thirty thousand.

6:2 and david arose, and went with all the people that were with him
from baale of judah, to bring up from thence the ark of god, whose
name is called by the name of the lord of hosts that dwelleth between
the cherubims.

6:3 and they set the ark of god upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of abinadab that was in gibeah: and uzzah and ahio, the sons
of abinadab, drave the new cart.

6:4 and they brought it out of the house of abinadab which was at
gibeah, accompanying the ark of god: and ahio went before the ark.

6:5 and david and all the house of israel played before the lord on
all manner of in
 
 ___________________________
 
struments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

6:6 and when they came to nachon's threshingfloor, uzzah put forth his
hand to the ark of god, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

6:7 and the anger of the lord was kindled against uzzah; and god smote
him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of god.

6:8 and david was displeased, because the lord had made a breach upon
uzzah: and he called the name of the place perezuzzah to this day.

6:9 and david was afraid of the lord that day, and said, how shall the
ark of the lord come to me?  6:10 so david would not remove the ark of
the lord unto him into the city of david: but david carried it aside
into the house of obededom the gittite.

6:11 and the ark of the lord continued in the house of obededom the
gittite three months: and th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord blessed obededom, and all his
household.

6:12 and it was told king david, saying, the lord hath blessed the
house of obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the
ark of god. so david went and brought up the ark of god from the house
of obededom into the city of david with gladness.

6:13 and it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the lord had
gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

6:14 and david danced before the lord with all his might; and david
was girded with a linen ephod.

6:15 so david and all the house of israel brought up the ark of the
lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 and as the ark of the lord came into the city of david, michal
saul's da
 
 ___________________________
 
e the lord.

6:22 and i will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine
own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them
shall i be had in honour.

6:23 therefore michal the daughter of saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 and it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the lord
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 7:2 that the king
said unto nathan the prophet, see now, i dwell in an house of cedar,
but the ark of god dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 and nathan said to the king, go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the lord is with thee.

7:4 and it came to pass that night, that the word of the lord came
unto nathan, saying, 7:5 go and tell my servant david, thus saith the
lord, shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?  7:6 whereas i
have not dwelt in any house since the time that i brought up the
children of israel out of egypt, even to this day, but have walked in
a tent and in a tabernac
 
 ___________________________
 
sten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 but my mercy shall not depart away from
him, as i took it from saul, whom i put away before thee.

7:16 and thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

7:17 according to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

7:18 then went king david in, and sat before the lord, and he said,
who am i, o lord god? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  7:19 and this was yet a small thing in thy sight, o lord
god; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great
while to come. and is this the manner of man, o lord god?  7:20 and
what can david say more unto thee? for thou, lord god, knowest thy
servant.

7:21 for thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou
done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.

7:22 wherefore thou art great,
 
 ___________________________
 
 o lord god: for there is none like
thee, neither is there any god beside thee, according to all that we
have heard with our ears.

7:23 and what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like
israel, whom god went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make
him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land,
before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from egypt, from the
nations and their gods?  7:24 for thou hast confirmed to thyself thy
people israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, lord, art
become their god.

7:25 and now, o lord god, the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do
as thou hast said.

7:26 and let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, the lord of hosts
is the god over israel: and let the house of thy servant david be
established before thee.

7:27 for thou, o lord of hosts, 
 
 ___________________________
 
god of israel, hast revealed to thy
servant, saying, i will build thee an house: therefore hath thy
servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

7:28 and now, o lord god, thou art that god, and thy words be true,
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 7:29 therefore
now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee: for thou, o lord god, hast spoken it:
and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for
ever.

8:1 and after this it came to pass that david smote the philistines,
and subdued them: and david took methegammah out of the hand of the
philistines.

8:2 and he smote moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death,
and with one full line to keep alive. and so the moabites became
david's servants, and brought gifts.

8:3 da
 
 ___________________________
 
s over both the
cherethites and the pelethites; and david's sons were chief rulers.

9:1 and david said, is there yet any that is left of the house of
saul, that i may shew him kindness for jonathan's sake?  9:2 and there
was of the house of saul a servant whose name was ziba. and when they
had called him unto david, the king said unto him, art thou ziba?  and
he said, thy servant is he.

9:3 and the king said, is there not yet any of the house of saul, that
i may shew the kindness of god unto him? and ziba said unto the king,
jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

9:4 and the king said unto him, where is he? and ziba said unto the
king, behold, he is in the house of machir, the son of ammiel, in
lodebar.

9:5 then king david sent, and fetched him out of the house of machir,
the son of ammiel, from lodebar.

9:6 now when mephibosheth, the son of jonathan, the son of saul, was
come unto david, he fell on his face, and did reverence. and david
said, mephi
 
 ___________________________
 
 chose of all the choice men of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians: 10:10 and the rest of the people he
delivered into the hand of abishai his brother, that he might put them
in array against the children of ammon.

10:11 and he said, if the syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then i will come and help thee.

10:12 be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the cities of our god: and the lord do that which seemeth him
good.

10:13 and joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the
battle against the syrians: and they fled before him.

10:14 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
then fled they also before abishai, and entered into the city. so joab
returned from the children of ammon, and came to jerusalem.

10:15 and when the syrians saw that they were smitten before israel,
they gathered themselves together.

10:16 an
 
 ___________________________
 
wn flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring
man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed
it for the man that was come to him.

12:5 and david's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he
said to nathan, as the lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing
shall surely die: 12:6 and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

12:7 and nathan said to david, thou art the man. thus saith the lord
god of israel, i anointed thee king over israel, and i delivered thee
out of the hand of saul; 12:8 and i gave thee thy master's house, and
thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of israel
and of judah; and if that had been too little, i would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the lord, to do
evil in his sight? thou hast killed uriah the hittite with the sword,
and hast taken his wife to be thy wife,
 
 ___________________________
 
he sun.

12:13 and david said unto nathan, i have sinned against the lord. and
nathan said unto david, the lord also hath put away thy sin; thou
shalt not die.

12:14 howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to
the enemies of the lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto
thee shall surely die.

12:15 and nathan departed unto his house. and the lord struck the
child that uriah's wife bare unto david, and it was very sick.

12:16 david therefore besought god for the child; and david fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

12:17 and the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him
up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them.

12:18 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. and
the servants of david feared to tell him that the child was dead: for
they said, behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted
himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the lord,
and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required,
they set bread before him, and he did eat.

12:21 then said his servants unto him, what thing is this that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive;
but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 and he said, while the child was yet alive, i fasted and wept:
for i said, who can tell whether god will be gracious to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast?
can i bring him back again? i shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 and david comforted bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name solomon:
and the lord loved him.

12:25 and he sent by the hand of nathan the prophet; and he called his
name jedidiah, because of the lord.

12:26 and joab fought against rabbah
 
 ___________________________
 
band neither name nor remainder upon the earth.

14:8 and the king said unto the woman, go to thine house, and i will
give charge concerning thee.

14:9 and the woman of tekoah said unto the king, my lord, o king, the
iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his
throne be guiltless.

14:10 and the king said, whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to
me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

14:11 then said she, i pray thee, let the king remember the lord thy
god, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy
any more, lest they destroy my son. and he said, as the lord liveth,
there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.

14:12 then the woman said, let thine handmaid, i pray thee, speak one
word unto my lord the king. and he said, say on.

14:13 and the woman said, wherefore then hast thou thought such a
thing against the people of god? for the king doth speak this thing as
one which is faulty, in that the king doth 
 
 ___________________________
 
not fetch home again his
banished.

14:14 for we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth god respect any
person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled
from him.

14:15 now therefore that i am come to speak of this thing unto my lord
the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy
handmaid said, i will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king
will perform the request of his handmaid.

14:16 for the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand
of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the
inheritance of
 
 ___________________________
 
 god.

14:17 then thine handmaid said, the word of my lord the king shall now
be comfortable: for as an angel of god, so is my lord the king to
discern good and bad: therefore the lord thy god will be with thee.

14:18 then the king answered and said unto the woman, hide not from
me, i pray thee, the thing that i shall ask thee. and the woman said,
let my lord the king now speak.

14:19 and the king said, is not the hand of joab with thee in all
this?  and the woman answered and said, as thy soul liveth, my lord
the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant joab, he bade me,
and he put all these words 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 to
fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant joab done this thing:
and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of god, to
know all things that are in the earth.

14:21 and the king said unto joab, behold now, i have done this thing:
go therefore, bring the young man absalom again.

14:22 and joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king: and joab said, to day thy servant knoweth that i
have found grace in thy sight, my lord, o king, in that the king hath
fulfilled the request of his servant.

14:23 so joab arose and went to geshur, and brought absalom to
jerusalem.

 
 ___________________________
 
r life, even there also will thy servant
be.

15:22 and david said to ittai, go and pass over. and ittai the gittite
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with
him.

15:23 and all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people
passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook kidron, and
all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

15:24 and lo zadok also, and all the levites were with him, bearing
the ark of the covenant of god: and they set down the ark of god; and
abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the
city.

15:25 and the king said unto zadok, carry back the ark of god into the
city: if i shall find favour in the eyes of the lord, he will bring me
again, and shew me both it, and his habitation: 15:26 but if he thus
say, i have no delight in thee; behold, here am i, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.

15:27 the king said also unto zadok the priest, art not thou a seer?

 
 ___________________________
 
return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, ahimaaz thy
son, and jonathan the son of abiathar.

15:28 see, i will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there
come word from you to certify me.

15:29 zadok therefore and abiathar carried the ark of god again to
jerusalem: and they tarried there.

15:30 and david went up by the ascent of mount olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up,
weeping as they went up.

15:31 and one told david, saying, ahithophel is among the conspirators
with absalom. and david said, o lord, i pray thee, turn the counsel of
ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 and it came to pass, that wh
 
 ___________________________
 
en david was come to the top of the
mount, where he worshipped god, behold, hushai the archite came to
meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 15:33 unto whom
david said, if thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 but if thou return to the city, and say unto absalom, i
will be thy servant, o king; as i have been thy father's servant
hitherto, so will i now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me
defeat the counsel of ahithophel.

15:35 and hast thou not there with thee zadok and abiathar the
priests?  the
 
 ___________________________
 
and as david and his men went by the way, shimei went along on
the hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw
stones at him, and cast dust.

16:14 and the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,
and refreshed themselves there.

16:15 and absalom, and all the people the men of israel, came to
jerusalem, and ahithophel with him.

16:16 and it came to pass, when hushai the archite, david's friend,
was come unto absalom, that hushai said unto absalom, god save the
king, god save the king.

16:17 and absalom said to hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend?
why wentest thou not with thy friend?  16:18 and hushai said unto
absalom, nay; but whom the lord, and this people, and all the men of
israel, choose, his will i be, and with him will i abide.

16:19 and again, whom should i serve? should i not serve in the
presence of his son? as i have served in thy father's presence, so
will i be in thy presence.

16:20 then said absalom to ah
 
 ___________________________
 
and ahithophel said unto absalom, go in unto thy father's
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all israel shall
hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 so they spread absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all
israel.

16:23 and the counsel of ahithophel, which he counselled in those
days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of god: so was all
the counsel of ahithophel both with david and with absalom.

17:1 moreover ahithophel said unto absalom, let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and i will arise and pursue after david this
night: 17:2 and i will come upon him while he is weary and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him
shall flee; and i will smite the king only: 17:3 and i will bring back
all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so a
 
 ___________________________
 
r man running: and the watchman
called unto the porter, and said, behold another man running alone.
and the king said, he also bringeth tidings.

18:27 and the watchman said, me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of ahimaaz the son of zadok. and the king said, he
is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 and ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, all is well. and he
fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said,
blessed be the lord thy god, which hath delivered up the men that
lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 and the king said, is the young man absalom safe? and ahimaaz
answered, when joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, i saw
a great tumult, but i knew not what it was.

18:30 and the king said unto him, turn aside, and stand here. and he
turned aside, and stood still.

18:31 and, behold, cushi came; and cushi said, tidings, my lord the
king: for the lord hath avenged thee this day of 
 
 ___________________________
 
all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 and the king said unto cushi, is the young man absalom safe? and
cushi answered, the enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 and the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, o my son absalom, my
son, my son absalom! would god i had died for thee, o absalom, my son,
my son!  19:1 and it was told joab, behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for absalom.

19:2 and the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
his son.

19:3 and the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 but the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud
voice, o my son a
 
 ___________________________
 
. now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?  19:11
and king david sent to zadok and to abiathar the priests, saying,
speak unto the elders of judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 and say ye to amasa,
art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? god do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the
room of joab.

19:14 and he bowed the heart of all the men of judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 so the king returned, and came to jordan. and judah came to
gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over jordan.

19:16 and shimei the son of gera, a benjamite, which was of bahurim,
hasted and came 
 
 ___________________________
 
eparted until the day he came again in
peace.

19:25 and it came to pass, when he was come to jerusalem to meet the
king, that the king said unto him, wherefore wentest not thou with me,
mephibosheth?  19:26 and he answered, my lord, o king, my servant
deceived me: for thy servant said, i will saddle me an ass, that i may
ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.

19:27 and he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my
lord the king is as an angel of god: do therefore what is good in
thine eyes.

19:28 for all of my father's house were but dead men before my lord
the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at
thine own table. what right therefore have i yet to cry any more unto
the king?  19:29 and the king said unto him, why speakest thou any
more of thy matters? i have said, thou and ziba divide the land.

19:30 and mephibosheth said unto the king, yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is come aga
 
 ___________________________
 
abeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of bethshan, where the philistines had hanged them,
when the philistines had slain saul in gilboa: 21:13 and he brought up
from thence the bones of saul and the bones of jonathan his son; and
they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

21:14 and the bones of saul and jonathan his son buried they in the
country of benjamin in zelah, in the sepulchre of kish his father: and
they performed all that the king commanded. and after that god was
intreated for the land.

21:15 moreover the philistines had yet war again with israel; and
david went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
philistines: and david waxed faint.

21:16 and ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight
of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he
being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain david.

21:17 but abishai the son of zeruiah succoured him, and smote the
philistine, and killed h
 
 ___________________________
 
 he also was born to the giant.

21:21 and when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimeah the
brother of david slew him.

21:22 these four were born to the giant in gath, and fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of his servants.

22:1 and david spake unto the lord the words of this song in the day
that the lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,
and out of the hand of saul: 22:2 and he said, the lord is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 the god of my rock; in him
will i trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

22:4 i will call on the lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall i
be saved from mine enemies.

22:5 when the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men
made me afraid; 22:6 the sorrows of hell compassed me about; the
snares of death prevented me; 22:7 in my distress i called upon the
lord, and cried to my god: and he d
 
 ___________________________
 
22:18 he delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

22:19 they prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the lord was my
stay.

22:20 he brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me,
because he delighted in me.

22:21 the lord rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to
the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

22:22 for i have kept the ways of the lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my god.

22:23 for all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, i
did not depart from them.

22:24 i was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine
iniquity.

22:25 therefore the lord hath recompensed me according to my
righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.

22:26 with the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

22:27 with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
 
 ___________________________
 

thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

22:28 and the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon
the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

22:29 for thou art my lamp, o lord: and the lord will lighten my
darkness.

22:30 for by thee i have run through a troop: by my god have i leaped
over a wall.

22:31 as for god, his way is perfect; the word of the lord is tried:
he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

22:32 for who is god, save the lord? and who is a rock, save our god?
22:33 god is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

22:34 he maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high
places.

22:35 he teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by
mine arms.

22:36 thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy
gentleness hath made me great.

22:37 thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not
slip.

22:38 i have pursued mine enemie
 
 ___________________________
 
h, i did
stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

22:44 thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people,
thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which i knew not
shall serve me.

22:45 strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear,
they shall be obedient unto me.

22:46 strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their
close places.

22:47 the lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the god
of the rock of my salvation.

22:48 it is god that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people
under me.

22:49 and that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast
delivered me from the violent man.

22:50 therefore i will give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the
heathen, and i will sing praises unto thy name.

22:51 he is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, unto davi
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and to his seed for evermore.

23:1 now these be the last words of david. david the son of jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the god
of jacob, and the sweet psalmist of israel, said, 23:2 the spirit of
the lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

23:3 the god of israel said, the rock of israel spake to me, he that
ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of god.

23:4 and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of
the earth by clear shining after rain.

23:5 although my house be not so with god; yet he hath made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all
my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

23:6 but the sons of belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust
away, because they cannot be tak
 
 ___________________________
 
:38 ira an ithrite, gareb an ithrite, 23:39 uriah
the hittite: thirty and seven in all.

24:1 and again the anger of the lord was kindled against israel, and
he moved david against them to say, go, number israel and judah.

24:2 for the king said to joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, go now through all the tribes of israel, from dan even to
beersheba, and number ye the people, that i may know the number of the
people.

24:3 and joab said unto the king, now the lord thy god add unto the
people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
this thing?  24:4 notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against
joab, and against the captains of the host. and joab and the captains
of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the
people of israel.

24:5 and they passed over jordan, and pitched in aroer, on the right
side of the city that lieth in the midst of t
 
 ___________________________
 
the king come to his
servant?  and david said, to buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build
an altar unto the lord, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

24:22 and araunah said unto david, let my lord the king take and offer
up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt
sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen
for wood.

24:23 all these things did araunah, as a king, give unto the king. and
araunah said unto the king, the lord thy god accept thee.

24:24 and the king said unto araunah, nay; but i will surely buy it of
thee at a price: neither will i offer burnt offerings unto the lord my
god of that which doth cost me nothing. so david bought the
threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

24:25 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings. so the lord was intreated for the land,
and the plague was stayed from israel.




the first book of the kings
 
 ___________________________
 
er me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
why then doth adonijah reign?  1:14 behold, while thou yet talkest
there with the king, i also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 and bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
king was very old; and abishag the shunammite ministered unto the
king.

1:16 and bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. and the
king said, what wouldest thou?  1:17 and she said unto him, my lord,
thou swarest by the lord thy god unto thine handmaid, saying,
assuredly solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne.

1:18 and now, behold, adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 and he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
abiathar the priest, and joab the captain of the host: but solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

1:20 and thou, my lord, o king, the eyes of all israel are upon thee,
that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 behold nathan the prophet. and
when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king
with his face to the ground.

1:24 and nathan said, my lord, o king, hast thou said, adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?  1:25 for he is gone
down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in
abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of
the host, and abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
before him, and say, god save king adonijah.

1:26 but me, even me thy servant, and zadok the priest, and benaiah
the son of jehoiada, and thy servant solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him?  1:28 then king david answered and said, call me bathsheba.
and she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.

1:29 and the king sware, and said, as the lord liveth, 
 
 ___________________________
 
that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress, 1:30 even as i sware unto thee
by the lord god of israel, saying, assuredly solomon thy son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
will i certainly do this day.

1:31 then bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the king, and said, let my lord king david live for ever.

1:32 and king david said, call me zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada. and they came before the
king.

1:33 the king also said unto them, take with you the servants 
 
 ___________________________
 
of your
lord, and cause solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to gihon: 1:34 and let zadok the priest and nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, god save king solomon.

1:35 then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and i have appointed him to
be ruler over israel and over judah.

1:36 and benaiah the son of jehoiada answered the king, and said,
amen: the lord god of my lord the king say so too.

1:37 as the lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
david.

1:38 so zadok the pries
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and nathan the prophet, and benaiah the son
of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the pelethites, went down, and
caused solomon to ride upon king david's mule, and brought him to
gihon.

1:39 and zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed solomon. and they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, god save king solomon.

1:40 and all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 and adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar?  1:42 and while he yet spake, behold, jonathan the son of
abiathar the priest came; and adonijah said unt
 
 ___________________________
 
 and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the
pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:
1:45 and zadok the priest and nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again. this is the noise that ye have heard.

1:46 and also solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

1:47 and moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king
david, saying, god make the name of solomon better than thy name, and
make his throne greater than thy throne. and the king bowed himself
upon the bed.

1:48 and also thus said the king, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
seeing it.

1:49 and all the guests that were with adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went every man his way.

1:50 and adonijah feared because of solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the horns of the a
 
 ___________________________
 
here
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 so king solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar.
and he came and bowed himself to king solomon: and solomon said unto
him, go to thine house.

2:1 now the days of david drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
solomon his son, saying, 2:2 i go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 and keep the charge of
the lord thy god, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, if thy children take
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
throne of israel.

 
 ___________________________
 
e,
say me not nay. and the king said unto her, ask on, my mother: for i
will not say thee nay.

2:21 and she said, let abishag the shunammite be given to adonijah thy
brother to wife.

2:22 and king solomon answered and said unto his mother, and why dost
thou ask abishag the shunammite for adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for abiathar the
priest, and for joab the son of zeruiah.

2:23 then king solomon sware by the lord, saying, god do so to me, and
more also, if adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 now therefore, as the lord liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of david my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 and king solomon sent by the hand of benaiah the son of jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 and unto abiathar the priest said the king, get thee to anathoth,
unto thine own field
 
 ___________________________
 
s; for thou art worthy of death: but i will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the lord
god before david my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 so solomon thrust out abiathar from being priest unto the lord;
that he might fulfil the word of the lord, which he spake concerning
the house of eli in shiloh.

2:28 then tidings came to joab: for joab had turned after adonijah,
though he turned not after absalom. and joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 and it was told kin
 
 ___________________________
 
und about.

3:2 only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no
house built unto the name of the lord, until those days.

3:3 and solomon loved the lord, walking in the statutes of david his
father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

3:4 and the king went to gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 in gibeon the lord appeared to solomon in a dream by night: and
god said, ask what i shall give thee.

3:6 and solomon said, thou hast shewed unto thy servant david my
father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on his throne, as it is this day.

3:7 and now, o lord my god, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
david my father: and i am but a little child: i know not how to go out

 
 ___________________________
 
or come in.

3:8 and thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.

3:9 give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that i may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people?  3:10 and the speech pleased the
lord, that solomon had asked this thing.

3:11 and god said unto him, because thou hast asked this thing, and
hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for
thyself understanding to discern judgment; 3:12 behold, i have done
according to thy words: lo, i have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

3:13 and i have also given thee that which thou has
 
 ___________________________
 
 then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king,
for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, o my lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it. but the other said, let it
be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

3:27 then the king answered and said, give her the living child, and
in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

3:28 and all israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged;
and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of god was in
him, to do judgment.

4:1 so king solomon was king over all israel.

4:2 and these were the princes which he had; azariah the son of zadok
the priest, 4:3 elihoreph and ahiah, the sons of shisha, scribes;
jehoshaphat the son of ahilud, the recorder.

4:4 and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over the host: and zadok and
abiathar were the priests: 4:5 and azariah the son of nathan was over
the officers: and zabud the son of nathan was principal officer, and
the king's friend: 4:
 
 ___________________________
 
under his fig tree, from dan even to beersheba, all the days of
solomon.

4:26 and solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,
and twelve thousand horsemen.

4:27 and those officers provided victual for king solomon, and for all
that came unto king solomon's table, every man in his month: they
lacked nothing.

4:28 barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they
unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his
charge.

4:29 and god gave solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

4:30 and solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the east country, and all the wisdom of egypt.

4:31 for he was wiser than all men; than ethan the ezrahite, and
heman, and chalcol, and darda, the sons of mahol: and his fame was in
all nations round about.

4:32 and he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a
thousand and five.

4:
 
 ___________________________
 
, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

4:34 and there came of all people to hear the wisdom of solomon, from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.

5:1 and hiram king of tyre sent his servants unto solomon; for he had
heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for
hiram was ever a lover of david.

5:2 and solomon sent to hiram, saying, 5:3 thou knowest how that david
my father could not build an house unto the name of the lord his god
for the wars which were about him on every side, until the lord put
them under the soles of his feet.

5:4 but now the lord my god hath given me rest on every side, so that
there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.

5:5 and, behold, i purpose to build an house unto the name of the lord
my god, as the lord spake unto david my father, saying, thy son, whom
i will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto
my name.

5:6 now therefore command thou that they hew m
 
 ___________________________
 
, 8:11 so that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the lord had filled the house of the lord.

8:12 then spake solomon, the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 i have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.

8:14 and the king turned his face about, and blessed all the
congregation of israel: (and all the congregation of israel stood;)
8:15 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, which spake with
his mouth unto david my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
saying, 8:16 since the day that i brought forth my people israel out
of egypt, i chose no city out of all the tribes of israel to build an
house, that my name might be therein; but i chose david to be over my
people israel.

8:17 and it was in the heart of david my father to build an house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto david my father, whereas it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
in thine
heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in
thine heart.

8:19 nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my
name.

8:20 and the lord hath performed his word that he spake, and i am
risen up in the room of david my father, and sit on the throne of
israel, as the lord promised, and have built an house for the name of
the lord god of israel.

8:21 and i have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of egypt.

8:22 and solomon stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of
all the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands toward
heaven: 8:23 and he said, lord god of israel, there is no god like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee with all their heart:
8:24 who hast kept with thy servant david my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is this day.

8:25 therefore now, lord god of israel, keep with thy servant david my
father that thou promisedst him, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man in my sight to sit on the throne of israel; so that thy children
take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked
before me.

8:26 and now, o god of israel, let thy word, i pray thee, be verified,
which thou spakest unto thy servant david my father.

8:27 but will god indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain th
 
 ___________________________
 
ee; how much less this house that i
have builded?  8:28 yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to his supplication, o lord my god, to hearken unto the
cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:
8:29 that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even
toward the place of which thou hast said, my name shall be there: that
thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make
toward this place.

8:30 and hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy
people israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou
in heaven thy dwelling place: and w
 
 ___________________________
 
ople, and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest forth out of egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
8:52 that thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
and unto the supplication of thy people israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 for thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of moses
thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of egypt, o lord
god.

8:54 and it was so, that when solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication unto the lord, he arose from before the
altar of the lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.

8:55 and he stood, and blessed all the congregation of israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 blessed be the lord, that hath given rest
unto his people israel, according to all that he promised: there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promis
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by the
hand of moses his servant.

8:57 the lord our god be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him
not leave us, nor forsake us: 8:58 that he may incline our hearts unto
him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his
statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.

8:59 and let these my words, wherewith i have made supplication before
the lord, be nigh unto the lord our god day and night, that he
maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people israel
at all times, as the matter shall require: 8:60 that all the people of
the earth may know that the lord is god, and that there is none else.

8:61 let your heart therefore be perfect with the lord our god, to
walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.

8:62 and the king, and all israel with him, offered sacrifice before
the lord.

8:63 and solomon offered a sacrifice 
 
 ___________________________
 
 king hallow the middle of the court that was
before the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the
brasen altar that was before the lord was too little to receive the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 and at that time solomon held a feast, and all israel with him, a
great congregation, from the entering in of hamath unto the river of
egypt, before the lord our god, seven days and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 on the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
goodness that the lord had done for david his servant, and for israel
his people.

9:1 and it came to pass, when solomon had finished the building of the
house of the lord, and the king's house, and all solomon's desire
which he was pleased to do, 9:2 that the lord appeared to solomon the
second time
 
 ___________________________
 
, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that i
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments: 9:5
then i will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon israel for ever,
as i promised to david thy father, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man upon the throne of israel.

9:6 but if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your
children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which i
have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
9:7 then will i cut off israel out of the land which i have given
them; and this house, which i have hallowed for my name, will i cast
out of my sight; and israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all
people: 9:8 and at this house, which is high, every one that passeth
by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, why
hath the lord done thus unto this land, and to this house?  9:9 and
they shall answer, because they forsook the lord their god, who
 
 ___________________________
 

brought forth their fathers out of the land of egypt, and have taken
hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them:
therefore hath the lord brought upon them all this evil.

9:10 and it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when solomon had
built the two houses, the house of the lord, and the king's house,
9:11 (now hiram the king of tyre had furnished solomon with cedar
trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that
then king solomon gave hiram twenty cities in the land of galilee.

9:12 and hiram came out from tyre to see the 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the lord; there was no more spirit in her.

10:6 and she said to the king, it was a true report that i heard in
mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.

10:7 howbeit i believed not the words, until i came, and mine eyes had
seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and
prosperity exceedeth the fame which i heard.

10:8 happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

10:9 blessed be the lord thy god, which delighted in thee, to set thee
on the throne of israel: because the lord loved israel for ever,
therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

10:10 and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more
such abundance of spices as these which the queen of sheba gave to
king solomon.

10:11 and the navy also of hiram, that brought gold from ophir,
brought in from ophir great plenty of almug
 
 ___________________________
 
and all
the vessels of the house of the forest of lebanon were of pure gold;
none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of
solomon.

10:22 for the king had at sea a navy of tharshish with the navy of
hiram: once in three years came the navy of tharshish, bringing gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

10:23 so king solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches
and for wisdom.

10:24 and all the earth sought to solomon, to hear his wisdom, which
god had put in his heart.

10:25 and they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and
mules, a rate year by year.

10:26 and solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had
a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen,
whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at
jerusalem.

10:27 and the king made silver to be in jerusalem as stones, and
cedars made he to 
 
 ___________________________
 
or an hundred and fifty: and so for
all the kings of the hittites, and for the kings of syria, did they
bring them out by their means.

11:1 but king solomon loved many strange women, together with the
daughter of pharaoh, women of the moabites, ammonites, edomites,
zidonians, and hittites: 11:2 of the nations concerning which the lord
said unto the children of israel, ye shall not go in to them, neither
shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 and he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

11:4 for it came to pass, when solomon was old, that his wives turned
away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with
the lord his god, as was the heart of david his father.

11:5 for solomon went after ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians,
and after milcom the abomination of the ammonites.

11:6 and solomon d
 
 ___________________________
 
id evil in the sight of the lord, and went not fully
after the lord, as did david his father.

11:7 then did solomon build an high place for chemosh, the abomination
of moab, in the hill that is before jerusalem, and for molech, the
abomination of the children of ammon.

11:8 and likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods.

11:9 and the lord was angry with solomon, because his heart was turned
from the lord god of israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 11:10
and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
after other gods: but he kept not that which the lord commanded.

11:11 wherefore the lord said unto solomon, forasmuch as this is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which i
have commanded thee, i will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 notwithstanding in thy days i will not do it for david thy
fat
 
 ___________________________
 
tahpenes weaned in pharaoh's house: and genubath was in pharaoh's
household among the sons of pharaoh.

11:21 and when hadad heard in egypt that david slept with his fathers,
and that joab the captain of the host was dead, hadad said to pharaoh,
let me depart, that i may go to mine own country.

11:22 then pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered, nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 and god stirred him up another adversary, rezon the son of
eliadah, which fled from his lord hadadezer king of zobah: 11:24 and
he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when david
slew them of zobah: and they went to damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reigned in damascus.

11:25 and he was an adversary to israel all the days of solomon,
beside the mischief that hadad did: and he abhorred israel, and
reigned over syria.

11:26 and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephrathite of zere
 
 ___________________________
 
ng the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over
all the charge of the house of joseph.

11:29 and it came to pass at that time when jeroboam went out of
jerusalem, that the prophet ahijah the shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 and ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pieces: 11:31 and he said to jeroboam, take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the lord, the god of israel, behold, i will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (but he shall have one tribe for my servant david's
sake, and for jerusalem's sake, the city which i have chosen out of
all the tribes of israel:) 11:33 because that they have forsaken me,
and have worshipped ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians, chemosh
the god of the moabites, and milcom the god of the children of ammon,
and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is ri
 
 ___________________________
 
eroboam was
come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and
made him king over all israel: there was none that followed the house
of david, but the tribe of judah only.

12:21 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he assembled all the
house of judah, with the tribe of benjamin, an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of israel, to bring the kingdom again to rehoboam the son of solomon.

12:22 but the word of god came unto shemaiah the man of god, saying,
12:23 speak unto rehoboam, the son of solomon, king of judah, and unto
all the house of judah and benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, 12:24 thus saith the lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of israel: return every man to his
house; for this thing is from me. they hearkened therefore to the word
of the lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
lord.

12:25 then jeroboam built 
 
 ___________________________
 
 penuel.

12:26 and jeroboam said in his heart, now shall the kingdom return to
the house of david: 12:27 if this people go up to do sacrifice in the
house of the lord at jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people
turn again unto their lord, even unto rehoboam king of judah, and they
shall kill me, and go again to rehoboam king of judah.

12:28 whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold,
and said unto them, it is too much for you to go up to jerusalem:
behold thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
egypt.

12:29 and he set the one in bethel, and the other put he in dan.

12:30 and this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship
before the one, even unto dan.

12:31 and he made an house of high places, and made priests of the
lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of levi.

12:32 and jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the
fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in judah, and
h
 
 ___________________________
 
e offered upon the altar. so did he in bethel, sacrificing unto the
calves that he had made: and he placed in bethel the priests of the
high places which he had made.

12:33 so he offered upon the altar which he had made in bethel the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of
israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.

13:1 and, behold, there came a man of god out of judah by the word of
the lord unto bethel: and jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

13:2 and he cried against the altar in the word of the lord, and said,
o altar, altar, thus saith the lord; behold, a child shall be born
unto the house of david, josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer
the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's
bones shall be burnt upon thee.

13:3 and he gave a sign the same day, saying, this is the sign which
the lord 
 
 ___________________________
 
hath spoken; behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it shall be poured out.

13:4 and it came to pass, when king jeroboam heard the saying of the
man of god, which had cried against the altar in bethel, that he put
forth his hand from the altar, saying, lay hold on him. and his hand,
which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it
in again to him.

13:5 the altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar,
according to the sign which the man of god had given by the word of
the lord.

13:6 and the king answered and said unto the man of god, intreat now
the face of the lord thy god, and pray for me, that m
 
 ___________________________
 
y hand may be
restored me again. and the man of god besought the lord, and the
king's hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.

13:7 and the king said unto the man of god, come home with me, and
refresh thyself, and i will give thee a reward.

13:8 and the man of god said unto the king, if thou wilt give me half
thine house, i will not go in with thee, neither will i eat bread nor
drink water in this place: 13:9 for so was it charged me by the word
of the lord, saying, eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by
the same way that thou camest.

13:10 so he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came
to bethel.

13:11 now there dwelt an old prophet in bethel; and his sons came and
told him all the works that the man of god had do
 
 ___________________________
 
ne that day in
bethel: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told
also to their father.

13:12 and their father said unto them, what way went he? for his sons
had seen what way the man of god went, which came from judah.

13:13 and he said unto his sons, saddle me the ass. so they saddled
him the ass: and he rode thereon, 13:14 and went after the man of god,
and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, art thou the
man of god that camest from judah? and he said, i am.

13:15 then he said unto him, come home with me, and eat bread.

13:16 and he said, i may not return with thee, nor go in with thee:
neither will i eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:
13:17 for it was said to me by the word of the lord, thou shalt eat no
bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou
camest.

13:18 he said unto him, i am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel
spake unto me by the word
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the lord, saying, bring him back with
thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. but he
lied unto him.

13:19 so he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and
drank water.

13:20 and it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of
the lord came unto the prophet that brought him back: 13:21 and he
cried unto the man of god that came from judah, saying, thus saith the
lord, forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the lord, and hast
not kept the commandment which the lord thy god commanded thee, 13:22
but camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of
the which the lord did say to thee, eat no bread, and drink no water;
thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.

13:23 and it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
drunk, that he saddled for him 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the prophet whom
he had brought back.

13:24 and when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him:
and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion
also stood by the carcase.

13:25 and, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way,
and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the
city where the old prophet dwelt.

13:26 and when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof, he said, it is the man of god, who was disobedient unto the
word of the lord: therefore the lord hath delivered him unto the lion,
which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the lord,
which he spake unto him.

13:27 and he spake to his sons, saying, saddle me the ass. and they
saddled him.

13:28 and he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass
and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the
carcase, nor torn the ass.

13:29 and the prophet took up the carcase of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the man of god, and laid
it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the
city, to mourn and to bury him.

13:30 and he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over
him, saying, alas, my brother!  13:31 and it came to pass, after he
had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, when i am dead,
then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of god is buried; lay my
bones beside his bones: 13:32 for the saying which he cried by the
word of the lord against the altar in bethel, and against all the
houses of the high places which are in the cities of samaria, shall
surely come to pass.

13:33 after this thing jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but
made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places:
whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests
of the high places.

13:34 and this thing 
 
 ___________________________
 
nto ahijah, behold, the wife of jeroboam
cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and
thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in,
that she shall feign herself to be another woman.

14:6 and it was so, when ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she
came in at the door, that he said, come in, thou wife of jeroboam; why
feignest thou thyself to be another? for i am sent to thee with heavy
tidings.

14:7 go, tell jeroboam, thus saith the lord god of israel, forasmuch
as i exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my
people israel, 14:8 and rent the kingdom away from the house of david,
and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant david, who
kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do
that only which was right in mine eyes; 14:9 but hast done evil above
all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other
gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and has
 
 ___________________________
 
man taketh away
dung, till it be all gone.

14:11 him that dieth of jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and
him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the
lord hath spoken it.

14:12 arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy
feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

14:13 and all israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of
jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some
good thing toward the lord god of israel in the house of jeroboam.

14:14 moreover the lord shall raise him up a king over israel, who
shall cut off the house of jeroboam that day: but what? even now.

14:15 for the lord shall smite israel, as a reed is shaken in the
water, and he shall root up israel out of this good land, which he
gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river,
because they have made their groves, provoking the lord to anger.

14:16 and he shall give israel up because of the sins 
 
 ___________________________
 
with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david. and his mother's name was naamah an
ammonitess. and abijam his son reigned in his stead.

15:1 now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam the son of nebat
reigned abijam over judah.

15:2 three years reigned he in jerusalem. and his mother's name was
maachah, the daughter of abishalom.

15:3 and he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him: and his heart was not perfect with the lord his god, as
the heart of david his father.

15:4 nevertheless for david's sake did the lord his god give him a
lamp in jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish
jerusalem: 15:5 because david did that which was right in the eyes of
the lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him
all the days of his life, save only in the matter of uriah the
hittite.

15:6 and there was war between rehoboam and jeroboam all the days of
his life.

15:7 now the rest of the ac
 
 ___________________________
 
bbethon.

15:28 even in the third year of asa king of judah did baasha slay him,
and reigned in his stead.

15:29 and it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the
house of jeroboam; he left not to jeroboam any that breathed, until he
had destroyed him, according unto the saying of the lord, which he
spake by his servant ahijah the shilonite: 15:30 because of the sins
of jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made israel sin, by his
provocation wherewith he provoked the lord god of israel to anger.

15:31 now the rest of the acts of nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
15:32 and there was war between asa and baasha king of israel all
their days.

15:33 in the third year of asa king of judah began baasha the son of
ahijah to reign over all israel in tirzah, twenty and four years.

15:34 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walked in the way
of jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made
 
 ___________________________
 
me to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat
on his throne, that he slew all the house of baasha: he left him not
one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
friends.

16:12 thus did zimri destroy all the house of baasha, according to the
word of the lord, which he spake against baasha by jehu the prophet.

16:13 for all the sins of baasha, and the sins of elah his son, by
which they sinned, and by which they made israel to sin, in provoking
the lord god of israel to anger with their vanities.

16:14 now the rest of the acts of elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
16:15 in the twenty and seventh year of asa king of judah did zimri
reign seven days in tirzah. and the people were encamped against
gibbethon, which belonged to the philistines.

16:16 and the people that were encamped heard say, zimri hath
conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all israel made
omr
 
 ___________________________
 
er israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in tirzah.

16:24 and he bought the hill samaria of shemer for two talents of
silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which
he built, after the name of shemer, owner of the hill, samaria.

16:25 but omri wrought evil in the eyes of the lord, and did worse
than all that were before him.

16:26 for he walked in all the way of jeroboam the son of nebat, and
in his sin wherewith he made israel to sin, to provoke the lord god of
israel to anger with their vanities.

16:27 now the rest of the acts of omri which he did, and his might
that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of israel?  16:28 so omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in samaria: and ahab his son reigned in his stead.

16:29 and in the thirty and eighth year of asa king of judah began
ahab the son of omri to reign over israel: and ahab the son of omri
reigned over israel in samaria twenty and two yea
 
 ___________________________
 
hab the son of omri did evil in the sight of the lord above
all that were before him.

16:31 and it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to
walk in the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, that he took to wife
jezebel the daughter of ethbaal king of the zidonians, and went and
served baal, and worshipped him.

16:32 and he reared up an altar for baal in the house of baal, which
he had built in samaria.

16:33 and ahab made a grove; and ahab did more to provoke the lord god
of israel to anger than all the kings of israel that were before him.

16:34 in his days did hiel the bethelite build jericho: he laid the
foundation thereof in abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son segub, according to the word of the lord,
which he spake by joshua the son of nun.

17:1 and elijah the tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of gilead,
said unto ahab, as the lord god of israel liveth, before whom i stand,
there shall not be dew nor rain th
 
 ___________________________
 
 zidon, and dwell there: behold,
i have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.

17:10 so he arose and went to zarephath. and when he came to the gate
of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks:
and he called to her, and said, fetch me, i pray thee, a little water
in a vessel, that i may drink.

17:11 and as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
bring me, i pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.

17:12 and she said, as the lord thy god liveth, i have not a cake, but
an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and,
behold, i am gathering two sticks, that i may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

17:13 and elijah said unto her, fear not; go and do as thou hast said:
but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and
after make for thee and for thy son.

17:14 for thus saith the lord god of israel, the barrel of meal shall
not waste, neither shall the cru
 
 ___________________________
 
 and did according to the saying of elijah: and she,
and he, and her house, did eat many days.

17:16 and the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil
fail, according to the word of the lord, which he spake by elijah.

17:17 and it came to pass after these things, that the son of the
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so
sore, that there was no breath left in him.

17:18 and she said unto elijah, what have i to do with thee, o thou
man of god? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and
to slay my son?  17:19 and he said unto her, give me thy son. and he
took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he
abode, and laid him upon his own bed.

17:20 and he cried unto the lord, and said, o lord my god, hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom i sojourn, by slaying her
son?  17:21 and he stretched himself upon the child three times, and
cried unto the lord, and said, o lord my god, i pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ay thee, let this
child's soul come into him again.

17:22 and the lord heard the voice of elijah; and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived.

17:23 and elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the
chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and elijah
said, see, thy son liveth.

17:24 and the woman said to elijah, now by this i know that thou art a
man of god, and that the word of the lord in thy mouth is truth.

18:1 and it came to pass after many days, that the word of the lord
came to elijah in the third year, saying, go, shew thyself unto ahab;
and i will send rain upon the earth.

18:2 and elijah went to shew himself unto ahab. and there was a sore
famine in samaria.

18:3 and ahab called obadiah, which was the governor of his house.
(now obadiah feared the lord greatly: 18:4 for it was so, when jezebel
cut off the prophets of the lo
 
 ___________________________
 

18:6 so they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: ahab
went one way by himself, and obadiah went another way by himself.

18:7 and as obadiah was in the way, behold, elijah met him: and he
knew him, and fell on his face, and said, art thou that my lord
elijah?  18:8 and he answered him, i am: go, tell thy lord, behold,
elijah is here.

18:9 and he said, what have i sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy
servant into the hand of ahab, to slay me?  18:10 as the lord thy god
liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent
to seek thee: and when they said, he is not there; he took an oath of
the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.

18:11 and now thou sayest, go, tell thy lord, behold, elijah is here.

18:12 and it shall come to pass, as soon as i am gone from thee, that
the spirit of the lord shall carry thee whither i know not; and so
when i come and tell ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me:
but i thy servant fea
 
 ___________________________
 
 have
forsaken the commandments of the lord, and thou hast followed baalim.

18:19 now therefore send, and gather to me all israel unto mount
carmel, and the prophets of baal four hundred and fifty, and the
prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at jezebel's table.

18:20 so ahab sent unto all the children of israel, and gathered the
prophets together unto mount carmel.

18:21 and elijah came unto all the people, and said, how long halt ye
between two opinions? if the lord be god, follow him: but if baal,
then follow him. and the people answered him not a word.

18:22 then said elijah unto the people, i, even i only, remain a
prophet of the lord; but baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty
men.

18:23 let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
put no fire under: and i will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
wood, and put no fire under: 18:24 and call ye on the na
 
 ___________________________
 
me of your
gods, and i will call on the name of the lord: and the god that
answereth by fire, let him be god. and all the people answered and
said, it is well spoken.

18:25 and elijah said unto the prophets of baal, choose you one
bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call
on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.

18:26 and they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed
it, and called on the name of baal from morning even until noon,
saying, o baal, hear us. but there was no voice, nor any that
answered. and they leaped upon the altar which was made.

18:27 and it came to pass at noon, that elijah mocked them, and said,
cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be
awak
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and
laid him on the wood, and said, fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 and he said, do it the second time. and they did it the second
time.

and he said, do it the third time. and they did it the third time.

18:35 and the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the
trench also with water.

18:36 and it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, that elijah the prophet came near, and said, lord god of
abraham, isaac, and of israel, let it be known this day that thou art
god in israel, and that i am thy servant, and that i have done all
these things at thy word.

18:37 hear me, o lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou
art the lord god, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

18:38 then the fire of the lord fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up
the water that was in the trench.

18:39 and when all
 
 ___________________________
 
 the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and
they said, the lord, he is the god; the lord, he is the god.

18:40 and elijah said unto them, take the prophets of baal; let not
one of them escape. and they took them: and elijah brought them down
to the brook kishon, and slew them there.

18:41 and elijah said unto ahab, get thee up, eat and drink; for there
is a sound of abundance of rain.

18:42 so ahab went up to eat and to drink. and elijah went up to the
top of carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his
face between his knees, 18:43 and said to his servant, go up now
 
 ___________________________
 
he rain stop thee not.

18:45 and it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black
with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. and ahab rode, and
went to jezreel.

18:46 and the hand of the lord was on elijah; and he girded up his
loins, and ran before ahab to the entrance of jezreel.

19:1 and ahab told jezebel all that elijah had done, and withal how he
had slain all the prophets with the sword.

19:2 then jezebel sent a messenger unto elijah, saying, so let the
gods do to me, and more also, if i make not thy life as the life of
one of them by to morrow about this time.

19:3 and when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came
to beersheba, which belongeth to judah, and left his servant there.

19:4 but he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came
and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that
he might die; and said, it is enough; now, o lord, take away my life;
for i am not better than my fathers
 
 ___________________________
 

angel touched him, and said unto him, arise and eat.

19:6 and he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals,
and a cruse of water at his head. and he did eat and drink, and laid
him down again.

19:7 and the angel of the lord came again the second time, and touched
him, and said, arise and eat; because the journey is too great for
thee.

19:8 and he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of
that meat forty days and forty nights unto horeb the mount of god.

19:9 and he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold,
the word of the lord came to him, and he said unto him, what doest
thou here, elijah?  19:10 and he said, i have been very jealous for
the lord god of hosts: for the children of israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and i, even i only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:11 and he said, go forth, and stand upon the mount before the lord.
 
 ___________________________
 
rd
was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the lord
was not in the earthquake: 19:12 and after the earthquake a fire; but
the lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

19:13 and it was so, when elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in
his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave.
and, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, what doest thou
here, elijah?  19:14 and he said, i have been very jealous for the
lord god of hosts: because the children of israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and i, even i only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:15 and the lord said unto him, go, return on thy way to the
wilderness of damascus: and when thou comest, anoint hazael to be king
over syria: 19:16 and jehu the son of nimshi shalt thou anoint to be
king over israel: and elisha the son of shaphat of abelmeholah shalt
thou anoint to
 
 ___________________________
 
r he
sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and
for my gold; and i denied him not.

20:8 and all the elders and all the people said unto him, hearken not
unto him, nor consent.

20:9 wherefore he said unto the messengers of benhadad, tell my lord
the king, all that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first i
will do: but this thing i may not do. and the messengers departed, and
brought him word again.

20:10 and benhadad sent unto him, and said, the gods do so unto me,
and more also, if the dust of samaria shall suffice for handfuls for
all the people that follow me.

20:11 and the king of israel answered and said, tell him, let not him
that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.

20:12 and it came to pass, when ben-hadad heard this message, as he
was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his
servants, set yourselves in array. and they set themselves in array
against the city.

20:1
 
 ___________________________
 
ed; and
israel pursued them: and benhadad the king of syria escaped on an
horse with the horsemen.

20:21 and the king of israel went out, and smote the horses and
chariots, and slew the syrians with a great slaughter.

20:22 and the prophet came to the king of israel, and said unto him,
go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the
return of the year the king of syria will come up against thee.

20:23 and the servants of the king of syria said unto him, their gods
are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let
us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger
than they.

20:24 and do this thing, take the kings away, every man out of his
place, and put captains in their rooms: 20:25 and number thee an army,
like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for
chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we
shall be stronger than they. and he hearkened unto their voice, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d
did so.

20:26 and it came to pass at the return of the year, that benhadad
numbered the syrians, and went up to aphek, to fight against israel.

20:27 and the children of israel were numbered, and were all present,
and went against them: and the children of israel pitched before them
like two little flocks of kids; but the syrians filled the country.

20:28 and there came a man of god, and spake unto the king of israel,
and said, thus saith the lord, because the syrians have said, the lord
is god of the hills, but he is not god of the valleys, therefore will
i deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know
that i am the lord.

20:29 and they pitched one over against the other seven days. and so
it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the
children of israel slew of the syrians an hundred thousand footmen in
one day.

20:30 bu
 
 ___________________________
 
se, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry:
i will give thee the vineyard of naboth the jezreelite.

21:8 so she wrote letters in ahab's name, and sealed them with his
seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were
in his city, dwelling with naboth.

21:9 and she wrote in the letters, saying, proclaim a fast, and set
naboth on high among the people: 21:10 and set two men, sons of
belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, thou didst
blaspheme god and the king. and then carry him out, and stone him,
that he may die.

21:11 and the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were
the inhabitants in his city, did as jezebel had sent unto them, and as
it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.

21:12 they proclaimed a fast, and set naboth on high among the people.

21:13 and there came in two men, children of belial, and sat before
him: and the men of belial witnessed against him, even against naboth,
in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the presence of the people, saying, naboth did blaspheme god and
the king. then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him
with stones, that he died.

21:14 then they sent to jezebel, saying, naboth is stoned, and is
dead.

21:15 and it came to pass, when jezebel heard that naboth was stoned,
and was dead, that jezebel said to ahab, arise, take possession of the
vineyard of naboth the jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for
money: for naboth is not alive, but dead.

21:16 and it came to pass, when ahab heard that naboth was 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the city of david his father: and jehoram his son reigned
in his stead.

22:51 ahaziah the son of ahab began to reign over israel in samaria
the seventeenth year of jehoshaphat king of judah, and reigned two
years over israel.

22:52 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walked in the way
of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin: 22:53 for he served
baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the lord god of
israel, according to all that his father had done.




the second book of the kings

commonly called:

the fourth book of the kings


1:1 then moab rebelled against israel after the death of ahab.

1:2 and ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that
was in samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto
them, go, enquire of baalzebub the god of ekron whether i shall
recover of this disease.

1:3 but the angel of the lord said to elijah the t
 
 ___________________________
 
ishbite, arise, go
up to meet the messengers of the king of samaria, and say unto them,
is it not because there is not a god in israel, that ye go to enquire
of baalzebub the god of ekron?  1:4 now therefore thus saith the lord,
thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die. and elijah departed.

1:5 and when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them,
why are ye now turned back?  1:6 and they said unto him, there came a
man up to meet us, and said unto us, go, turn again unto the king that
sent you, and say unto him, thus saith the lord, is it not because
there is not a god in israel, that thou sendest to enq
 
 ___________________________
 
uire of
baalzebub the god of ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from
that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.

1:7 and he said unto them, what manner of man was he which came up to
meet you, and told you these words?  1:8 and they answered him, he was
an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. and
he said, it is elijah the tishbite.

1:9 then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. and
he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd he
spake unto him, thou man of god, the king hath said, come down.

1:10 and elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, if i be a
man of god, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and
thy fifty.

and there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:11 again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his
fifty.

and he answered and said unto him, o man of god, thus hath the king
said, come down quickly.

1:12 and elijah answered and said unto them, if i be a man of god, let
fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. and the
fire of god came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:13 and he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty.
and the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees
before elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, o man of god, i
pray thee, let my life, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ife of these fifty thy servants, be
precious in thy sight.

1:14 behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two
captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my
life now be precious in thy sight.

1:15 and the angel of the lord said unto elijah, go down with him: be
not afraid of him. and he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

1:16 and he said unto him, thus saith the lord, forasmuch as thou hast
sent messengers to enquire of baalzebub the god of ekron, is it not
because there is no god in israel to enquire of his word? therefore
thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die.

1:17 so he died according to the word of the lord which elijah had
spoken.

and jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of jehoram the son
of jehoshaphat king of judah; because he had no son.

1:18 now the rest of the acts of ahaziah which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of t
 
 ___________________________
 
rted them both asunder; and elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.

2:12 and elisha saw it, and he cried, my father, my father, the
chariot of israel, and the horsemen thereof. and he saw him no more:
and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

2:13 he took up also the mantle of elijah that fell from him, and went
back, and stood by the bank of jordan; 2:14 and he took the mantle of
elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, where is
the lord god of elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they
parted hither and thither: and elisha went over.

2:15 and when the sons of the prophets which were to view at jericho
saw him, they said, the spirit of elijah doth rest on elisha. and they
came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

2:16 and they said unto him, behold now, there be with thy servants
fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest
peradventure the spirit of the lord ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ome in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and
upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou
shalt set aside that which is full.

4:5 so she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her
sons, who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.

4:6 and it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said
unto her son, bring me yet a vessel. and he said unto her, there is
not a vessel more. and the oil stayed.

4:7 then she came and told the man of god. and he said, go, sell the
oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

4:8 and it fell on a day, that elisha passed to shunem, where was a
great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. and so it was, that
as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.

4:9 and she said unto her husband, behold now, i perceive that this is
an holy man of god, which passeth by us continually.

4:10 let us make a little chamber, i pray thee, on the wall; and let

 
 ___________________________
 
 what is to be done for thee?
wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the
host? and she answered, i dwell among mine own people.

4:14 and he said, what then is to be done for her? and gehazi
answered, verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.

4:15 and he said, call her. and when he had called her, she stood in
the door.

4:16 and he said, about this season, according to the time of life,
thou shalt embrace a son. and she said, nay, my lord, thou man of god,
do not lie unto thine handmaid.

4:17 and the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that
elisha had said unto her, according to the time of life.

4:18 and when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out
to his father to the reapers.

4:19 and he said unto his father, my head, my head. and he said to a
lad, carry him to his mother.

4:20 and when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat
on her knees till noon, and then died.

4:21 and she wen
 
 ___________________________
 
t up, and laid him on the bed of the man of god, and
shut the door upon him, and went out.

4:22 and she called unto her husband, and said, send me, i pray thee,
one of the young men, and one of the asses, that i may run to the man
of god, and come again.

4:23 and he said, wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither
new moon, nor sabbath. and she said, it shall be well.

4:24 then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, drive, and go
forward; slack not thy riding for me, except i bid thee.

4:25 so she went and came unto the man of god to mount carmel. and it
came to pass, when the man of god saw her afar off, that he said to
gehazi his servant, behold, yonder is that shunammite: 4:26 run now, i
pray the
 
 ___________________________
 
e, to meet her, and say unto her, is it well with thee? is it
well with thy husband? is it well with the child? and she answered, it
is well: 4:27 and when she came to the man of god to the hill, she
caught him by the feet: but gehazi came near to thrust her away. and
the man of god said, let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her:
and the lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

4:28 then she said, did i desire a son of my lord? did i not say, do
not deceive me?  4:29 then he said to gehazi, gird up thy loins, and
take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man,
salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay
my staff upon the face of the child.

4:30 and the mother of the child said, as the lord liveth, and as
 
 ___________________________
 
ns of the prophets were sitting before him: and he
said unto his servant, set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for
the sons of the prophets.

4:39 and one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and
shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

4:40 so they poured out for the men to eat. and it came to pass, as
they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, o thou
man of god, there is death in the pot. and they could not eat thereof.

4:41 but he said, then bring meal. and he cast it into the pot; and he
said, pour out for the people, that they may eat. and there was no
harm in the pot.

4:42 and there came a man from baalshalisha, and brought the man of
god bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears
of corn in the husk thereof. and he said, give unto the people, that
they may eat.

4:43 and his servitor said, what, should i set thi
 
 ___________________________
 
 and they did eat, and left thereof,
according to the word of the lord.

5:1 now naaman, captain of the host of the king of syria, was a great
man with his master, and honourable, because by him the lord had given
deliverance unto syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was
a leper.

5:2 and the syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away
captive out of the land of israel a little maid; and she waited on
naaman's wife.

5:3 and she said unto her mistress, would god my lord were with the
prophet that is in samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.

5:4 and one went in, and told his lord, saying, thus and thus said the
maid that is of the land of israel.

5:5 and the king of syria said, go to, go, and i will send a letter
unto the king of israel. and he departed, and took with him ten
talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of
raiment.

5:6 and he brought the letter to the king of israel, saying, now when
this
 
 ___________________________
 
 letter is come unto thee, behold, i have therewith sent naaman my
servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.

5:7 and it came to pass, when the king of israel had read the letter,
that he rent his clothes, and said, am i god, to kill and to make
alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his
leprosy? wherefore consider, i pray you, and see how he seeketh a
quarrel against me.

5:8 and it was so, when elisha the man of god had heard that the king
of israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying,
wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he
shall know that there is a prophet in israel.

5:9 so naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at
the door of the house of elisha.

5:10 and elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, go and wash in
jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou
shalt be clean.

5:11 but naaman was wroth
 
 ___________________________
 
, and went away, and said, behold, i thought,
he will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the
lord his god, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the
leper.

5:12 are not abana and pharpar, rivers of damascus, better than all
the waters of israel? may i not wash in them, and be clean? so he
turned and went away in a rage.

5:13 and his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, my
father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou
not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, wash,
and be clean?  5:14 then went he down, and dipped himse
 
 ___________________________
 
lf seven times
in jordan, according to the saying of the man of god: and his flesh
came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

5:15 and he returned to the man of god, he and all his company, and
came, and stood before him: and he said, behold, now i know that there
is no god in all the earth, but in israel: now therefore, i pray thee,
take a blessing of thy servant.

5:16 but he said, as the lord liveth, before whom i stand, i will
receive none. and he urged him to take it; but he refused.

5:17 and naaman said, shall there not then, i pray thee, be given to
thy servant two mules' burden of earth? for thy servant will
henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods,
but unto the lord.

5:18 in this thing the lord pardon thy servant,
 
 ___________________________
 
 that when my master
goeth into the house of rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and i bow myself in the house of rimmon: when i bow down myself
in the house of rimmon, the lord pardon thy servant in this thing.

5:19 and he said unto him, go in peace. so he departed from him a
little way.

5:20 but gehazi, the servant of elisha the man of god, said, behold,
my master hath spared naaman this syrian, in not receiving at his
hands that which he brought: but, as the lord liveth, i will run after
him, and take somewhat of him.

5:21 so gehazi followed after naaman. and when naaman saw him running
after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, is
all well?  5:22 and he said, all is well. my master hath sent me,
saying, behold, even now there be come to me from mount ephraim two
young men of the sons of the pro
 
 ___________________________
 
r us.

6:2 let us go, we pray thee, unto jordan, and take thence every man a
beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. and he
answered, go ye.

6:3 and one said, be content, i pray thee, and go with thy servants.
and he answered, i will go.

6:4 so he went with them. and when they came to jordan, they cut down
wood.

6:5 but as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water:
and he cried, and said, alas, master! for it was borrowed.

6:6 and the man of god said, where fell it? and he shewed him the
place.

and he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did
swim.

6:7 therefore said he, take it up to thee. and he put out his hand,
and took it.

6:8 then the king of syria warred against israel, and took counsel
with his servants, saying, in such and such a place shall be my camp.

6:9 and the man of god sent unto the king of israel, saying, beware
that thou pass not such a place; for thither the syrians are come
down.

 
 ___________________________
 

6:10 and the king of israel sent to the place which the man of god
told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor
twice.

6:11 therefore the heart of the king of syria was sore troubled for
this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, will ye
not shew me which of us is for the king of israel?  6:12 and one of
his servants said, none, my lord, o king: but elisha, the prophet that
is in israel, telleth the king of israel the words that thou speakest
in thy bedchamber.

6:13 and he said, go and spy where he is, that i 
 
 ___________________________
 
may send and fetch
him.

and it was told him, saying, behold, he is in dothan.

6:14 therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

6:15 and when the servant of the man of god was risen early, and gone
forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and
chariots. and his servant said unto him, alas, my master! how shall we
do?  6:16 and he answered, fear not: for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.

6:17 and elisha prayed, and said, lord, i pray thee, open his eyes,
that he may see. and the lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he
saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire
round about elisha.
 
 ___________________________
 
e? and she answered, this woman
said unto me, give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will
eat my son to morrow.

6:29 so we boiled my son, and did eat him: and i said unto her on the
next day, give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

6:30 and it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman,
that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the
people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.

6:31 then he said, god do so and more also to me, if the head of
elisha the son of shaphat shall stand on him this day.

6:32 but elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the
king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he
said to the elders, see ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to
take away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master's feet
behind him?  6:33 and while he yet talked with
 
 ___________________________
 
 them, behold, the
messenger came down unto him: and he said, behold, this evil is of the
lord; what should i wait for the lord any longer?  7:1 then elisha
said, hear ye the word of the lord; thus saith the lord, to morrow
about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel,
and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of samaria.

7:2 then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of god,
and said, behold, if the lord would make windows in heaven, might this
thing be?  and he said, behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but
shalt not eat thereof.

7:3 and there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate:
and they said one to another, why sit we here until we die?  7:4 if we
say, we will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and
we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. now
therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of th
 
 ___________________________
 
 was
full of garments and vessels, which the syrians had cast away in their
haste. and the messengers returned, and told the king.

7:16 and the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the syrians. so
a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of
barley for a shekel, according to the word of the lord.

7:17 and the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have
the charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and
he died, as the man of god had said, who spake when the king came down
to him.

7:18 and it came to pass as the man of god had spoken to the king,
saying, two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine
flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of
samaria: 7:19 and that lord answered the man of god, and said, now,
behold, if the lord should make windows in heaven, might such a thing
be? and he said, behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt
not eat thereof.

7:20 
 
 ___________________________
 
and so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the
gate, and he died.

8:1 then spake elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to
life, saying, arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn
wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the lord hath called for a famine;
and it shall also come upon the land seven years.

8:2 and the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of god:
and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the
philistines seven years.

8:3 and it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman
returned out of the land of the philistines: and she went forth to cry
unto the king for her house and for her land.

8:4 and the king talked with gehazi the servant of the man of god,
saying, tell me, i pray thee, all the great things that elisha hath
done.

8:5 and it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had
restor
 
 ___________________________
 
d to the king for her house and for her
land. and gehazi said, my lord, o king, this is the woman, and this is
her son, whom elisha restored to life.

8:6 and when the king asked the woman, she told him. so the king
appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, restore all that was
hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the
land, even until now.

8:7 and elisha came to damascus; and benhadad the king of syria was
sick; and it was told him, saying, the man of god is come hither.

8:8 and the king said unto hazael, take a present in thine hand, and
go, meet the man of god, and enquire of the lord by him, saying, shall
i recover of this disease?  8:9 so hazael went to meet him, and took a
present with him, even of every good thing of damascus, forty camels'
burden, and came and stood before him, and said, thy son benhadad king
of syria hath sent me to thee, saying, shall i recover of this
disease?  8:10 and elisha said unto him, go, say unto him, 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou mayest
certainly recover: howbeit the lord hath shewed me that he shall
surely die.

8:11 and he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed:
and the man of god wept.

8:12 and hazael said, why weepeth my lord? and he answered, because i
know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of israel: their
strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women
with child.

8:13 and hazael said, but what, is thy servant a dog, that he should
do this great thing? and elisha answered, the lord hath shewed me that
thou shalt be king over syria.

8:14 so he departe
 
 ___________________________
 
hus saith the lord, i have anointed thee king over israel.
then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.

9:4 so the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to
ramothgilead.

9:5 and when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting;
and he said, i have an errand to thee, o captain. and jehu said, unto
which of all us? and he said, to thee, o captain.

9:6 and he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on
his head, and said unto him, thus saith the lord god of israel, i have
anointed thee king over the people of the lord, even over israel.

9:7 and thou shalt smite the house of ahab thy master, that i may
avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the
servants of the lord, at the hand of jezebel.

9:8 for the whole house of ahab shall perish: and i will cut off from
ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in israel: 9:9 and i will make the house of ahab like the house
of jeroboam t
 
 ___________________________
 
m the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin, jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden
calves that were in bethel, and that were in dan.

10:30 and the lord said unto jehu, because thou hast done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the
house of ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of
the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of israel.

10:31 but jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the lord god of
israel with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of
jeroboam, which made israel to sin.

10:32 in those days the lord began to cut israel short: and hazael
smote them in all the coasts of israel; 10:33 from jordan eastward,
all the land of gilead, the gadites, and the reubenites, and the
manassites, from aroer, which is by the river arnon, even gilead and
bashan.

10:34 now the rest of the acts of jehu, and all that he did, and all
his might, are they not written in th
 
 ___________________________
 
 captains over hundreds did the priest give king
david's spears and shields, that were in the temple of the lord.

11:11 and the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand,
round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left
corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

11:12 and he brought forth the king's son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him;
and they clapped their hands, and said, god save the king.

11:13 and when athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the
people, she came to the people into the temple of the lord.

11:14 and when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all
the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and athaliah
rent her clothes, and cried, treason, treason.

11:15 but jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds,
the officers of the h
 
 ___________________________
 
it: and elisha put his hands upon the king's
hands.

13:17 and he said, open the window eastward. and he opened it. then
elisha said, shoot. and he shot. and he said, the arrow of the lord's
deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from syria: for thou shalt
smite the syrians in aphek, till thou have consumed them.

13:18 and he said, take the arrows. and he took them. and he said unto
the king of israel, smite upon the ground. and he smote thrice, and
stayed.

13:19 and the man of god was wroth with him, and said, thou shouldest
have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten syria till
thou hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite syria but thrice.

13:20 and elisha died, and they buried him. and the bands of the
moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.

13:21 and it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
elisha: and when the man was let down, and to
 
 ___________________________
 
at the king
slept with his fathers.

14:23 in the fifteenth year of amaziah the son of joash king of judah
jeroboam the son of joash king of israel began to reign in samaria,
and reigned forty and one years.

14:24 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord: he
departed not from all the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin.

14:25 he restored the coast of israel from the entering of hamath unto
the sea of the plain, according to the word of the lord god of israel,
which he spake by the hand of his servant jonah, the son of amittai,
the prophet, which was of gathhepher.

14:26 for the lord saw the affliction of israel, that it was very
bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper
for israel.

14:27 and the lord said not that he would blot out the name of israel
from under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of jeroboam the son
of joash.

14:28 now the rest of the acts of jeroboam, and all that he did, and
h
 
 ___________________________
 
d against judah rezin the
king of syria, and pekah the son of remaliah.

15:38 and jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of david his father: and ahaz his son reigned in
his stead.

16:1 in the seventeenth year of pekah the son of remaliah ahaz the son
of jotham king of judah began to reign.

16:2 twenty years old was ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen years in jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the
sight of the lord his god, like david his father.

16:3 but he walked in the way of the kings of israel, yea, and made
his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the
heathen, whom the lord cast out from before the children of israel.

16:4 and he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.

16:5 then rezin king of syria and pekah son of remaliah king of israel
came up to jerusalem to war: and they besieged ahaz, but could not
overcome 
 
 ___________________________
 
ad done year by year: therefore the king of
assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.

17:5 then the king of assyria came up throughout all the land, and
went up to samaria, and besieged it three years.

17:6 in the ninth year of hoshea the king of assyria took samaria, and
carried israel away into assyria, and placed them in halah and in
habor by the river of gozan, and in the cities of the medes.

17:7 for so it was, that the children of israel had sinned against the
lord their god, which had brought them up out of the land of egypt,
from under the hand of pharaoh king of egypt, and had feared other
gods, 17:8 and walked in the statutes of the heathen, whom the lord
cast out from before the children of israel, and of the kings of
israel, which they had made.

17:9 and the children of israel did secretly those things that were
not right against the lord their god, and they built them high places
in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced
cit
 
 ___________________________
 
had said unto them, ye shall
not do this thing.

17:13 yet the lord testified against israel, and against judah, by all
the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, turn ye from your evil
ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the
law which i commanded your fathers, and which i sent to you by my
servants the prophets.

17:14 notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks,
like to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the lord
their god.

17:15 and they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made
with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against
them; and they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the
heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the lord had
charged them, that they should not do like them.

17:16 and they left all the commandments of the lord their god, and
made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and
worshipped all the host of heaven, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d served baal.

17:17 and they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through
the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to
do evil in the sight of the lord, to provoke him to anger.

17:18 therefore the lord was very angry with israel, and removed them
out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of judah only.

17:19 also judah kept not the commandments of the lord their god, but
walked in the statutes of israel which they made.

17:20 and the lord rejected all the seed of israel, and afflicted
them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast
them out of his sight.

17:21 for he rent israel from the house of david; and they made
jeroboam the son of nebat king: and jeroboam drave israel from
following the lord, and made them sin a great sin.

17:22 for the children of israel walked in all the sins of jeroboam
which he did; they depar
 
 ___________________________
 
m hamath, and from sepharvaim, and placed
them in the cities of samaria instead of the children of israel: and
they possessed samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.

17:25 and so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that
they feared not the lord: therefore the lord sent lions among them,
which slew some of them.

17:26 wherefore they spake to the king of assyria, saying, the nations
which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of samaria, know not
the manner of the god of the land: therefore he hath sent lions among
them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of
the god of the land.

17:27 then the king of assyria commanded, saying, carry thither one of
the priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell
there, and let him teach them the manner of the god of the land.

17:28 then one of the priests whom they had carried away from samaria
came and dwelt in bethel, and taught them how they should fear the
lord.

 
 ___________________________
 

17:29 howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the
houses of the high places which the samaritans had made, every nation
in their cities wherein they dwelt.

17:30 and the men of babylon made succothbenoth, and the men of cuth
made nergal, and the men of hamath made ashima, 17:31 and the avites
made nibhaz and tartak, and the sepharvites burnt their children in
fire to adrammelech and anammelech, the gods of sepharvaim.

17:32 so they feared the lord, and made unto themselves of the lowest
of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the
houses of the high places.

17:33 they feared the lord, and served their own gods, after the
manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.

17:34 unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not
the lord, neither do they after their statutes, or after their
ordinances, or after the law and commandment whic
 
 ___________________________
 
h the lord commanded
the children of jacob, whom he named israel; 17:35 with whom the lord
had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, ye shall not fear other
gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to
them: 17:36 but the lord, who brought you up out of the land of egypt
with great power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him
shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

17:37 and the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the
commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for
evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

17:38 and the covenant that i have made with you ye shall not
 
 ___________________________
 
 forget;
neither shall ye fear other gods.

17:39 but the lord your god ye shall fear; and he shall deliver you
out of the hand of all your enemies.

17:40 howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former
manner.

17:41 so these nations feared the lord, and served their graven
images, both their children, and their children's children: as did
their fathers, so do they unto this day.

18:1 now it came to pass in the third year of hoshea son of elah king
of israel, that hezekiah the son of ahaz king of judah began to reign.

18:2 twenty and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ign; and he
reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. his mother's name also was
abi, the daughter of zachariah.

18:3 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that david his father did.

18:4 he removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that moses had
made: for unto those days the children of israel did burn incense to
it: and he called it nehushtan.

18:5 he trusted in the lord god of israel; so that after him was none
like him among all the kings of judah, nor any that were before him.

18:6 for he clave to the lord, and departed not from following him,
but kept his commandments, which the lord commanded moses.

18:7 and the lord was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went
forth: and he rebelled against the king of assyria, and served him
not.

18:8 he smote the philistines, even unto gaza, and the borders
thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to th
 
 ___________________________
 
ear of hoshea son of elah king of israel, that
shalmaneser king of assyria came up against samaria, and besieged it.

18:10 and at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth
year of hezekiah, that is in the ninth year of hoshea king of israel,
samaria was taken.

18:11 and the king of assyria did carry away israel unto assyria, and
put them in halah and in habor by the river of gozan, and in the
cities of the medes: 18:12 because they obeyed not the voice of the
lord their god, but transgressed his covenant, and all that moses the
servant of the lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

18:13 now in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah did sennacherib king
of assyria come up against all the fenced cities of judah, and took
them.

18:14 and hezekiah king of judah sent to the king of assyria to
lachish, saying, i have offended; return from me: that which thou
puttest on me will i bear. and the king of assyria appointed unto
hezekiah king of judah
 
 ___________________________
 
 king, the king of assyria, what confidence is this
wherein thou trustest?  18:20 thou sayest, (but they are but vain
words,) i have counsel and strength for the war. now on whom dost thou
trust, that thou rebellest against me?  18:21 now, behold, thou
trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon egypt, on
which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is
pharaoh king of egypt unto all that trust on him.

18:22 but if ye say unto me, we trust in the lord our god: is not that
he, whose high places and whose altars hezekiah hath taken away, and
hath said to judah and jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar
in jerusalem?  18:23 now therefore, i pray thee, give pledges to my
lord the king of assyria, and i will deliver thee two thousand horses,
if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

18:24 how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the
least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on egypt for chariots
and for h
 
 ___________________________
 
syria,
make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then
eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and
drink ye every one the waters of his cistern: 18:32 until i come and
take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a
land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive and of honey, that ye
may live, and not die: and hearken not unto hezekiah, when he
persuadeth you, saying, the lord will deliver us.

18:33 hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land
out of the hand of the king of assyria?  18:34 where are the gods of
hamath, and of arpad? where are the gods of sepharvaim, hena, and
ivah? have they delivered samaria out of mine hand?  18:35 who are
they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their
country out of mine hand, that the lord should deliver jerusalem out
of mine hand?  18:36 but the people held their peace, and answered him
not a word: for the king's commandment w
 
 ___________________________
 
 rent
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
house of the lord.

19:2 and he sent eliakim, which was over the household, and shebna the
scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to
isaiah the prophet the son of amoz.

19:3 and they said unto him, thus saith hezekiah, this day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy; for the children are come to
the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

19:4 it may be the lord thy god will hear all the words of rabshakeh,
whom the king of assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living
god; and will reprove the words which the lord thy god hath heard:
wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.

19:5 so the servants of king hezekiah came to isaiah.

19:6 and isaiah said unto them, thus shall ye say to your master, thus
saith the lord, be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with
which the servants of the king of assyria have blasphemed 
 
 ___________________________
 
pon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and shall return to his own land; and i will cause him to fall by the
sword in his own land.

19:8 so rabshakeh returned, and found the king of assyria warring
against libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from lachish.

19:9 and when he heard say of tirhakah king of ethiopia, behold, he is
come out to fight against thee: he sent messengers again unto
hezekiah, saying, 19:10 thus shall ye speak to hezekiah king of judah,
saying, let not thy god in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying,
jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of assyria.

19:11 behold, thou hast heard what the kings of assyria have done to
all lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?
19:12 have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed; as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of
eden which were in thelasar?  19:13 where is the king of hamath, and
the king of arpad, and the king o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the city of sepharvaim, of hena,
and ivah?  19:14 and hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and hezekiah went up into the house of the
lord, and spread it before the lord.

19:15 and hezekiah prayed before the lord, and said, o lord god of
israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the god, even
thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven
and earth.

19:16 lord, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, lord, thine eyes, and
see: and hear the words of sennacherib, which hath sent him to
reproach the living god.

19:17 of a truth, lord, the kings of assyria have destroyed the
nations and their lands, 19:18 and have cast their gods into the fire:
for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone:
therefore they have destroyed them.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
9:19 now therefore, o lord our god, i beseech thee, save thou us out
of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art
the lord god, even thou only.

19:20 then isaiah the son of amoz sent to hezekiah, saying, thus saith
the lord god of israel, that which thou hast prayed to me against
sennacherib king of assyria i have heard.

19:21 this is the word that the lord hath spoken concerning him; the
virgin the daughter of zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
scorn; the daughter of jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

19:22 whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the holy one of israel.

19:23 by thy messengers t
 
 ___________________________
 
l defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and
for my servant david's sake.

19:35 and it came to pass that night, that the angel of the lord went
out, and smote in the camp of the assyrians an hundred fourscore and
five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they
were all dead corpses.

19:36 so sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

19:37 and it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
nisroch his god, that adrammelech and sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword: and they escaped into the land of armenia. and esarhaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

20:1 in those days was hezekiah sick unto death. and the prophet
isaiah the son of amoz came to him, and said unto him, thus saith the
lord, set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.

20:2 then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the lord,
saying, 20:3 i beseech thee, o lord, remember now how i have walk
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

20:4 and it came to pass, afore isaiah was gone out into the middle
court, that the word of the lord came to him, saying, 20:5 turn again,
and tell hezekiah the captain of my people, thus saith the lord, the
god of david thy father, i have heard thy prayer, i have seen thy
tears: behold, i will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up
unto the house of the lord.

20:6 and i will add unto thy days fifteen years; and i will deliver
thee and this city out of the hand of the king of assyria; and i will
defend this city for mine own sake, and for my servant david's sake.

20:7 and isaiah said, take a lump of figs. and they took and laid it
on the boil, and he recovered.

20:8 and hezekiah sai
 
 ___________________________
 
 the law that my servant moses commanded
them.

21:9 but they hearkened not: and manasseh seduced them to do more evil
than did the nations whom the lord destroyed before the children of
israel.

21:10 and the lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying, 21:11
because manasseh king of judah hath done these abominations, and hath
done wickedly above all that the amorites did, which were before him,
and hath made judah also to sin with his idols: 21:12 therefore thus
saith the lord god of israel, behold, i am bringing such evil upon
jerusalem and judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall
tingle.

21:13 and i will stretch over jerusalem the line of samaria, and the
plummet of the house of ahab: and i will wipe jerusalem as a man
wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

21:14 and i will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver
them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and
a spoil to all their enemies; 21
 
 ___________________________
 
 the garden
of uzza: and amon his son reigned in his stead.

21:19 amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years in jerusalem. and his mother's name was
meshullemeth, the daughter of haruz of jotbah.

21:20 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord, as his
father manasseh did.

21:21 and he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and
served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them: 21:22
and he forsook the lord god of his fathers, and walked not in the way
of the lord.

21:23 and the servants of amon conspired against him, and slew the
king in his own house.

21:24 and the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king amon; and the people of the land made josiah his son king
in his stead.

21:25 now the rest of the acts of amon which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?  21:26
and he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of uz
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the lord
that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened
unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is
written concerning us.

22:14 so hilkiah the priest, and ahikam, and achbor, and shaphan, and
asahiah, went unto huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son
of tikvah, the son of harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt
in jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.

22:15 and she said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, tell
the man that sent you to me, 22:16 thus saith the lord, behold, i will
bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all
the words of the book which the king of judah hath read: 22:17 because
they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that
they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands;
therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not
be quenched.

22:18 but to the king of judah which sent 
 
 ___________________________
 
you to enquire of the lord,
thus shall ye say to him, thus saith the lord god of israel, as
touching the words which thou hast heard; 22:19 because thine heart
was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the lord, when thou
heardest what i spake against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast
rent thy clothes, and wept before me; i also have heard thee, saith
the lord.

22:20 behold therefore, i will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou
shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine
 
 ___________________________
 
r the altar that was at bethel, and the high place which
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin, had made, both that
altar and the high place he brake down, and burned the high place, and
stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove.

23:16 and as josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were
there in the mount, and sent, and took the bones out of the
sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar, and polluted it, according
to the word of the lord which the man of god proclaimed, who
proclaimed these words.

23:17 then he said, what title is that that i see? and the men of the
city told him, it is the sepulchre of the man of god, which came from
judah, and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the
altar of bethel.

23:18 and he said, let him alone; let no man move his bones. so they
let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of
samaria.

23:19 and all the houses also of the high places that were in the
cities 
 
 ___________________________
 
of samaria, which the kings of israel had made to provoke the
lord to anger, josiah took away, and did to them according to all the
acts that he had done in bethel.

23:20 and he slew all the priests of the high places that were there
upon the altars, and burned men's bones upon them, and returned to
jerusalem.

23:21 and the king commanded all the people, saying, keep the passover
unto the lord your god, as it is written in the book of this covenant.

23:22 surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of the
judges that judged israel, nor in all the days of the kings of israel,
nor of the kings of judah; 23:23 but in the eighteenth year of king
josiah, wherein this passover was holden to the lord in jerusalem.

23:24 moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and
the images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in
the land of judah and
 
 ___________________________
 

4:5 and ashur the father of tekoa had two wives, helah and naarah.

4:6 and naarah bare him ahuzam, and hepher, and temeni, and
haahashtari.

these were the sons of naarah.

4:7 and the sons of helah were, zereth, and jezoar, and ethnan.

4:8 and coz begat anub, and zobebah, and the families of aharhel the
son of harum.

4:9 and jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother
called his name jabez, saying, because i bare him with sorrow.

4:10 and jabez called on the god of israel, saying, oh that thou
wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand
might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it
may not grieve me! and god granted him that which he requested.

4:11 and chelub the brother of shuah begat mehir, which was the father
of eshton.

4:12 and eshton begat bethrapha, and paseah, and tehinnah the father
of irnahash. these are the men of rechah.

4:13 and the sons of kenaz; othniel, and seraiah: and the so
 
 ___________________________
 
ing of israel.

5:18 the sons of reuben, and the gadites, and half the tribe of
manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to
shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were four and forty thousand seven
hundred and threescore, that went out to the war.

5:19 and they made war with the hagarites, with jetur, and nephish,
and nodab.

5:20 and they were helped against them, and the hagarites were
delivered into their hand, and all that were with them: for they cried
to god in the battle, and he was intreated of them; because they put
their trust in him.

5:21 and they took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand,
and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two
thousand, and of men an hundred thousand.

5:22 for there fell down many slain, because the war was of god. and
they dwelt in their steads until the captivity.

5:23 and the children of the half tribe of manasseh dwelt in the land:
they increased from bashan unto baalhermo
 
 ___________________________
 
n and senir, and unto mount
hermon.

5:24 and these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even
epher, and ishi, and eliel, and azriel, and jeremiah, and hodaviah,
and jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house
of their fathers.

5:25 and they transgressed against the god of their fathers, and went
a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom god destroyed
before them.

5:26 and the god of israel stirred up the spirit of pul king of
assyria, and the spirit of tilgathpilneser king of assyria, and he
carried them away, even the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, and brought them unto halah, and habor, and hara,
and to the river gozan, unto this day.

6:1 the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

6:2 and the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, and hebron, and uzziel.

6:3 and the children of amram; aaron, and moses, and miriam. the sons
also o
 
 ___________________________
 
jahath, the son of gershom, the son
of levi.

6:44 and their brethren the sons of merari stood on the left hand:
ethan the son of kishi, the son of abdi, the son of malluch, 6:45 the
son of hashabiah, the son of amaziah, the son of hilkiah, 6:46 the son
of amzi, the son of bani, the son of shamer, 6:47 the son of mahli,
the son of mushi, the son of merari, the son of levi.

6:48 their brethren also the levites were appointed unto all manner of
service of the tabernacle of the house of god.

6:49 but aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt
offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the
work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for israel,
according to all that moses the servant of god had commanded.

6:50 and these are the sons of aaron; eleazar his son, phinehas his
son, abishua his son, 6:51 bukki his son, uzzi his son, zerahiah his
son, 6:52 meraioth his son, amariah his son, ahitub his son, 6:53
zadok his son, ahimaa
 
 ___________________________
 
oham,
and elah the son of uzzi, the son of michri, and meshullam the son of
shephathiah, the son of reuel, the son of ibnijah; 9:9 and their
brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and
six. all these men were chief of the fathers in the house of their
fathers.

9:10 and of the priests; jedaiah, and jehoiarib, and jachin, 9:11 and
azariah the son of hilkiah, the son of meshullam, the son of zadok,
the son of meraioth, the son of ahitub, the ruler of the house of god;
9:12 and adaiah the son of jeroham, the son of pashur, the son of
malchijah, and maasiai the son of adiel, the son of jahzerah, the son
of meshullam, the son of meshillemith, the son of immer; 9:13 and
their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand and
seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the
service of the house of god.

9:14 and of the levites; shemaiah the son of hasshub, the son of
azrikam, the son of hashabiah, of the sons of merari; 9:15 a
 
 ___________________________
 
n their set
office.

9:23 so they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the
house of the lord, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.

9:24 in four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north,
and south.

9:25 and their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come
after seven days from time to time with them.

9:26 for these levites, the four chief porters, were in their set
office, and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of god.

9:27 and they lodged round about the house of god, because the charge
was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to
them.

9:28 and certain of them had the charge of the ministering vessels,
that they should bring them in and out by tale.

9:29 some of them also were appointed to oversee the vessels, and all
the instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine,
and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.

9:30 and some of the sons of the p
 
 ___________________________
 
d his sons were dead, then they forsook
their cities, and fled: and the philistines came and dwelt in them.

10:8 and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found saul and his sons fallen in mount
gilboa.

10:9 and when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his
armour, and sent into the land of the philistines round about, to
carry tidings unto their idols, and to the people.

10:10 and they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened
his head in the temple of dagon.

10:11 and when all jabeshgilead heard all that the philistines had
done to saul, 10:12 they arose, all the valiant men, and took away the
body of saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to jabesh,
and buried their bones under the oak in jabesh, and fasted seven days.

10:13 so saul died for his transgression which he committed against
the lord, even against the word of the lord, which he kept not, and
also for asking counsel 
 
 ___________________________
 
of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire
of it; 10:14 and enquired not of the lord: therefore he slew him, and
turned the kingdom unto david the son of jesse.

11:1 then all israel gathered themselves to david unto hebron, saying,
behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

11:2 and moreover in time past, even when saul was king, thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord thy god said
unto thee, thou shalt feed my people israel, and thou shalt be ruler
over my people israel.

11:3 therefore came all the elders of israel to the king to hebron;
and david made a covenant with them in hebron before the lord; and
they anointed david king over israel, according to the word of the
lord by samuel.

11:4 and david and all israel went to jerusalem, which is jebus; where
the jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

11:5 and the inhabitants of jebus said to david, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ley of rephaim.

11:16 and david was then in the hold, and the philistines' garrison
was then at bethlehem.

11:17 and david longed, and said, oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of bethlehem, that is at the gate!  11:18 and
the three brake through the host of the philistines, and drew water
out of the well of bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and
brought it to david: but david would not drink of it, but poured it
out to the lord.

11:19 and said, my god forbid it me, that i should do this thing:
shall i drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in
jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it.
therefore he would not drink it.

these things did these three mightiest.

11:20 and abishai the brother of joab, he was chief of the three: for
lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
name among the three.

11:21 of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was
their capt
 
 ___________________________
 
t over jordan in the first month, when it
had overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all them of the
valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

12:16 and there came of the children of benjamin and judah to the hold
unto david.

12:17 and david went out to meet them, and answered and said unto
them, if ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be
knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing
there is no wrong in mine hands, the god of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it.

12:18 then the spirit came upon amasai, who was chief of the captains,
and he said, thine are we, david, and on thy side, thou son of jesse:
peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy god
helpeth thee.

then david received them, and made them captains of the band.

12:19 and there fell some of manasseh to david, when he came with the
philistines against saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the
lords of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
fall to his master saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

12:20 as he went to ziklag, there fell to him of manasseh, adnah, and
jozabad, and jediael, and michael, and jozabad, and elihu, and
zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of manasseh.

12:21 and they helped david against the band of the rovers: for they
were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.

12:22 for at that time day by day there came to david to help him,
until it was a great host, like the host of god.

12:23 and these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to
the war, and came to david to hebron, to turn the kingdom of saul to
him, according to the word of the lord.

12:24 the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

12:25 of the children of simeon, mighty men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 of the children of levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 and jehoiada was t
 
 ___________________________
 
moreover they that were nigh them, even unto issachar and
zebulun and naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on
mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there
was joy in israel.

13:1 and david consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds,
and with every leader.

13:2 and david said unto all the congregation of israel, if it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the lord our god, let us send abroad
unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of
israel, and with them also to the priests and levites which are in
their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:
13:3 and let us bring again the ark of our god to us: for we enquired
not at it in the days of saul.

13:4 and all the congregation said that they would do so: for the
thing was right in the eyes of all the people.

13:5 so david gathered all israel together, from shihor
 
 ___________________________
 
 of egypt even
unto the entering of hemath, to bring the ark of god from
kirjathjearim.

13:6 and david went up, and all israel, to baalah, that is, to
kirjathjearim, which belonged to judah, to bring up thence the ark of
god the lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is
called on it.

13:7 and they carried the ark of god in a new cart out of the house of
abinadab: and uzza and ahio drave the cart.

13:8 and david and all israel played before god with all their might,
and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with
timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.

13:9 and when they came unto the threshingfloor of chidon, uzza put
forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

13:10 and the anger of the lord was kindled against uzza, and he smote
him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before god.

13:11 and david was displeased, because the lord had made a breach
upon uzza: wherefore
 
 ___________________________
 
 that place is called perezuzza to this day.

13:12 and david was afraid of god that day, saying, how shall i bring
the ark of god home to me?  13:13 so david brought not the ark home to
himself to the city of david, but carried it aside into the house of
obededom the gittite.

13:14 and the ark of god remained with the family of obededom in his
house three months. and the lord blessed the house of obededom, and
all that he had.

14:1 now hiram king of tyre sent messengers to david, and timber of
cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house.

14:2 and david perceived that the lord had confirmed him king over
israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people
israel.

14:3 and david took more wives at jerusalem: and david begat more sons
and daughters
 
 ___________________________
 
dren which he had in
jerusalem; shammua, and shobab, nathan, and solomon, 14:5 and ibhar,
and elishua, and elpalet, 14:6 and nogah, and nepheg, and japhia, 14:7
and elishama, and beeliada, and eliphalet.

14:8 and when the philistines heard that david was anointed king over
all israel, all the philistines went up to seek david. and david heard
of it, and went out against them.

14:9 and the philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of
rephaim.

14:10 and david enquired of god, saying, shall i go up against the
philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and the lord
said unto him, go up; for i will deliver them into thine hand.

14:11 so they came up to baalperazim; and david smote them there. then
david said, god hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the
breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place
baalperazim.

14:12 and when they had left their gods there, david gave a
commandment, and they were burned 
 
 ___________________________
 
with fire.

14:13 and the philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the
valley.

14:14 therefore david enquired again of god; and god said unto him, go
not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over
against the mulberry trees.

14:15 and it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the
tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for
god is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the philistines.

14:16 david therefore did as god commanded him: and they smote the
host of the philistines from gibeon even to gazer.

14:17 and the fame of david went out into all lands; and the lord
brought the fear of him upon all nations.

15:1 and david made him houses in the city of david, and prepared a
place for the ark of god, and pitched for it a tent.

15:2 then david said, none ought to carry the ark of god but the
levites
 
 ___________________________
 
: for them hath the lord chosen to carry the ark of god, and to
minister unto him for ever.

15:3 and david gathered all israel together to jerusalem, to bring up
the ark of the lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it.

15:4 and david assembled the children of aaron, and the levites: 15:5
of the sons of kohath; uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
and twenty: 15:6 of the sons of merari; asaiah the chief, and his
brethren two hundred and twenty: 15:7 of the sons of gershom; joel the
chief and his brethren an hundred and th
 
 ___________________________
 
thren two hundred: 15:9 of
the sons of hebron; eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 15:10
of the sons of uzziel; amminadab the chief, and his brethren an
hundred and twelve.

15:11 and david called for zadok and abiathar the priests, and for the
levites, for uriel, asaiah, and joel, shemaiah, and eliel, and
amminadab, 15:12 and said unto them, ye are the chief of the fathers
of the levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that
ye may bring up the ark of the lord god of israel unto the place that
i have prepared for it.

15:13 for because ye did it not at the first, the lord our god made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

15:14 so the priests and the levites sanctified themselves to bring up
the ark of the lord god of israel.

15:15 and the children of the levites bare the ark of god upon their
shoulders with the staves thereon, as moses commanded according to the
word of the lord.

15:16 and david spake to the c
 
 ___________________________
 
salteries on alamoth; 15:21 and mattithiah, and
elipheleh, and mikneiah, and obededom, and jeiel, and azaziah, with
harps on the sheminith to excel.

15:22 and chenaniah, chief of the levites, was for song: he instructed
about the song, because he was skilful.

15:23 and berechiah and elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.

15:24 and shebaniah, and jehoshaphat, and nethaneel, and amasai, and
zechariah, and benaiah, and eliezer, the priests, did blow with the
trumpets before the ark of god: and obededom and jehiah were
doorkeepers for the ark.

15:25 so david, and the elders of israel, and the captains over
thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of
the house of obededom with joy.

15:26 and it came to pass, when god helped the levites that bare the
ark of the covenant of the lord, that they offered seven bullocks and
seven rams.

15:27 and david was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the
levites that bare the ark, and the singers, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 also had upon him an ephod of
linen.

15:28 thus all israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the lord
with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and
with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.

15:29 and it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the lord came
to the city of david, that michal, the daughter of saul looking out at
a window saw king david dancing and playing: and she despised him in
her heart.

16:1 so they brought the ark of god, and set it in the midst of the
tent that david had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices
and peace offerings before god.

16:2 and when david had made an end of offering the burnt offerings
and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the
lord.

16:3 and he dealt to every one of israel, both man and woman, to every
one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine.

16:4 and he appointed certain of the levites to minister before the
a
 
 ___________________________
 
rk of the lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the lord god
of israel: 16:5 asaph the chief, and next to him zechariah, jeiel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and mattithiah, and eliab, and benaiah, and
obededom: and jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but asaph made a
sound with cymbals; 16:6 benaiah also and jahaziel the priests with
trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of god.

16:7 then on that day david delivered first this psalm to thank the
lord into the hand of asaph and his brethren.

16:8 give thanks unto the lord, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people.

16:9 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

16:10 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.

16:11 seek the lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 remember his marvellous works that he ha
 
 ___________________________
 
th done, his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth; 16:13 o ye seed of israel his servant,
ye children of jacob, his chosen ones.

16:14 he is the lord our god; his judgments are in all the earth.

16:15 be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; 16:16 even of the covenant which
he made with abraham, and of his oath unto isaac; 16:17 and hath
confirmed the same to jacob for a law, and to israel for an
everlasting covenant, 16:18 saying, unto thee will i give the land of
canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 when ye were but few, even
a few, and strangers in it.

16:20 and when they went 
 
 ___________________________
 
from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to another people; 16:21 he suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he
reproved kings for their sakes, 16:22 saying, touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophets no harm.

16:23 sing unto the lord, all the earth; shew forth from day to day
his salvation.

16:24 declare his glory among the heathen; his marvellous works among
all nations.

16:25 for great is the lord, and greatly to be praised: he also is to
be feared above all gods.

16:26 for all the gods of the people are idols: but the lord made the
heavens.

16:27 glory and honour are in his presence; strength and gladness are
in his place.

16:28 give unto the lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the
lord glory and strength.

16:29 give unto the lord the glory due unto his name: bring an
offering, and come before him: worship the lord in the beauty of
holiness.

16:30 fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable,
that it be no
 
 ___________________________
 
t moved.

16:31 let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men
say among the nations, the lord reigneth.

16:32 let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields
rejoice, and all that is therein.

16:33 then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the
lord, because he cometh to judge the earth.

16:34 o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

16:35 and say ye, save us, o god of our salvation, and gather us
together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to
thy holy name, and glory in thy praise.

16:36 blessed be the lord god of israel for ever and ever. and all the
people said, amen, and praised the lord.

16:37 so he left there before the ark of the covenant of the lord
asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as
every day's work required: 16:38 and obededom with their brethren,
threescore and eight; obededom al
 
 ___________________________
 
r burnt offerings unto the lord upon the altar of
the burnt offering continually morning and evening, and to do
according to all that is written in the law of the lord, which he
commanded israel; 16:41 and with them heman and jeduthun, and the rest
that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to the
lord, because his mercy endureth for ever; 16:42 and with them heman
and jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a
sound, and with musical instruments of god. and the sons of jeduthun
were porters.

16:43 and all the people departed every man to his house: and david
returned to bless his house.

17:1 now it came to pass, as david sat in his house, that david said
to nathan the prophet, lo, i dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark
of the covenant of the lord remaineth under curtains.

17:2 then nathan said unto david, do all that is in thine heart; for
god is with thee.

17:3 and it came to pass the same night, that the word of god cam
 
 ___________________________
 
and i will stablish his throne for
ever.

17:13 i will be his father, and he shall be my son: and i will not
take my mercy away from him, as i took it from him that was before
thee: 17:14 but i will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for
ever: and his throne shall be established for evermore.

17:15 according to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

17:16 and david the king came and sat before the lord, and said, who
am i, o lord god, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  17:17 and yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, o god;
for thou hast also spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to
come, and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of high
degree, o lord god.

17:18 what can david speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant?
for thou knowest thy servant.

17:19 o lord, for thy servant's sake, and according to thine own
heart, hast thou done all this greatness, 
 
 ___________________________
 
in making known all these
great things.

17:20 o lord, there is none like thee, neither is there any god beside
thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

17:21 and what one nation in the earth is like thy people israel, whom
god went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of
greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy
people whom thou hast redeemed out of egypt?  17:22 for thy people
israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, lord,
becamest their god.

17:23 therefore now, lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken
concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for
ever, and do as thou hast said.

17:24 let it even be established, that thy na
 
 ___________________________
 
me may be magnified for
ever, saying, the lord of hosts is the god of israel, even a god to
israel: and let the house of david thy servant be established before
thee.

17:25 for thou, o my god, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build
him an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray
before thee.

17:26 and now, lord, thou art god, and hast promised this goodness
unto thy servant: 17:27 now therefore let it please thee to bless the
house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou
blessest, o lord, and it shall be blessed for ever.

18:1 now after this it came to pass, that david smote the philistines,
and subdued them, and took gath and her towns out of the hand of the
philistines.

18:2 and he smote moab; and the moabites became david's servants, and
brought gifts.

18:3 and david smote ha
 
 ___________________________
 
t of all the choice of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians.

19:11 and the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of abishai
his brother, and they set themselves in array against the children of
ammon.

19:12 and he said, if the syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then i will help thee.

19:13 be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for
our people, and for the cities of our god: and let the lord do that
which is good in his sight.

19:14 so joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the
syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.

19:15 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
they likewise fled before abishai his brother, and entered into the
city. then joab came to jerusalem.

19:16 and when the syrians saw that they were put to the worse before
israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the syrians that were
b
 
 ___________________________
 
l?  21:4 nevertheless the king's
word prevailed against joab. wherefore joab departed, and went
throughout all israel, and came to jerusalem.

21:5 and joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto david. and
all they of israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand
men that drew sword: and judah was four hundred threescore and ten
thousand men that drew sword.

21:6 but levi and benjamin counted he not among them: for the king's
word was abominable to joab.

21:7 and god was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote
israel.

21:8 and david said unto god, i have sinned greatly, because i have
done this thing: but now, i beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy
servant; for i have done very foolishly.

21:9 and the lord spake unto gad, david's seer, saying, 21:10 go and
tell david, saying, thus saith the lord, i offer thee three things:
choose thee one of them, that i may do it unto thee.

21:11 so gad came to david, and said unto him, thus saith
 
 ___________________________
 
e sword of the lord, even the
pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the lord destroying
throughout all the coasts of israel. now therefore advise thyself what
word i shall bring again to him that sent me.

21:13 and david said unto gad, i am in a great strait: let me fall now
into the hand of the lord; for very great are his mercies: but let me
not fall into the hand of man.

21:14 so the lord sent pestilence upon israel: and there fell of
israel seventy thousand men.

21:15 and god sent an angel unto jerusalem to destroy it: and as he
was destroying, the lord beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed, it is enough, stay now thine hand.
and the angel of the lord stood by the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

21:16 and david lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the lord
stand between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his
hand stretched out over jerusalem. then david and the elders of
israel, who were clot
 
 ___________________________
 
hed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.

21:17 and david said unto god, is it not i that commanded the people
to be numbered? even i it is that have sinned and done evil indeed;
but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, i pray
thee, o lord my god, be on me, and on my father's house; but not on
thy people, that they should be plagued.

21:18 then the angel of the lord commanded gad to say to david, that
david should go up, and set up an altar unto the lord in the
threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite.

21:19 and david went up at the saying of gad, which he spake in the
name of the lord.

21:20 and ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with
him hid themselves. now ornan was threshing wheat.

21:21 and as davi
 
 ___________________________
 
 fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

21:27 and the lord commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again
into the sheath thereof.

21:28 at that time when david saw that the lord had answered him in
the threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

21:29 for the tabernacle of the lord, which moses made in the
wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season
in the high place at gibeon.

21:30 but david could not go before it to enquire of god: for he was
afraid because of the sword of the angel of the lord.

22:1 then david said, this is the house of the lord god, and this is
the altar of the burnt offering for israel.

22:2 and david commanded to gather together the strangers that were in
the land of israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build
the house of god.

22:3 and david prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors
of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without
weight; 22
 
 ___________________________
 
:4 also cedar trees in abundance: for the zidonians and they
of tyre brought much cedar wood to david.

22:5 and david said, solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
that is to be builded for the lord must be exceeding magnifical, of
fame and of glory throughout all countries: i will therefore now make
preparation for it. so david prepared abundantly before his death.

22:6 then he called for solomon his son, and charged him to build an
house for the lord god of israel.

22:7 and david said to solomon, my son, as for me, it was in my mind
to build an house unto the name of the lord my god: 22:8 but the word
of the lord came to me, saying, thou hast shed blood abundantly, and
hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name,
because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

22:9 behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest;
and i will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his
nam
 
 ___________________________
 
e shall be solomon, and i will give peace and quietness unto israel
in his days.

22:10 he shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and
i will be his father; and i will establish the throne of his kingdom
over israel for ever.

22:11 now, my son, the lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build
the house of the lord thy god, as he hath said of thee.

22:12 only the lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charge concerning israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the lord
thy god.

22:13 then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the
statutes and judgments which the lord charged moses with concerning
israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.

22:14 now, behold, in my trouble i have prepared for the house of the
lord an hundred thousand talents of gold,
 
 ___________________________
 
n
abundance: timber also and stone have i prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every
manner of work.

22:16 of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is
no number. arise therefore, and be doing, and the lord be with thee.

22:17 david also commanded all the princes of israel to help solomon
his son, saying, 22:18 is not the lord your god with you? and hath he
not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of
the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the lord, and
before his people.

22:19 now set your heart and your soul to seek the lord your god;
arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the lord god, to bring
the ark of the covenant of the lord, and the holy vessels of god, into
the house that is to be built to the name of the lord.

23:1 so when david was old and full of days
 
 ___________________________
 
th was the chief, and zizah the second: but jeush and
beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning,
according to their father's house.

23:12 the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel, four.

23:13 the sons of amram; aaron and moses: and aaron was separated,
that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for
ever, to burn incense before the lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name for ever.

23:14 now concerning moses the man of god, his sons were named of the
tribe of levi.

23:15 the sons of moses were, gershom, and eliezer.

23:16 of the sons of gershom, shebuel was the chief.

23:17 and the sons of eliezer were, rehabiah the chief. and eliezer
had none other sons; but the sons of rehabiah were very many.

23:18 of the sons of izhar; shelomith the chief.

23:19 of the sons of hebron; jeriah the first, amariah the second,
jahaziel the third, and jekameam the fourth.

23:20 of the sons of uzziel; micah the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of mahli;
eleazar, and kish.

23:22 and eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their
brethren the sons of kish took them.

23:23 the sons of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jeremoth, three.

23:24 these were the sons of levi after the house of their fathers;
even the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names
by their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the
lord, from the age of twenty years and upward.

23:25 for david said, the lord god of israel hath given rest unto his
people, that they may dwell in jerusalem for ever: 23:26 and also unto
the levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels
of it for the service thereof.

23:27 for by the last words of david the levites were numbered from
twenty years old and above: 23:28 because their office was to wait on
the sons of aaron for the service of the house of the lord, in the
courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things,
and the
 
 ___________________________
 
 work of the service of the house of god; 23:29 both for the
shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the
unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that
which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size; 23:30 and to
stand every morning to thank and praise the lord, and likewise at
even: 23:31 and to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the lord in the
sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number,
according to the order commanded unto them, continually before the
lord
 
 ___________________________
 
ahimelech of the sons of ithamar, according to their offices in
their service.

24:4 and there were more chief men found of the sons of eleazar than
of the sons of ithamar, and thus were they divided. among the sons of
eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers,
and eight among the sons of ithamar according to the house of their
fathers.

24:5 thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the
governors of the sanctuary, and governors of the house of god, were of
the sons of eleazar, and of the sons of ithamar.

24:6 and shemaiah the son of nethaneel the scribe, one of the levites,
wrote them before the king, and the princes, and zadok the priest, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of
the priests and levites: one principal household being taken for
eleazar, and one taken for ithamar.

24:7 now the first lot came forth to jehoiarib, the second to jedaiah,
24:8 the third to harim, the fourth to seorim
 
 ___________________________
 
shebeab, 24:14 the fifteenth
to bilgah, the sixteenth to immer, 24:15 the seventeenth to hezir, the
eighteenth to aphses, 24:16 the nineteenth to pethahiah, the twentieth
to jehezekel, 24:17 the one and twentieth to jachin, the two and
twentieth to gamul, 24:18 the three and twentieth to delaiah, the four
and twentieth to maaziah.

24:19 these were the orderings of them in their service to come into
the house of the lord, according to their manner, under aaron their
father, as the lord god of israel had commanded him.

24:20 and the rest of the sons of levi were these: of the sons of
amram; shubael: of the sons of shubael; jehdeiah.

24:21 concerning rehabiah: of the sons of rehabiah, the first was
isshiah.

24:22 of the izharites; shelomoth: of the sons of shelomoth; jahath.

24:23 and the sons of hebron; jeriah the first, amariah the second,
jahaziel the third, jekameam the fourth.

24:24 of the sons of uzziel; michah: of the sons of michah; shamir.

24:25 the br
 
 ___________________________
 
er of the king.

25:3 of jeduthun: the sons of jeduthun; gedaliah, and zeri, and
jeshaiah, hashabiah, and mattithiah, six, under the hands of their
father jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to
praise the lord.

25:4 of heman: the sons of heman: bukkiah, mattaniah, uzziel, shebuel,
and jerimoth, hananiah, hanani, eliathah, giddalti, and romamtiezer,
joshbekashah, mallothi, hothir, and mahazioth: 25:5 all these were the
sons of heman the king's seer in the words of god, to lift up the
horn. and god gave to heman fourteen sons and three daughters.

25:6 all these were under the hands of their father for song in the
house of the lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the
service of the house of god, according to the king's order to asaph,
jeduthun, and heman.

25:7 so the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed
in the songs of the lord, even all that were cunning, was two hundred
fourscore and eight.

25:8 and they cast lots
 
 ___________________________
 
ers: of the korhites was
meshelemiah the son of kore, of the sons of asaph.

26:2 and the sons of meshelemiah were, zechariah the firstborn,
jediael the second, zebadiah the third, jathniel the fourth, 26:3 elam
the fifth, jehohanan the sixth, elioenai the seventh.

26:4 moreover the sons of obededom were, shemaiah the firstborn,
jehozabad the second, joah the third, and sacar the fourth, and
nethaneel the fifth.

26:5 ammiel the sixth, issachar the seventh, peulthai the eighth: for
god blessed him.

26:6 also unto shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout
the house of their father: for they were mighty men of valour.

26:7 the sons of shemaiah; othni, and rephael, and obed, elzabad,
whose brethren were strong men, elihu, and semachiah.

26:8 all these of the sons of obededom: they and their sons and their
brethren, able men for strength for the service, were threescore and
two of obededom.

26:9 and meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eight
 
 ___________________________
 

26:16 to shuppim and hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate
shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward.

26:17 eastward were six levites, northward four a day, southward four
a day, and toward asuppim two and two.

26:18 at parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at parbar.

26:19 these are the divisions of the porters among the sons of kore,
and among the sons of merari.

26:20 and of the levites, ahijah was over the treasures of the house
of god, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.

26:21 as concerning the sons of laadan; the sons of the gershonite
laadan, chief fathers, even of laadan the gershonite, were jehieli.

26:22 the sons of jehieli; zetham, and joel his brother, which were
over the treasures of the house of the lord.

26:23 of the amramites, and the izharites, the hebronites, and the
uzzielites: 26:24 and shebuel the son of gershom, the son of moses,
was ruler of the treasures.

26:25 and his brethren 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the king.

26:31 among the hebronites was jerijah the chief, even among the
hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. in the
fortieth year of the reign of david they were sought for, and there
were found among them mighty men of valour at jazer of gilead.

26:32 and his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven
hundred chief fathers, whom king david made rulers over the
reubenites, the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh, for every
matter pertaining to god, and affairs of the king.

27:1 now the children of israel after their number, to wit, the chief
fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers
that served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and
went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of
every course were twenty and four thousand.

27:2 over the first course for the first month was jashobeam the son
of zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:3 of the c
 
 ___________________________
 
to the king
by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the
hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of
the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men,
and with all the valiant men, unto jerusalem.

28:2 then david the king stood up upon his feet, and said, hear me, my
brethren, and my people: as for me, i had in mine heart to build an
house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the lord, and for the
footstool of our god, and had made ready for the building: 28:3 but
god said unto me, thou shalt not build an house for my name, because
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 howbeit the lord god of israel chose me before all the house of
my father to be king over israel for ever: for he hath chosen judah to
be the ruler; and of the house of judah, the house of my father; and
among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all
israel: 28:5 and of all my sons, (for the lord hat
 
 ___________________________
 
en me many
sons,) he hath chosen solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the lord over israel.

28:6 and he said unto me, solomon thy son, he shall build my house and
my courts: for i have chosen him to be my son, and i will be his
father.

28:7 moreover i will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant
to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

28:8 now therefore in the sight of all israel the congregation of the
lord, and in the audience of our god, keep and seek for all the
commandments of the lord your god: that ye may possess this good land,
and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.

28:9 and thou, solomon my son, know thou the god of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the lord
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:
 
 ___________________________
 
ow; for the lord hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 then david gave to solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper
chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place
of the mercy seat, 28:12 and the pattern of all that he had by the
spirit, of the courts of the house of the lord, and of all the
chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of god, and of
the treasuries of the dedicated things: 28:13 also for the courses of
the priests and the levites, and for all the work of the service of
the house of the lord, and for all the vessels of service in the house
of the lord.

28:14 he gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for all
instruments of all manner of service; silver also for all instruments
of silver by weight, for all instruments of every kind of service:
28:15 even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
silver by weight for every bason of silver: 28:18 and for the altar of
incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the
ark of the covenant of the lord.

28:19 all this, said david, the lord made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

28:20 and david said to solomon his son, be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the lord god, even
my god, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of
the lord.

28:21 and, behold, the courses of the priests and the levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of god: and
there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing
skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy commandment.

29:1 furthermor
 
 ___________________________
 
e david the king said unto all the congregation,
solomon my son, whom alone god hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the lord
god.

29:2 now i have prepared with all my might for the house of my god the
gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of
iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious
stones, and marble stones in abundance.

29:3 moreover, because i have set my affection to the house of my god,
i have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which i have given
to the house of my god, over and 
 
 ___________________________
 
of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the
houses withal: 29:5 the gold for things of gold, and the silver for
things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands
of artificers. and who then is willing to consecrate his service this
day unto the lord?  29:6 then the chief of the fathers and princes of
the tribes of israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds,
with the rulers of the king's work, offered willingly, 29:7 and gave
for the service of the house of god of gold five thousand talents and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass
eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.

29:8 and they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
treasure of the house of the lord, by the hand of jehiel the
gershonite.

29:9 then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly,
because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the lord: and
david the king also rejoiced with great joy
 
 ___________________________
 
.

29:10 wherefore david blessed the lord before all the congregation:
and david said, blessed be thou, lord god of israel our father, for
ever and ever.

29:11 thine, o lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in
the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, o lord, and thou art exalted
as head above all.

29:12 both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all;
and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all.

29:13 now therefore, our god, we th
 
 ___________________________
 
ank thee, and praise thy glorious
name.

29:14 but who am i, and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and
of thine own have we given thee.

29:15 for we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all
our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 o lord our god, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thine own.

29:17 i know also, my god, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. as for me, in the uprightness of mine heart i
have willingly offered all these things: and now have i seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 o lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the i
 
 ___________________________
 
magination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which i have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congregation blessed the lord god of their fathers, and
bowed down their heads, and worshipped the lord, and the king.

29:21 and they sacrificed sacrifices unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings unto the lord, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all israel: 29:22 and did
eat and drink before the lord on that day with great gladness. and
they made solomon the son of david king the second time, and a
 
 ___________________________
 

and solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 now the acts of david the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of samuel the seer, and in the book of nathan the
prophet, and in the book of gad the seer, 29:30 with all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.




the second book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the lord his god was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 so solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of god, which moses the servant of the lord had made in
the wilderness.

1:4 but the ark of god had david brought up from kirjathj
 
 ___________________________
 
earim to the
place which david had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at jerusalem.

1:5 moreover the brasen altar, that bezaleel the son of uri, the son
of hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the lord: and
solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 and solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the lord,
which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a
thousand burnt offerings upon it.

1:7 in that night did god appear unto solomon, and said unto him, ask
what i shall give thee.

1:8 and solomon said unto god, thou hast shewed great mercy unto david
my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

1:9 now, o lord god, let thy promise unto david my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of
the earth in multitude.

1:10 give me now wisdom and knowledge, that i may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
gre
 
 ___________________________
 
at?  1:11 and god said to solomon, because this was in thine heart,
and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom
and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom
i have made thee king: 1:12 wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee;
and i will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of
the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the li
 
 ___________________________
 
 build an house for the name of the lord,
and an house for his kingdom.

2:2 and solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

2:3 and solomon sent to huram the king of tyre, saying, as thou didst
deal with david my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 behold, i build an house to the name of the lord my god, to
dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the
continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening,
on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the
lord our god. this is an ordinance for ever to israel.

2:5 and the house which i build is great: for great is our god above
all gods.

2:6 but who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am i then, that i should
build
 
 ___________________________
 
 house which i am about to
build shall be wonderful great.

2:10 and, behold, i will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil.

2:11 then huram the king of tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
solomon, because the lord hath loved his people, he hath made thee
king over them.

2:12 huram said moreover, blessed be the lord god of israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to david the king a wise son, endued
with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
lord, and an house for his kingdom.

2:13 and now i have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
huram my father's, 2:14 the son of a woman of the daughters of dan,
and his father was a man of tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, 
 
 ___________________________
 
mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

3:1 then solomon began to build the house of the lord at jerusalem in
mount moriah, where the lord appeared unto david his father, in the
place that david had prepared in the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

3:2 and he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
the fourth year of his reign.

3:3 now these are the things wherein solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of god. the length by cubits after the first
measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

3:4 and the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the
height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

3:5 and the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid
with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.

3:6 and he garnished the house with precious sto
 
 ___________________________
 
, and placed them in the temple, five on
the right side, and five on the left. and he made an hundred basons of
gold.

4:9 furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

4:10 and he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over
against the south.

4:11 and huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. and
huram finished the work that he was to make for king solomon for the
house of god; 4:12 to wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the
top of the pillars; 4:13 and four hundred pomegranates on the two
wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two
pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.

4:14 he made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases; 4:15 one
sea, and twelve oxen under it.

4:16 the pot
 
 ___________________________
 
s also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
instruments, did huram his father make to king solomon for the house
of the lord of bright brass.

4:17 in the plain of jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between succoth and zeredathah.

4:18 thus solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the
weight of the brass could not be found out.

4:19 and solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of god,
the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;
4:20 moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner
doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of
the temple, wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e of gold.

5:1 thus all the work that solomon made for the house of the lord was
finished: and solomon brought in all the things that david his father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasures of the house of god.

5:2 then solomon assembled the elders of israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of israel, unto
jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of the
city of david, which is zion.

5:3 wherefore all the men of israel assembled themselves unto the king
in the feast which was in the seventh month.

5:4 and all the elders of israel came; and the levites took up the
ark.

5:5 and they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of
 
 ___________________________
 
en
to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in praising and thanking the lord; and when they lifted up
their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick,
and praised the lord, saying, for he is good; for his mercy endureth
for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house
of the lord; 5:14 so that the priests could not stand to minister by
reason of the cloud: for the glory of the lord had filled the house of
god.

6:1 then said solomon, the lord hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 but i have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for
thy dwelling for ever.

6:3 and the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation
of israel: and all the congregation of israel stood.

6:4 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, who hath with his
hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father david,
saying, 6:5 since the day that i brought
 
 ___________________________
 
 forth my people out of the
land of egypt i chose no city among all the tribes of israel to build
an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose i any man to
be a ruler over my people israel: 6:6 but i have chosen jerusalem,
that my name might be there; and have chosen david to be over my
people israel.

6:7 now it was in the heart of david my father to build an house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

6:8 but the lord said to david my father, forasmuch as it was in thine
heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in
thine heart: 6:9 notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but
thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the
house for my name.

6:10 the lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken:
for i am risen up in the room of david my father, and am set on the
throne of israel, as the lord promised, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd have built the house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

6:11 and in it have i put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
lord, that he made with the children of israel.

6:12 and he stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of all
the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands: 6:13 for
solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five
cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of
the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
before all the congregation o
 
 ___________________________
 
f israel, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven.

6:14 and said, o lord god of israel, there is no god like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 6:15
thou which hast kept with thy servant david my father that which thou
hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it
with thine hand, as it is this day.

6:16 now therefore, o lord god of israel, keep with thy servant david
my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, there shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of israel; yet so
that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou
hast walked before me.

6:17 now then, o lord god of israel, let thy word be verified, which
thou hast spoken unto thy servant david.

6:18 but will god in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot c
 
 ___________________________
 
ontain thee; how much less
this house which i have built!  6:19 have respect therefore to the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, o lord my god, to
hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before
thee: 6:20 that thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night,
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name
there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward
this place.

6:21 hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of
thy people israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou
from thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou h
 
 ___________________________
 
to thee with all their heart and with
all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have
carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest
unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and
toward the house which i have built for thy name: 6:39 then hear thou
from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their
supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which
have sinned against thee.

6:40 now, my god, let, i beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

6:41 now therefore arise, o lord god, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, o lord god, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

6:42 o lord god, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
the mercies of david thy servant.

7:1 now when solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from he
 
 ___________________________
 
israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glory of the lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and
praised the lord, saying, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for
ever.

7:4 then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
lord.

7:5 and king solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all
the people dedicated the house of god.

7:6 and the priests waited on their offices: the levites also with
instruments of musick of the lord, which david the king had made to
praise the lord, because his mercy endureth for ever, when david
praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
them, and all israel stood.

7:7 moreover solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before
the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar
 
 ___________________________
 
rpetually.

7:17 and as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as david thy father
walked, and do according to all that i have commanded thee, and shalt
observe my statutes and my judgments; 7:18 then will i stablish the
throne of thy kingdom, according as i have covenanted with david thy
father, saying, there shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in israel.

7:19 but if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments,
which i have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and
worship them; 7:20 then will i pluck them up by the roots out of my
land which i have given them; and this house, which i have sanctified
for my name, will i cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a
proverb and a byword among all nations.

7:21 and this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every
one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, why hath the lord done
thus unto this land, and unto this house?  7:22 and it shall be
answered, because they forsook the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord god of their fathers, which
brought them forth out of the land of egypt, and laid hold on other
gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought
all this evil upon them.

8:1 and it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein solomon
had built the house of the lord, and his own house, 8:2 that the
cities which huram had restored to solomon, solomon built them, and
caused the children of israel to dwell there.

8:3 and solomon went to hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.

8:4 and he built tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
which he built 
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 and he appointed, according to the order of david his father, the
courses of the priests to their service, and the levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had david the man of god commanded.

8:15 and they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
priests and levites concerning any matter, or concerning the
treasures.

8:16 now all the work of solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the lord, and until it was finished. so the
house of the lord was perfected.

8:17 then went solomon to eziongeber, and to eloth, at the sea side in
the land of edom.

8:18 and huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and
servan
 
 ___________________________
 
e was no more
spirit in her.

9:5 and she said to the king, it was a true report which i heard in
mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: 9:6 howbeit i believed
not their words, until i came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold,
the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou
exceedest the fame that i heard.

9:7 happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

9:8 blessed be the lord thy god, which delighted in thee to set thee
on his throne, to be king for the lord thy god: because thy god loved
israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over
them, to do judgment and justice.

9:9 and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any
such spice as the queen of sheba gave king solomon.

9:10 and the servants also of huram, and the servants of solomon,
which brought gold f
 
 ___________________________
 
f the house of the forest of lebanon were of pure
gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the
days of solomon.

9:21 for the king's ships went to tarshish with the servants of huram:
every three years once came the ships of tarshish bringing gold, and
silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

9:22 and king solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and
wisdom.

9:23 and all the kings of the earth sought the presence of solomon, to
hear his wisdom, that god had put in his heart.

9:24 and they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules,
a rate year by year.

9:25 and solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at jerusalem.

9:26 and he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the
land of the philistines, and to the border of egypt.

9:27 and th
 
 ___________________________
 
eroboam and all the people came to rehoboam on the third
day, as the king bade, saying, come again to me on the third day.

10:13 and the king answered them roughly; and king rehoboam forsook
the counsel of the old men, 10:14 and answered them after the advice
of the young men, saying, my father made your yoke heavy, but i will
add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but i will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:15 so the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of
god, that the lord might perform his word, which he spake by the hand
of ahijah the shilonite to jeroboam the son of nebat.

10:16 and when all israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them, the people answered the king, saying, what portion have we in
david?  and we have none inheritance in the son of jesse: every man to
your tents, o israel: and now, david, see to thine own house. so all
israel went to their tents.

10:17 but as for the children of israel that dwelt in the cities 
 
 ___________________________
 
rael stoned him with stones, that he died. but king
rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

10:19 and israel rebelled against the house of david unto this day.

11:1 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he gathered of the house
of judah and benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to rehoboam.

11:2 but the word of the lord came to shemaiah the man of god, saying,
11:3 speak unto rehoboam the son of solomon, king of judah, and to all
israel in judah and benjamin, saying, 11:4 thus saith the lord, ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to
his house: for this thing is done of me. and they obeyed the words of
the lord, and returned from going against jeroboam.

11:5 and rehoboam dwelt in jerusalem, and built cities for defence in
judah.

11:6 he built even bethlehem, and etam, and tekoa, 11:7 and bethzur,
a
 
 ___________________________
 
 priests and the levites that were in all israel resorted
to him out of all their coasts.

11:14 for the levites left their suburbs and their possession, and
came to judah and jerusalem: for jeroboam and his sons had cast them
off from executing the priest's office unto the lord: 11:15 and he
ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for
the calves which he had made.

11:16 and after them out of all the tribes of israel such as set their
hearts to seek the lord god of israel came to jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the lord god of their fathers.

11:17 so they strengthened the kingdom of judah, and made rehoboam the
son of solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of david and solomon.

11:18 and rehoboam took him mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son
of david to wife, and abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse;
11:19 which bare him children; jeush, and shamariah, and zaham.

11:20 and after her he took maachah
 
 ___________________________
 
s
michaiah the daughter of uriel of gibeah. and there was war between
abijah and jeroboam.

13:3 and abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of
war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: jeroboam also set the
battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
being mighty men of valour.

13:4 and abijah stood up upon mount zemaraim, which is in mount
ephraim, and said, hear me, thou jeroboam, and all israel; 13:5 ought
ye not to know that the lord god of israel gave the kingdom over
israel to david for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?  13:6 yet jeroboam the son of nebat, the servant of solomon the
son of david, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

13:7 and there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of belial,
and have strengthened themselves against rehoboam the son of solomon,
when rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 and now ye think to withstand th
 
 ___________________________
 
e kingdom of the lord in the hand
of the sons of david; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 have ye not cast out the priests of the lord, the sons of aaron,
and the levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the
nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself
with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them
that are no gods.

13:10 but as for us, the lord is our god, and we have not forsaken
him; and the priests, which minister unto the lord, are the sons of
aaron, and the levites wait upon their business: 13:11 and they burn
unto the lord every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and
sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure
table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn
every evening: for we keep the charge of the lord our god; but ye have
forsaken him
 
 ___________________________
 
.

13:12 and, behold, god himself is with us for our captain, and his
priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. o children of
israel, fight ye not against the lord god of your fathers; for ye
shall not prosper.

13:13 but jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so
they were before judah, and the ambushment was behind them.

13:14 and when judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and
behind: and they cried unto the lord, and the priests sounded with the
trumpets.

13:15 then the men of judah gave a shout: and as the men of judah
shouted, it came to pass, that god smote jeroboam and all israel
before abijah and judah.

13:
 
 ___________________________
 
16 and the children of israel fled before judah: and god delivered
them into their hand.

13:17 and abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so
there fell down slain of israel five hundred thousand chosen men.

13:18 thus the children of israel were brought under at that time, and
the children of judah prevailed, because they relied upon the lord god
of their fathers.

13:19 and abijah pursued after jeroboam, and took cities from him,
bethel with the towns thereof, and jeshanah with the towns thereof,
and ephraim with the towns thereof.

13:20 neither did jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
abijah: and the lord struck him, and he died.

13:21 but abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

13:22 and the rest of the acts of abijah, and his ways, and his
sayi
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs, are written in the story of the prophet iddo.

14:1 so abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of david: and asa his son reigned in his stead. in his days the land
was quiet ten years.

14:2 and asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the lord
his god: 14:3 for he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
and commanded judah to seek the lord god of their fathers, and to do
the law and the commandment.

14:5 also he took away out of all the cities of judah the high places
and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.

14:6 and he built fenced cities in judah: for the land had rest, and
he had no war in those years; because the lord had given him rest.

14:7 therefore he said unto judah, let us build these cities, and make
about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
before us; because we have s
 
 ___________________________
 
ought the lord our god, we have sought
him, and he hath given us rest on every side. so they built and
prospered.

14:8 and asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of
judah three hundred thousand; and out of benjamin, that bare shields
and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were
mighty men of valour.

14:9 and there came out against them zerah the ethiopian with an host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto
mareshah.

14:10 then asa went 
 
 ___________________________
 
out against him, and they set the battle in array
in the valley of zephathah at mareshah.

14:11 and asa cried unto the lord his god, and said, lord, it is
nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have
no power: help us, o lord our god; for we rest on thee, and in thy
name we go against this multitude. o lord, thou art our god; let no
man prevail against thee.

14:12 so the lord smote the ethiopians before asa, and before judah;
and the ethiopians fled.

14:13 and asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto
gerar: and the ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; for they were destroyed before the lord, and before his
host; and they carried away very much spoil.

14:14 and they smote all the cities round about gerar; for the fear of
the lord came upon them: and they s
 
 ___________________________
 
poiled all the cities; for there
was exceeding much spoil in them.

14:15 they smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
camels in abundance, and returned to jerusalem.

15:1 and the spirit of god came upon azariah the son of oded: 15:2 and
he went out to meet asa, and said unto him, hear ye me, asa, and all
judah and benjamin; the lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.

15:3 now for a long season israel hath been without the true god, and
without a teaching priest, and without law.

15:4 but when they in their trouble did turn unto the lord god of
israel, and sought him, he was found of t
 
 ___________________________
 
hem.

15:5 and in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants
of the countries.

15:6 and nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for god did
vex them with all adversity.

15:7 be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your
work shall be rewarded.

15:8 and when asa heard these words, and the prophecy of oded the
prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all
the land of judah and benjamin, and out of the cities which he had
taken from mount ephraim, and renewed the altar of the lord, that was
before the porch of the lord.

15:9 and he gathered all judah and benjamin, and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
strangers with
them out of ephraim and manasseh, and out of simeon: for they fell to
him out of israel in abundance, when they saw that the lord his god
was with him.

15:10 so they gathered themselves together at jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of asa.

15:11 and they offered unto the lord the same time, of the spoil which
they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

15:12 and they entered into a covenant to seek the lord god of their
fathers with all their heart and with all their soul; 15:13 that
whosoever would not seek the lord god of israel should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

15:14 and they sware unto the lord with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

15:15 and all judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all
their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found
of them: and the lord gave them rest round ab
 
 ___________________________
 
out.

15:16 and also concerning maachah the mother of asa the king, he
removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove:
and asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
kidron.

15:17 but the high places were not taken away out of israel:
nevertheless the heart of asa was perfect all his days.

15:18 and he brought into the house of god the things that his father
had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold,
and vessels.

15:19 and there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
the reign of asa.

16:1 in the six and thirtieth year of the reign of asa baasha king of
israel came up against judah, and built ramah, to the intent that he
might let none go out or come in to asa king of judah.

16:2 then asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
house of the lord and of t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and all the store cities of naphtali.

16:5 and it came to pass, when baasha heard it, that he left off
building of ramah, and let his work cease.

16:6 then asa the king took all judah; and they carried away the
stones of ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith baasha was
building; and he built therewith geba and mizpah.

16:7 and at that time hanani the seer came to asa king of judah, and
said unto him, because thou hast relied on the king of syria, and not
relied on the lord thy god, therefore is the host of the king of syria
escaped out of thine hand.

16:8 were not the ethiopians and the lubims a huge host, with very
many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the lord,
he delivered them into thine hand.

16:9 for the eyes of the lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from
henceforth thou shalt have wars.

16:10 t
 
 ___________________________
 
epared by the
apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.

17:1 and jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against israel.

17:2 and he placed forces in all the fenced cities of judah, and set
garrisons in the land of judah, and in the cities of ephraim, which
asa his father had taken.

17:3 and the lord was with jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his father david, and sought not unto baalim; 17:4 but sought
to the lord god of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not
after the doings of israel.

17:5 therefore the lord stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all
judah brought to jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
abundance.

17:6 and his heart was lifted up in the ways of the lord: moreover he
took away the high places and groves out of judah.

17:7 also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even
to benhail, and to obadiah, and to zechariah, and to nethanee
 
 ___________________________
 
b king of israel said unto jehoshaphat king of judah, wilt
thou go with me to ramothgilead? and he answered him, i am as thou
art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.

18:4 and jehoshaphat said unto the king of israel, enquire, i pray
thee, at the word of the lord to day.

18:5 therefore the king of israel gathered together of prophets four
hundred men, and said unto them, shall we go to ramothgilead to
battle, or shall i forbear? and they said, go up; for god will deliver
it into the king's hand.

18:6 but jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the lord
besides, that we might enquire of him?  18:7 and the king of israel
said unto jehoshaphat, there is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of
the lord: but i hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but
always evil: the same is micaiah the son of imla. and jehoshaphat
said, let not the king say so.

18:8 and the king of israel called for one of his officers, and said,
fetch q
 
 ___________________________
 
th these thou shalt push syria until
they be consumed.

18:11 and all the prophets prophesied so, saying, go up to
ramothgilead, and prosper: for the lord shall deliver it into the hand
of the king.

18:12 and the messenger that went to call micaiah spake to him,
saying, behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king
with one assent; let thy word therefore, i pray thee, be like one of
their's, and speak thou good.

18:13 and micaiah said, as the lord liveth, even what my god saith,
that will i speak.

18:14 and when he was come to the king, the king said unto him,
micaiah, shall we go to ramothgilead to battle, or shall i forbear?
and he said, go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into
your hand.

18:15 and the king said to him, how many times shall i adjure thee
that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the lord?
18:16 then he said, i did see all israel scattered upon the mountains,
as sheep that have no shepherd: and the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
; but put thou on thy robes. so the
king of israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.

18:30 now the king of syria had commanded the captains of the chariots
that were with him, saying, fight ye not with small or great, save
only with the king of israel.

18:31 and it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
jehoshaphat, that they said, it is the king of israel. therefore they
compassed about him to fight: but jehoshaphat cried out, and the lord
helped him; and god moved them to depart from him.

18:32 for it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots
perceived that it was not the king of israel, they turned back again
from pursuing him.

18:33 and a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his
chariot man, turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the
host; for i am wounded.

18:34 and the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of israel
s
 
 ___________________________
 
tayed himself up in his chariot against the syrians until the even:
and about the time of the sun going down he died.

19:1 and jehoshaphat the king of judah returned to his house in peace
to jerusalem.

19:2 and jehu the son of hanani the seer went out to meet him, and
said to king jehoshaphat, shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the
lord.

19:3 nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou
hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine
heart to seek god.

19:4 and jehoshaphat dwelt at jerusalem: and he went out again through
the people from beersheba to mount ephraim, and brought them back unto
the lord god of their fathers.

19:5 and he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities 
 
 ___________________________
 
of
judah, city by city, 19:6 and said to the judges, take heed what ye
do: for ye judge not for man, but for the lord, who is with you in the
judgment.

19:7 wherefore now let the fear of the lord be upon you; take heed and
do it: for there is no iniquity with the lord our god, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts.

19:8 moreover in jerusalem did jehoshaphat set of the levites, and of
the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of israel, for the
judgment of the lord, and for controversies, when they returned to
jerusalem.

19:9 and he charged them, saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of the
lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

19:10 and what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that
dwell in your cities, between blood and bloo
 
 ___________________________
 
nst thee from beyond the sea on this side syria;
and, behold, they be in hazazontamar, which is engedi.

20:3 and jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the lord, and
proclaimed a fast throughout all judah.

20:4 and judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the lord:
even out of all the cities of judah they came to seek the lord.

20:5 and jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of judah and jerusalem,
in the house of the lord, before the new court, 20:6 and said, o lord
god of our fathers, art not thou god in heaven? and rulest not thou
over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not
power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?  20:7 art not
thou our god, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
thy people israel, and gavest it to the seed of abraham thy friend for
ever?  20:8 and they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thy name, saying, 20:9 if, when evil cometh upon us, as
the sword, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry
unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

20:10 and now, behold, the children of ammon and moab and mount seir,
whom thou wouldest not let israel invade, when they came out of the
land of egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;
20:11 behold, i say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

20:12 o our god, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we
what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

20:13 and all judah stood before the lord, with their little ones,
their wives, and their children.

20:14 then upon jahaziel the son of zechariah, the son of benaiah, the
son of jeiel, the son of mattaniah, a levite of the sons of asaph,
came the spirit of the lord in the midst of the congregation; 20:15
and he said, hearken ye, a
 
 ___________________________
 
ll judah, and ye inhabitants of jerusalem,
and thou king jehoshaphat, thus saith the lord unto you, be not afraid
nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not
yours, but god's.

20:16 to morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the
cliff of ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before
the wilderness of jeruel.

20:17 ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand
ye still, and see the salvation of the lord with you, o judah and
jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them:
for the lord will be with you.

20:18 and jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and
all judah 
 
 ___________________________
 
and the inhabitants of jerusalem fell before the lord,
worshipping the lord.

20:19 and the levites, of the children of the kohathites, and of the
children of the korhites, stood up to praise the lord god of israel
with a loud voice on high.

20:20 and they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the
wilderness of tekoa: and as they went forth, jehoshaphat stood and
said, hear me, o judah, and ye inhabitants of jerusalem; believe in
the lord your god, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets,
so shall ye prosper.

20:21 and when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers
unto the lord, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they
went out before the army, and to say, praise the lord; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

20:22 and when they began to sing and to praise, the lord set
ambushments against the children of ammon, moab, and mount seir, which
were come against judah; and they were smitten.

20:
 
 ___________________________
 
assembled themselves in the valley of
berachah; for there they blessed the lord: therefore the name of the
same place was called, the valley of berachah, unto this day.

20:27 then they returned, every man of judah and jerusalem, and
jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to jerusalem with
joy; for the lord had made them to rejoice over their enemies.

20:28 and they came to jerusalem with psalteries and harps and
trumpets unto the house of the lord.

20:29 and the fear of god was on all the kingdoms of those countries,
when they had heard that the lord fought against the enemies of
israel.

20:30 so the realm of jehoshaphat was quiet: for his god gave him rest
round about.

20:31 and jehoshaphat reigned over judah: he was thirty and five years
old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in
jerusalem.

and his mother's name was azubah the daughter of shilhi.

20:32 and he walked in the way of asa his father, and departed not
from it
 
 ___________________________
 
, doing that which was right in the sight of the lord.

20:33 howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the god of their fathers.

20:34 now the rest of the acts of jehoshaphat, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of jehu the son of hanani, who is
mentioned in the book of the kings of israel.

20:35 and after this did jehoshaphat king of judah join himself with
ahaziah king of israel, who did very wickedly: 20:36 and he joined
himself with him to make ships to go to tarshish: and they made the
ships in eziongaber.

20:37 then eliezer the son of dodavah of mareshah prophesied a
 
 ___________________________
 
o him and to his sons for ever.

21:8 in his days the edomites revolted from under the dominion of
judah, and made themselves a king.

21:9 then jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots
with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the edomites which
compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.

21:10 so the edomites revolted from under the hand of judah unto this
day.

the same time also did libnah revolt from under his hand; because he
had forsaken the lord god of his fathers.

21:11 moreover he made high places in the mountains of judah and
caused the inhabitants of jerusalem to commit fornication, and
compelled judah thereto.

21:12 and there came a writing to him from elijah the prophet, saying,
thus saith the lord god of david thy father, because thou hast not
walked in the ways of jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of asa
king of judah, 21:13 but hast walked in the way of the kings of
israel, and hast made judah and the inhabitants
 
 ___________________________
 
uction.

22:5 he walked also after their counsel, and went with jehoram the son
of ahab king of israel to war against hazael king of syria at
ramothgilead: and the syrians smote joram.

22:6 and he returned to be healed in jezreel because of the wounds
which were given him at ramah, when he fought with hazael king of
syria. and azariah the son of jehoram king of judah went down to see
jehoram the son of ahab at jezreel, because he was sick.

22:7 and the destruction of ahaziah was of god by coming to joram: for
when he was come, he went out with jehoram against jehu the son of
nimshi, whom the lord had anointed to cut off the house of ahab.

22:8 and it came to pass, that, when jehu was executing judgment upon
the house of ahab, and found the princes of judah, and the sons of the
brethren of ahaziah, that ministered to ahaziah, he slew them.

22:9 and he sought ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in
samaria,) and brought him to jehu: and when they had slain h
 
 ___________________________
 
aw that her son was
dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of
judah.

22:11 but jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took joash the son
of ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain,
and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. so jehoshabeath, the
daughter of king jehoram, the wife of jehoiada the priest, (for she
was the sister of ahaziah,) hid him from athaliah, so that she slew
him not.

22:12 and he was with them hid in the house of god six years: and
athaliah reigned over the land.

23:1 and in the seventh year jehoiada strengthened himself, and took
the captains of hundreds, azariah the son of jeroham, and ishmael the
son of jehohanan, and azariah the son of obed, and maaseiah the son of
adaiah, and elishaphat the son of zichri, into covenant with him.

23:2 and they went about in judah, and gathered the levites out of all
the cities of judah, and the chief of the fathers of israel, and they
came to jerusalem.

2
 
 ___________________________
 
3:3 and all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the
house of god. and he said unto them, behold, the king's son shall
reign, as the lord hath said of the sons of david.

23:4 this is the thing that ye shall do; a third part of you entering
on the sabbath, of the priests and of the levites, shall be porters of
the doors; 23:5 and a third part shall be at the king's house; and a
third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be
in the courts of the house of the lord.

23:6 but let none come into the house of the lord, save the prie
 
 ___________________________
 
 be ye with the king when he
cometh in, and when he goeth out.

23:8 so the levites and all judah did according to all things that
jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that
were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the
sabbath: for jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.

23:9 moreover jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of
hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king
david's, which were in the house of god.

23:10 and he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his
hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the
temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

23:11 then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the
crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. and jehoiada and
his sons anointed him, and said, god save the king.

23:12 now when athaliah heard the noise of the people running and
praising the king, she came to
 
 ___________________________
 
mother's name also was zibiah of
beersheba.

24:2 and joash did that which was right in the sight of the lord all
the days of jehoiada the priest.

24:3 and jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and
daughters.

24:4 and it came to pass after this, that joash was minded to repair
the house of the lord.

24:5 and he gathered together the priests and the levites, and said to
them, go out unto the cities of judah, and gather of all israel money
to repair the house of your god from year to year, and see that ye
hasten the matter. howbeit the levites hastened it not.

24:6 and the king called for jehoiada the chief, and said unto him,
why hast thou not required of the levites to bring in out of judah and
out of jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of moses
the servant of the lord, and of the congregation of israel, for the
tabernacle of witness?  24:7 for the sons of athaliah, that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of god; and also all th
 
 ___________________________
 
e dedicated
things of the house of the lord did they bestow upon baalim.

24:8 and at the king's commandment they made a chest, and set it
without at the gate of the house of the lord.

24:9 and they made a proclamation through judah and jerusalem, to
bring in to the lord the collection that moses the servant of god laid
upon israel in the wilderness.

24:10 and all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in,
and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.

24:11 now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought
unto the king's office by the hand of the levites, and when they saw
that there was much money, the king's scribe and the high priest's
officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his
place again. thus they did day by day, and gathered m
 
 ___________________________
 
oney in
abundance.

24:12 and the king and jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the
service of the house of the lord, and hired masons and carpenters to
repair the house of the lord, and also such as wrought iron and brass
to mend the house of the lord.

24:13 so the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and
they set the house of god in his state, and strengthened it.

24:14 and when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the
money before the king and jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the
house of the lord, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and
spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. and they offered burnt
offerings in the house of the lord continually all the days of
jehoiada.

24:15 but jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an
hundred and thirty years old was he when h
 
 ___________________________
 
e died.

24:16 and they buried him in the city of david among the kings,
because he had done good in israel, both toward god, and toward his
house.

24:17 now after the death of jehoiada came the princes of judah, and
made obeisance to the king. then the king hearkened unto them.

24:18 and they left the house of the lord god of their fathers, and
served groves and idols: and wrath came upon judah and jerusalem for
this their trespass.

24:19 yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the lord;
and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.

24:20 and the spirit of god came upon zechariah the son of jehoiada
the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, thus
saith god, why transgress ye the commandments of the lord, that ye
cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken
 
 ___________________________
 
on. and when he died, he
said, the lord look upon it, and require it.

24:23 and it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of
syria came up against him: and they came to judah and jerusalem, and
destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and
sent all the spoil of them unto the king of damascus.

24:24 for the army of the syrians came with a small company of men,
and the lord delivered a very great host into their hand, because they
had forsaken the lord god of their fathers. so they executed judgment
against joash.

24:25 and when they were departed from him, (for they left him in
great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood
of the sons of jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he
died: and they buried him in the city of david, but they buried him
not in the sepulchres of the kings.

24:26 and these are they that conspired against him; zabad the son of
shimeath an ammonitess, and jehozabad the son of s
 
 ___________________________
 
himrith a moabitess.

24:27 now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid
upon him, and the repairing of the house of god, behold, they are
written in the story of the book of the kings. and amaziah his son
reigned in his stead.

25:1 amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. and his mother's name
was jehoaddan of jerusalem.

25:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, but not
with a perfect heart.

25:3 now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him,
that he slew his servants that had killed the kin
 
 ___________________________
 
moreover amaziah gathered judah together, and made them captains
over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of
their fathers, throughout all judah and benjamin: and he numbered them
from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand
choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and
shield.

25:6 he hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of
israel for an hundred talents of silver.

25:7 but there came a man of god to him, saying, o king, let not the
army of israel go with thee; for the lord is not with israel, to wit,
with all the children of ephraim.

25:8 but if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the battle: god shall
make thee fall before the enemy: for god hath power to help, and to
cast down.

25:9 and amaziah said to the man of god, but what shall we do for the
hundred talents which i have given to the army of israel? and the man
of god answered, the lord is able to give thee much more th
 
 ___________________________
 
 judah
carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and
cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in
pieces.

25:13 but the soldiers of the army which amaziah sent back, that they
should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of judah, from
samaria even unto bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and
took much spoil.

25:14 now it came to pass, after that amaziah was come from the
slaughter of the edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of
seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before
them, and burned incense unto them.

25:15 wherefore the anger of the lord was kindled against amaziah, and
he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, why hast thou sought
after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people
out of thine hand?  25:16 and it came to pass, as he talked with him,
that the king said unto him, art thou made of the king's counsel?
forbear; why shou
 
 ___________________________
 
ldest thou be smitten? then the prophet forbare, and
said, i know that god hath determined to destroy thee, because thou
hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.

25:17 then amaziah king of judah took advice, and sent to joash, the
son of jehoahaz, the son of jehu, king of israel, saying, come, let us
see one another in the face.

25:18 and joash king of israel sent to amaziah king of judah, saying,
the thistle that was in lebanon sent to the cedar that was in lebanon,
saying, give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a
wild bea
 
 ___________________________
 
st that was in lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

25:19 thou sayest, lo, thou hast smitten the edomites; and thine heart
lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle
to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and judah with
thee?  25:20 but amaziah would not hear; for it came of god, that he
might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought
after the gods of edom.

25:21 so joash the king of israel went up; and they saw one another in
the face, both he and amaziah king of judah, at bethshemesh, which
belongeth to judah.

25:22 and judah was put to the worse before israel, and they fled
every man to his tent.

25:23 and joash the king of israel took amaziah king of judah, the son
of joash, the son of jehoahaz, at bethshemesh, and brought him to
jerusalem, and brake down the wall of jerusalem from the gate of
ephraim to the corner gat
 
 ___________________________
 
e, four hundred cubits.

25:24 and he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels
that were found in the house of god with obededom, and the treasures
of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to samaria.

25:25 and amaziah the son of joash king of judah lived after the death
of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel fifteen years.

25:26 now the rest of the acts of amaziah, first and last, behold, are
they not written in the book of the kings of judah and israel?  25:27
now after the time that amaziah did turn away from following the lord
they made a conspiracy against him in jerusalem; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ople of judah took uzziah, who was sixteen years
old, and made him king in the room of his father amaziah.

26:2 he built eloth, and restored it to judah, after that the king
slept with his fathers.

26:3 sixteen years old was uzziah when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty and two years in jerusalem. his mother's name also was
jecoliah of jerusalem.

26:4 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that his father amaziah did.

26:5 and he sought god in the days of zechariah, who had understanding
in the visions of god: and as long as he sought the lord, god made him
to prosper.

26:6 and he went forth and warred against the philistines, and brake
down the wall of gath, and the wall of jabneh, and the wall of ashdod,
and built cities about ashdod, and among the philistines.

26:7 and god helped him against the philistines, and against the
arabians that dwelt in gurbaal, and the mehunims.

26:8 and the ammonites gave gifts to uzzi
 
 ___________________________
 
 uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields,
and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast
stones.

26:15 and he made in jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be
on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones
withal.

and his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till
he was strong.

26:16 but when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction: for he transgressed against the lord his god, and went
into the temple of the lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense.

26:17 and azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore
priests of the lord, that were valiant men: 26:18 and they withstood
uzziah the king, and said unto him, it appertaineth not unto thee,
uzziah, to burn incense unto the lord, but to the priests the sons of
aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary;
for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour
 
 ___________________________
 
 from
the lord god.

26:19 then uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn
incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even
rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the lord,
from beside the incense altar.

26:20 and azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon
him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him
out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the lord
had smitten him.

26:21 and uzziah the kin
 
 ___________________________
 
 moreover he built cities in the mountains of judah, and in the
forests he built castles and towers.

27:5 he fought also with the king of the ammonites, and prevailed
against them. and the children of ammon gave him the same year an
hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten
thousand of barley. so much did the children of ammon pay unto him,
both the second year, and the third.

27:6 so jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the
lord his god.

27:7 now the rest of the acts of jotham, and all his wars, and his
ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of israel and
judah.

27:8 he was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
reigned sixteen years in jerusalem.

27:9 and jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city of david: and ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

28:1 ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in jerusalem: but he did not that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 right in the
sight of the lord, like david his father: 28:2 for he walked in the
ways of the kings of israel, and made also molten images for baalim.

28:3 moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of hinnom, and
burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen
whom the lord had cast out before the children of israel.

28:4 he sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.

28:5 wherefore the lord his god delivered him into the hand of the
king of syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude
of them captives, and brought them to damascus. and he was also
delivered into the hand of the king of israel, who smote him with a
great slaughter.

28:6 for pekah the son of remaliah slew in judah an hundred and twenty
thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had
forsaken the lord god of their fathers.

28:7 and zichri, a mighty man of ephraim, slew maaseiah 
 
 ___________________________
 
the king's
son, and azrikam the governor of the house, and elkanah that was next
to the king.

28:8 and the children of israel carried away captive of their brethren
two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away
much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to samaria.

28:9 but a prophet of the lord was there, whose name was oded: and he
went out before the host that came to samaria, and said unto them,
behold, because the lord god of your fathers was wroth with judah, he
hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage
that reacheth up unto heaven.

28:10 and now ye purpose to keep under the children of judah and
jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with
you, even with you, sins against the lord your god?  28:11 now hear me
therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive
of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the lord is upon you.

28:12 t
 
 ___________________________
 
r he made judah naked, and transgressed sore against the lord.

28:20 and tilgathpilneser king of assyria came unto him, and
distressed him, but strengthened him not.

28:21 for ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the lord, and
out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the
king of assyria: but he helped him not.

28:22 and in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against
the lord: this is that king ahaz.

28:23 for he sacrificed unto the gods of damascus, which smote him:
and he said, because the gods of the kings of syria help them,
therefore will i sacrifice to them, that they may help me. but they
were the ruin of him, and of all israel.

28:24 and ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of god, and
cut in pieces the vessels of the house of god, and shut up the doors
of the house of the lord, and he made him altars in every corner of
jerusalem.

28:25 and in every several city of judah he made high places to bu
 
 ___________________________
 
rn
incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the lord god of his
fathers.

28:26 now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last,
behold, they are written in the book of the kings of judah and israel.

28:27 and ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city, even in jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres
of the kings of israel: and hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

29:1 hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old,
and he reigned nine and twenty years in jerusalem. and his 
 
 ___________________________
 

name was abijah, the daughter of zechariah.

29:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that david his father had done.

29:3 he in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the
doors of the house of the lord, and repaired them.

29:4 and he brought in the priests and the levites, and gathered them
together into the east street, 29:5 and said unto them, hear me, ye
levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the lord
god of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy
place.

29:6 for our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in
the eyes of the lord our god, and have forsaken him, and have turned
away their faces from the habitation of the lord, and turned their
backs.

29:7 also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the
lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the
holy place unto the god of israel.

29:8 wherefore the wrath of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord was upon judah and jerusalem, and
he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as
ye see with your eyes.

29:9 for, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and
our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.

29:10 now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the lord god of
israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.

29:11 my sons, be not now negligent: for the lord hath chosen you to
stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him,
and burn incense.

29:12 then the levites arose, mahath the son of amasai, and joel the
son of azariah, of the sons of the kohathites: and of the sons of
merari, kish the son of abdi, and azariah the son of jehalelel: and of
the gershonites; joah the son of zimmah, and eden the son of joah:

 
 ___________________________
 
he burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the levites did help
them, till the work was ended, and until the other priests had
sanctified themselves: for the levites were more upright in heart to
sanctify themselves than the priests.

29:35 and also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of
the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for every burnt offering.
so the service of the house of the lord was set in order.

29:36 and hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that god had prepared
the people: for the thing was done suddenly.

30:1 and hezekiah sent to all israel and judah, and wrote letters also
to ephraim and manasseh, that they should come to the house of the
lord at jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the lord god of israel.

30:2 for the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the
congregation in jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.

30:3 for they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had
not sanctified 
 
 ___________________________
 
themselves sufficiently, neither had the people
gathered themselves together to jerusalem.

30:4 and the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.

30:5 so they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all
israel, from beersheba even to dan, that they should come to keep the
passover unto the lord god of israel at jerusalem: for they had not
done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

30:6 so the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes
throughout all israel and judah, and according to the commandment of
the king, saying, ye children of israel, turn again unto the lord god
of abraham, isaac, and israel, and he will return to the remnant of
you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of assyria.

30:7 and be not ye like your fathers, and like your 
 
 ___________________________
 
brethren, which
trespassed against the lord god of their fathers, who therefore gave
them up to desolation, as ye see.

30:8 now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield
yourselves unto the lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath
sanctified for ever: and serve the lord your god, that the fierceness
of his wrath may turn away from you.

30:9 for if ye turn again unto the lord, your brethren and your
children shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so
that they shall come again into this land: for the lord your god is
gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye
return unto him.

30:10 so the posts passed from city to city through the country of
ephraim and manasseh even unto zebulun: but they laughed them to
scorn,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and mocked them.

30:11 nevertheless divers of asher and manasseh and of zebulun humbled
themselves, and came to jerusalem.

30:12 also in judah the hand of god was to give them one heart to do
the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the
lord.

30:13 and there assembled at jerusalem much people to keep the feast
of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.

30:14 and they arose and took away the altars that were in jerusalem,
and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the
brook kidron.

30:15 then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the
second month: and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
priests and the levites were ashamed, and
sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the
house of the lord.

30:16 and they stood in their place after their manner, according to
the law of moses the man of god: the priests sprinkled the blood,
which they received of the hand of the levites.

30:17 for there were many in the congregation that were not
sanctified: therefore the levites had the charge of the killing of the
passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the
lord.

30:18 for a multitude of the people, even many of ephraim, and
manasseh, issachar, and zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did
they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. but hezekiah
 
 ___________________________
 

prayed for them, saying, the good lord pardon every one 30:19 that
prepareth his heart to seek god, the lord god of his fathers, though
he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.

30:20 and the lord hearkened to hezekiah, and healed the people.

30:21 and the children of israel that were present at jerusalem kept
the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the
levites and the priests praised the lord day by day, singing with loud
instruments unto the lord.

30:22 and hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the levites that taught
the good knowledge of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he lord: and they did eat throughout the feast
seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the
lord god of their fathers.

30:23 and the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days:
and they kept other seven days with gladness.

30:24 for hezekiah king of judah did give to the congregation a
thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to
the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a
great number of priests sanctified themselves.

30:25 and all the congregation of judah, with the priests and the
levites, and all the congregation that ca
 
 ___________________________
 
be
encouraged in the law of the lord.

31:5 and as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of
israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil,
and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all
things brought they in abundantly.

31:6 and concerning the children of israel and judah, that dwelt in
the cities of judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep,
and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the lord
their god, and laid them by heaps.

31:7 in the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps,
and finished them in the seventh month.

31:8 and when hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they
blessed the lord, and his people israel.

31:9 then hezekiah questioned with the priests and the levites
concerning the heaps.

31:10 and azariah the chief priest of the house of zadok answered him,
and said, since the people began to bring the offerings into the house
of the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
he house of the
lord; and they prepared them, 31:12 and brought in the offerings and
the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully: over which cononiah
the levite was ruler, and shimei his brother was the next.

31:13 and jehiel, and azaziah, and nahath, and asahel, and jerimoth,
and jozabad, and eliel, and ismachiah, and mahath, and benaiah, were
overseers under the hand of cononiah and shimei his brother, at the
commandment of hezekiah the king, and azariah the ruler of the house
of god.

31:14 and kore the son of imnah the levite, the porter toward the
east, was over the freewill offerings of god, to distribute the
oblations of the lord, and the most holy things.

31:15 and next him were eden, and miniamin, and jeshua, and shemaiah,
amariah, and shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set
office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as
to the small: 31:16 beside their genealogy of males, from three years
old and upward, even unto ever
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh all the congregation: for in their set office
they sanctified themselves in holiness: 31:19 also of the sons of
aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their
cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to
give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were
reckoned by genealogies among the levites.

31:20 and thus did hezekiah throughout all judah, and wrought that
which was good and right and truth before the lord his god.

31:21 and in every work that he began in the service of the house of
god, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his god, he did
it with all his heart, and prospered.

32:1 after these things, and the establishment thereof, sennacherib
king of assyria came, and entered into judah, and encamped against the
fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.

32:2 and when hezekiah saw that sennacherib was come, and that he was
purposed to fight against jerusalem, 32:3 he t
 
 ___________________________
 
er wall without, and
repaired millo in the city of david, and made darts and shields in
abundance.

32:6 and he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them
together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake
comfortably to them, saying, 32:7 be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismayed for the king of assyria, nor for all the multitude
that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: 32:8 with
him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the lord our god to help us,
and to fight our battles. and the people rested themselves upon the
words of hezekiah king of judah.

32:9 after this did sennacherib king of assyria send his servants to
jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against lachish, and all his
power with him,) unto hezekiah king of judah, and unto all judah that
were at jerusalem, saying, 32:10 thus saith sennacherib king of
assyria, whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in jerusalem?
32:11 doth not hezekiah persuade yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u to give over yourselves to die by
famine and by thirst, saying, the lord our god shall deliver us out of
the hand of the king of assyria?  32:12 hath not the same hezekiah
taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded judah and
jerusalem, saying, ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense
upon it?  32:13 know ye not what i and my fathers have done unto all
the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands
any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?  32:14 who was
there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly
destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your
god should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?  32:15 now
therefore let not hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this
manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom
was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hand
of my fathers: how much less shall your god deliver you out of mine
hand?  32:16 and his servants spake yet more against the lord god, and
against his servant hezekiah.

32:17 he wrote also letters to rail on the lord god of israel, and to
speak against him, saying, as the gods of the nations of other lands
have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the god
of hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.

32:18 then they cried with a loud voice in the jews' speech unto the
people of jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to
trouble them; that they might take the city.

32:19 and they spake against the god of jerusalem, as against the gods
of the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man.

32:20 and for this cause hezekiah the king, and the prophet isaiah the
son of amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.

 
 ___________________________
 

32:21 and the lord sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of
valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of
assyria. so he returned with shame of face to his own land. and when
he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own
bowels slew him there with the sword.

32:22 thus the lord saved hezekiah and the inhabitants of jerusalem
from the hand of sennacherib the king of assyria, and from the hand of
all other, and guided them on every side.

32:23 and many brought gifts unto the lord to jerusalem, and presents
to hezekiah king of judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of
all nations from thenceforth.

32:24 in those days hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed un
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
the lord came not upon them in the days of hezekiah.

32:27 and hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made
himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones,
and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant
jewels; 32:28 storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and
oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.

32:29 moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and
herds in abundance: for god had given him substance very much.

32:30 this same hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of gihon,
and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of david.
and hezekiah prospered in all his works.

32:31 howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in
the land, god left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in
his heart.

32:32 now the rest of the acts of hezekiah, and his g
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall my name be for ever.

33:5 and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the lord.

33:6 and he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley
of the son of hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments,
and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the lord, to provoke him
to anger.

33:7 and he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the
house of god, of which god had said to david and to solomon his son,
in this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen before all the
tribes of israel, will i put my name for ever: 33:8 neither will i any
more remove the foot of israel from out of the land which i have
appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
i have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and
the ordinances by the hand of moses.

33:9 so manasseh made judah and the inhabitants of 
 
 ___________________________
 
jerusalem to err,
and to do worse than the heathen, whom the lord had destroyed before
the children of israel.

33:10 and the lord spake to manasseh, and to his people: but they
would not hearken.

33:11 wherefore the lord brought upon them the captains of the host of
the king of assyria, which took manasseh among the thorns, and bound
him with fetters, and carried him to babylon.

33:12 and when he was in affliction, he besought the lord his god, and
humbled himself greatly before the god of his fathers, 33:13 and
prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to jerusalem into his kingdom.
then manasseh knew that the lord he was god.

33:14 now after this he built a wall without the city of david, on the
west side of gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish
gate, and compassed about ophel, and raised it up a very great height,
and put captains of war in all the
 
 ___________________________
 
 fenced cities of judah.

33:15 and he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house
of the lord, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the
house of the lord, and in jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

33:16 and he repaired the altar of the lord, and sacrificed thereon
peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded judah to serve the
lord god of israel.

33:17 nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places,
yet unto the lord their god only.

33:18 now the rest of the acts of manasseh, and his prayer unto his
god, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the
lord god of israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of israel.

33:19 his prayer also, and how god was intreated of him, and all his
sins, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places,
and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold,
they are written among the sayings of the seers.

33:20
 
 ___________________________
 
and slew all them that had conspired
against king amon; and the people of the land made josiah his son king
in his stead.

34:1 josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
in jerusalem one and thirty years.

34:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, and
walked in the ways of david his father, and declined neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.

34:3 for in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the god of david his father: and in the twelfth
year he began to purge judah and jerusalem from the high places, and
the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.

34:4 and they brake down the altars of baalim in his presence; and the
images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and
the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made
dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had
sacrificed unto them.

34:5 and he burnt the b
 
 ___________________________
 
even unto naphtali, with their mattocks round about.

34:7 and when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had
beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols
throughout all the land of israel, he returned to jerusalem.

34:8 now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the
land, and the house, he sent shaphan the son of azaliah, and maaseiah
the governor of the city, and joah the son of joahaz the recorder, to
repair the house of the lord his god.

34:9 and when they came to hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the
money that was brought into the house of god, which the levites that
kept the doors had gathered of the hand of manasseh and ephraim, and
of all the remnant of israel, and of all judah and benjamin; and they
returned to jerusalem.

34:10 and they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the
oversight of the house of the lord, and they gave it to the workmen
that wrought in the house of the lord, to repair and a
 
 ___________________________
 
 book that is found: for great is the wrath of the lord
that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word
of the lord, to do after all that is written in this book.

34:22 and hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to
huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son of tikvath, the son
of hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in jerusalem in the
college:) and they spake to her to that effect.

34:23 and she answered them, thus saith the lord god of israel, tell
ye the man that sent you to me, 34:24 thus saith the lord, behold, i
will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof,
even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read
before the king of judah: 34:25 because they have forsaken me, and
have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to
anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be
poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched.

34:26 and
 
 ___________________________
 
 as for the king of judah, who sent you to enquire of the
lord, so shall ye say unto him, thus saith the lord god of israel
concerning the words which thou hast heard; 34:27 because thine heart
was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before god, when thou
heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes,
and weep before me; i have even heard thee also, saith the lord.

34:28 behold, i will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the
evil that i will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of
the same. so they brought the king word again.

34:29 then the king sen
 
 ___________________________
 
f the covenant that was found in the
house of the lord.

34:31 and the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the
lord, to walk after the lord, and to keep his commandments, and his
testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his
soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this
book.

34:32 and he caused all that were present in jerusalem and benjamin to
stand to it. and the inhabitants of jerusalem did according to the
covenant of god, the god of their fathers.

34:33 and josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
countries that pertained to the children of israel, and made all that
were present in israel to serve, even to serve the lord their god. and
all his days they departed not from following the lord, the god of
their fathers.

35:1 moreover josiah kept a passover unto the lord in jerusalem: and
they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

35:2 and he set the priests in their
 
 ___________________________
 
 charges, and encouraged them to
the service of the house of the lord, 35:3 and said unto the levites
that taught all israel, which were holy unto the lord, put the holy
ark in the house which solomon the son of david king of israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the
lord your god, and his people israel, 35:4 and prepare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of david king of israel, and according to the writing of
solomon his son.

35:5 and stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the levites.

35:6 so kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to t
 
 ___________________________
 
he word of the lord by the
hand of moses.

35:7 and josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all
for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number
of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the
king's substance.

35:8 and his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests,
and to the levites: hilkiah and zechariah and jehiel, rulers of the
house of god, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two
thousand and six hundred small cattle and three hundred oxen.

35:9 conaniah also, and shemaiah and nethaneel, his brethren, and
hashabiah and jeiel and jozabad, chief of the levites, gave unto the
levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five
hundred oxen.

35:10 so the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their
place, and the levites in their courses, according to the king's
commandment.

35:11 a
 
 ___________________________
 
udah and israel that were present, and the inhabitants of
jerusalem.

35:19 in the eighteenth year of the reign of josiah was this passover
kept.

35:20 after all this, when josiah had prepared the temple, necho king
of egypt came up to fight against charchemish by euphrates: and josiah
went out against him.

35:21 but he sent ambassadors to him, saying, what have i to do with
thee, thou king of judah? i come not against thee this day, but
against the house wherewith i have war: for god commanded me to make
haste: forbear thee from meddling with god, who is with me, that he
destroy thee not.

35:22 nevertheless josiah would not turn his face from him, but
disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not
unto the words of necho from the mouth of god, and came to fight in
the valley of megiddo.

35:23 and the archers shot at king josiah; and the king said to his
servants, have me away; for i am sore wounded.

35:24 his servants therefore took him ou
 
 ___________________________
 
em.

36:3 and the king of egypt put him down at jerusalem, and condemned
the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.

36:4 and the king of egypt made eliakim his brother king over judah
and jerusalem, and turned his name to jehoiakim. and necho took
jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to egypt.

36:5 jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned eleven years in jerusalem: and he did that which was
evil in the sight of the lord his god.

36:6 against him came up nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and bound him
in fetters, to carry him to babylon.

36:7 nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the
lord to babylon, and put them in his temple at babylon.

36:8 now the rest of the acts of jehoiakim, and his abominations which
he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in
the book of the kings of israel and judah: and jehoiachin his son
reigned in his stead.

36:9 jehoiachin was e
 
 ___________________________
 
nd he
reigned three months and ten days in jerusalem: and he did that which
was evil in the sight of the lord.

36:10 and when the year was expired, king nebuchadnezzar sent, and
brought him to babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the
lord, and made zedekiah his brother king over judah and jerusalem.

36:11 zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign,
and reigned eleven years in jerusalem.

36:12 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord his god,
and humbled not himself before jeremiah the prophet speaking from the
mouth of the lord.

36:13 and he also rebelled against king nebuchadnezzar, who had made
him swear by god: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart
from turning unto the lord god of israel.

36:14 moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people,
transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and
polluted the house of the lord which he had hallowed in jerusalem.

36:15 and the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d god of their fathers sent to them by his
messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion
on his people, and on his dwelling place: 36:16 but they mocked the
messengers of god, and despised his words, and misused his prophets,
until the wrath of the lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy.

36:17 therefore he brought upon them the king of the chaldees, who
slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary,
and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that
stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.

36:18 and all the vessels of the house of god, great and small, and
the treasures of the house of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord, and the treasures of the king,
and of his princes; all these he brought to babylon.

36:19 and they burnt the house of god, and brake down the wall of
jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed
all the goodly vessels thereof.

36:20 and them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to
babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign
of the kingdom of persia: 36:21 to fulfil the word of the lord by the
mouth of jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as
long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and
ten years.

36:2
 
 ___________________________
 
2 now in the first year of cyrus king of persia, that the word of
the lord spoken by the mouth of jeremiah might be accomplished, the
lord stirred up the spirit of cyrus king of persia, that he made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, 36:23 thus saith cyrus king of persia, all the kingdoms of the
earth hath the lord god of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to
build him an house in jerusalem, which is in judah. who is there among
you of all his people?  the lord his god be with him, and let him go up.




ezra


1:1 now in the first year of cyrus king of persia, that the word of
the lord by the mouth of jeremiah might be fulfilled, the lord stirred
up the spirit of cyrus king of persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 1:2
thus saith
 
 ___________________________
 
 cyrus king of persia, the lord god of heaven hath given me
all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an
house at jerusalem, which is in judah.

1:3 who is there among you of all his people? his god be with him, and
let him go up to jerusalem, which is in judah, and build the house of
the lord god of israel, (he is the god,) which is in jerusalem.

1:4 and whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the
men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods,
and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of god
that is in jerusalem.

1:5 then rose up the chief of the fathers of judah and benjamin, and
the priests, and the levites, with all them whose spirit god had
raised, to go up to build the house of the lord which is in jerusalem.

1:6 and all they that were
 
 ___________________________
 
 about them strengthened their hands with
vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with
precious things, beside all that was willingly offered.

1:7 also cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the
lord, which nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of jerusalem, and had
put them in the house of his gods; 1:8 even those did cyrus king of
persia bring forth by the hand of mithredath the treasurer, and
numbered them unto sheshbazzar, the prince of judah.

1:9 and this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a
thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives, 1:10 thirty
basons of gold, silver basons of a second sort four hundred and ten,
and other vessels a thousand.

1:11 all the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four
hundred. all these did sheshbazzar br
 
 ___________________________
 
nts and their maids, of
whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and
there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women.

2:66 their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two
hundred forty and five; 2:67 their camels, four hundred thirty and
five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

2:68 and some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house
of the lord which is at jerusalem, offered freely for the house of god
to set it up in his place: 2:69 they gave after their ability unto the
treasure of the work threescore and one thousand drams of gold, and
five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred priests' garments.

2:70 so the priests, and the levites, and some of the people, and the
singers, and the porters, and the nethinims, dwelt in their cities,
and all israel in their cities.

3:1 and when the seventh month was come, and the children of israel
were in the cities, the people gathered them
 
 ___________________________
 
selves together as one man
to jerusalem.

3:2 then stood up jeshua the son of jozadak, and his brethren the
priests, and zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and his brethren, and
builded the altar of the god of israel, to offer burnt offerings
thereon, as it is written in the law of moses the man of god.

3:3 and they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them
because of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt
offerings thereon unto the lord, even burnt offerings morning and
evening.

3:4 they kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom,
as the duty of every day required; 3:5 and afterward offered the
continual burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set
feasts of
 
 ___________________________
 
nto the lord.

3:6 from the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
offerings unto the lord. but the foundation of the temple of the lord
was not yet laid.

3:7 they gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and
meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of zidon, and to them of tyre, to
bring cedar trees from lebanon to the sea of joppa, according to the
grant that they had of cyrus king of persia.

3:8 now in the second year of their coming unto the house of god at
jerusalem, in the second month, began zerubbabel the son of shealtiel,
and jeshua the son of jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the
priests and the levites, and all they that were come out of the
captivity unto jerusalem; and appointed the levites, from twenty years
old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the lord.

3:9 then stood jeshua with his sons and his brethren, kadmiel and his
sons, the sons of judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the
house 
 
 ___________________________
 
of god: the sons of henadad, with their sons and their brethren
the levites.

3:10 and when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the
lord, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the
levites the sons of asaph with cymbals, to praise the lord, after the
ordinance of david king of israel.

3:11 and they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever
toward israel.

and all the people shout
 
 ___________________________
 
 who
were ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation
of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and
many shouted aloud for joy: 3:13 so that the people could not discern
the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the
people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was
heard afar off.

4:1 now when the adversaries of judah and benjamin heard that the
children of the captivity builded the temple unto the lord god of
israel; 4:2 then they came to zerubbabel, and to the chief of the
fathers, and said unto them, let us build with you: for we seek your
god, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of
esarhaddon king of assur, which brought us up hither.

4:3 but zerubbabel, and jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the
fathers of israel, said unto them, ye have nothing to do with us to
build an house unto our god; but we ourselves together will build unto
the lord god of israel, as king
 
 ___________________________
 
e ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that
this city be not builded, until another commandment shall be given
from me.

4:22 take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow
to the hurt of the kings?  4:23 now when the copy of king artaxerxes'
letter was read before rehum, and shimshai the scribe, and their
companions, they went up in haste to jerusalem unto the jews, and made
them to cease by force and power.

4:24 then ceased the work of the house of god which is at jerusalem.
so it ceased unto the second year of the reign of darius king of
persia.

5:1 then the prophets, haggai the prophet, and zechariah the son of
iddo, prophesied unto the jews that were in judah and jerusalem in the
name of the god of israel, even unto them.

5:2 then rose up zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and jeshua the son
of jozadak, and began to build the house of god which is at jerusalem:
and with them were the prophets of god helping them.

5:3 at the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
me time came to them tatnai, governor on this side the
river, and shetharboznai and their companions, and said thus unto
them, who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this
wall?  5:4 then said we unto them after this manner, what are the
names of the men that make this building?  5:5 but the eye of their
god was upon the elders of the jews, that they could not cause them to
cease, till the matter came to darius: and then they returned answer
by letter concerning this matter.

5:6 the copy of the letter that tatnai, governor on this side the
river, and shetharboznai and his companions the apharsachites, which
were on this side the river, sent unto darius the king: 5:7 they sent
a letter unto him, wherein was written thus; unto darius the king, all
peace.

5:8 be it known unto the king, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t we went into the province of
judea, to the house of the great god, which is builded with great
stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on,
and prospereth in their hands.

5:9 then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, who commanded
you to build this house, and to make up these walls?  5:10 we asked
their names also, to certify thee, that we might write the names of
the men that were the chief of them.

5:11 and thus they returned us answer, saying, we are the servants of
the god of heaven and earth, and build the 
 
 ___________________________
 
house that was builded
these many years ago, which a great king of israel builded and set up.

5:12 but after that our fathers had provoked the god of heaven unto
wrath, he gave them into the hand of nebuchadnezzar the king of
babylon, the chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the
people away into babylon.

5:13 but in the first year of cyrus the king of babylon the same king
cyrus made a decree to build this house of god.

5:14 and the vessels also of gold and silver of the house of god,
which nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in jerusalem, and
brought them into the temple of babylon, those did cyrus the king take
out of the temple of babylon, and they were delivered unto one, whose
name was sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor; 5:15 and said unto
him, take these vessels, go, carry them into the temple that is in
jerusalem, and let the house of god be builded in his place.

5:16 then ca
 
 ___________________________
 
me the same sheshbazzar, and laid the foundation of the
house of god which is in jerusalem: and since that time even until now
hath it been in building, and yet it is not finished.

5:17 now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search
made in the king's treasure house, which is there at babylon, whether
it be so, that a decree was made of cyrus the king to build this house
of god at jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us
concerning this matter.

6:1 then darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the
house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in babylon.

6:2 and there was found at achmetha, in the palace that is in the
province of the medes, a roll, and therein was a record thus written:
6:3 in the first year of cyrus the king the same cyrus the king made a
decree concerning the house of god at jerusalem, let the house be
bui
 
 ___________________________
 
lded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the
foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore
cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits; 6:4 with three rows
of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expenses be
given out of the king's house: 6:5 and also let the golden and silver
vessels of the house of god, which nebuchadnezzar took forth out of
the temple which is at jerusalem, and brought unto babylon, be
restored, and brought again unto the temple which is at jerusalem,
every one to his place, and place them in the house of god.

6:6 now therefore, tatnai, governor beyond the river, shetharboznai,
and your companions the apharsachites, which are beyond the river, be
ye far from thence: 6:7 let the work of this house of god alone; let
the governor of the jews and the elders of the jews 
 
 ___________________________
 
build this house
of god in his place.

6:8 moreover i make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of these
jews for the building of this house of god: that of the king's goods,
even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto
these men, that they be not hindered.

6:9 and that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams,
and lambs, for the burnt offerings of the god of heaven, wheat, salt,
wine, and oil, according to the appointment of the priests which are
at jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail: 6:10 that
they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the god of heaven, and
pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.

6:11 also i have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word,
let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be
hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this.

6
 
 ___________________________
 
:12 and the god that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy all
kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy
this house of god which is at jerusalem. i darius have made a decree;
let it be done with speed.

6:13 then tatnai, governor on this side the river, shetharboznai, and
their companions, according to that which darius the king had sent, so
they did speedily.

6:14 and the elders of the jews builded, and they prospered through
the prophesying of haggai the prophet and zechariah the son of iddo.
and they builded, and finished it, according to the commandment of the
god of israel, and according to the comm
 
 ___________________________
 
andment of cyrus, and darius,
and artaxerxes king of persia.

6:15 and this house was finished on the third day of the month adar,
which was in the sixth year of the reign of darius the king.

6:16 and the children of israel, the priests, and the levites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this
house of god with joy.

6:17 and offered at the dedication of this house of god an hundred
bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering
for all israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes
of israel.

6:18 and they set the priests in their divisions, and the levites in
their courses, for the service of god, which is at jerusalem; as it is
written in the book of moses.

6:19 and the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the
fourteenth day of the first month.

6:20 for the priests and the levites were purifie
 
 ___________________________
 
d together, all of
them were pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the
captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.

6:21 and the children of israel, which were come again out of
captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the
filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek the lord god of israel,
did eat, 6:22 and kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with
joy: for the lord had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the
king of assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of
the house of god, the god of israel.

7:1 now after these things, in the reign of artaxerxes king of persia,
ezra the son of seraiah, the son of azariah, the son of hilkiah, 7:2
the son of shallum, the son of zadok, the son of ahitub, 7:3 the son
of amariah, the son of azar
 
 ___________________________
 
iah, the son of meraioth, 7:4 the son of
zerahiah, the son of uzzi, the son of bukki, 7:5 the son of abishua,
the son of phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the chief
priest: 7:6 this ezra went up from babylon; and he was a ready scribe
in the law of moses, which the lord god of israel had given: and the
king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the lord
his god upon him.

7:7 and there went up some of the children of israel, and of the
priests, and the levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the
nethinims, unto jerusalem, in the seventh year of artaxerxes the king.

7:8 and he came to jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the
seventh year of the king.

7:9 for upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from
babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to jerusalem,
according to the good hand of his god u
 
 ___________________________
 
pon him.

7:10 for ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the lord, and
to do it, and to teach in israel statutes and judgments.

7:11 now this is the copy of the letter that the king artaxerxes gave
unto ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the
commandments of the lord, and of his statutes to israel.

7:12 artaxerxes, king of kings, unto ezra the priest, a scribe of the
law of the god of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time.

7:13 i make a decree, that all they of the people of israel, and of
his priests and levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own
freewill to go up to jerusalem, go with thee.

7:14 forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven
counsellors, to enquire concerning judah and jerusalem, according to
the law of thy god which is in thine hand; 7:15 and to carry the
silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely
 
 ___________________________
 

offered unto the god of israel, whose habitation is in jerusalem, 7:16
and all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province
of babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the
priests, offering willingly for the house of their god which is in
jerusalem: 7:17 that thou mayest buy speedily with this money
bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offerings and their drink
offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your god
which is in jerusalem.

7:18 and whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to
do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of
your god.

7:19 the vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house
of thy god, those deliver thou before the god of jerusalem.

7:20 and whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy god,
which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's
treasure house.

7:21 and i, even i arta
 
 ___________________________
 
xerxes the king, do make a decree to all the
treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever ezra the
priest, the scribe of the law of the god of heaven, shall require of
you, it be done speedily, 7:22 unto an hundred talents of silver, and
to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and
to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.

7:23 whatsoever is commanded by the god of heaven, let it be
diligently done for the house of the god of heaven: for why should
there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?  7:24 also
we certify you, that touching any of the priests and levites, singers,
porters, nethinims, or ministers of this house of god, it shall not be
lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.

7:25 and thou, ezra, after the wisdom of thy god, that is in thine
hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that
are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy god; a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd teach
ye them that know them not.

7:26 and whosoever will not do the law of thy god, and the law of the
king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
imprisonment.

7:27 blessed be the lord god of our fathers, which hath put such a
thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the lord
which is in jerusalem: 7:28 and hath extended mercy unto me before the
king, and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes.
and i was strengthened as the hand of the lord my god was upon me, and
i gathered together out of israel chief men to go up with me.

8:1 these are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the
genealogy of them that went up with me from baby
 
 ___________________________
 
 of levi.

8:16 then sent i for eliezer, for ariel, for shemaiah, and for
elnathan, and for jarib, and for elnathan, and for nathan, and for
zechariah, and for meshullam, chief men; also for joiarib, and for
elnathan, men of understanding.

8:17 and i sent them with commandment unto iddo the chief at the place
casiphia, and i told them what they should say unto iddo, and to his
brethren the nethinims, at the place casiphia, that they should bring
unto us ministers for the house of our god.

8:18 and by the good hand of our god upon us they brought us a man of
understanding, of the sons of mahli, the son of levi, the son of
israel; and sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; 8:19
and hashabiah, and with him jeshaiah of the sons of merari, his
brethren and their sons, twenty; 8:20 also of the nethinims, whom
david and the princes had appointed for the service of the levites,
two hundred and twenty nethinims: all of them were expressed by name.

8:21 then i p
 
 ___________________________
 
roclaimed a fast there, at the river of ahava, that we
might afflict ourselves before our god, to seek of him a right way for
us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.

8:22 for i was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and
horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had
spoken unto the king, saying, the hand of our god is upon all them for
good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them
that forsake him.

8:23 so we fasted and besought our god for this: and he was intreated
of us.

8:24 then i separated twelve of the chief of the priests, sherebiah,
hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them, 8:25 and weighed unto
them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering of
the house of our god, which the king, and his counsellors, and his
lords, and all israel there
 
 ___________________________
 
 present, had offered: 8:26 i even weighed
unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver
vessels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents; 8:27 also
twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of fine
copper, precious as gold.

8:28 and i said unto them, ye are holy unto the lord; the vessels are
holy also; and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto
the lord god of your fathers.

8:29 watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chief of
the priests and the levites, and chief of the fathers of israel, at
jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the lord.

8:30 so took the priests and the levites the weight of the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to jerusalem unto the house
of our god.

8:31 then we departed from the river of ahava on the twelfth day of
the first month, to go unto jerusalem: and the hand of ou
 
 ___________________________
 
r god was
upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such
as lay in wait by the way.

8:32 and we came to jerusalem, and abode there three days.

8:33 now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels
weighed in the house of our god by the hand of meremoth the son of
uriah the priest; and with him was eleazar the son of phinehas; and
with them was jozabad the son of jeshua, and noadiah the son of
binnui, levites; 8:34 by number and by weight of every one: and all
the weight was written at that time.

8:35 also the children of those that had been carried away, which were
come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the god of
israel, twelve bullocks for all israel, ninety and six rams, seventy
and seven 
 
 ___________________________
 
lambs, twelve he goats for a sin offering: all this was a
burnt offering unto the lord.

8:36 and they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's
lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they
furthered the people, and the house of god.

9:1 now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying,
the people of israel, and the priests, and the levites, have not
separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to
their abominations, even of the canaanites, the hittites, the
perizzites, the jebusites, the ammonites, the moabites, the egyptians,
and the amorites.

9:2 for they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for
their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath
been chief in this trespass.

9:3 and when i heard this thing, i rent my garment and my mantle, and
plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down
astonied.

9:4 then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words
of the god of israel, because of the transgression of those that had
been carried away; and i sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.

9:5 and at the evening sacrifice i arose up from my heaviness; and
having rent my garment and my mantle, i fell upon my knees, and spread
out my hands unto the lord my god, 9:6 and said, o my god, i am
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my god: for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heavens.

9:7 since t
 
 ___________________________
 
he days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass
unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our
priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to
the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as
it is this day.

9:8 and now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the lord
our god, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holy place, that our god may lighten our eyes, and give us a little
reviving in our bondage.

9:9 for we were bondmen; yet our god hath not forsaken us in our
bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of
persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our god, and to
repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in judah and in
jerusalem.

9:10 and now, o our god, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments, 9:11 which thou hast commanded by thy

 
 ___________________________
 
people of the lands,
with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another
with their uncleanness.

9:12 now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither
take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their
wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land,
and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.

9:13 and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, seeing that thou our god hast punished us less
than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as
this; 9:14 should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be
angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping?  9:15 o lord god of israel, thou art righteous:
for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before
thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
this.

10:1 now when ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and
casting himself down before the house of god, there assembled unto him
out of israel a very great congregation of men and women and children:
for the people wept very sore.

10:2 and shechaniah the son of jehiel, one of the sons of elam,
answered and said unto ezra, we have trespassed against our god, and
have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is
hope in israel concerning this thing.

10:3 now therefore let us make a covenant with our god to put away all
the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of
my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our god; and
let it be done according to the law.

10:4 arise; for this matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with
thee: be of good courage, and do it.

10:5 then arose ez
 
 ___________________________
 
ra, and made the chief priests, the levites, and all
israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. and they
sware.

10:6 then ezra rose up from before the house of god, and went into the
chamber of johanan the son of eliashib: and when he came thither, he
did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the
transgression of them that had been carried away.

10:7 and they made proclamation throughout judah and jerusalem unto
all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves
together unto jerusalem; 10:8 and that whosoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders,
all his s
 
 ___________________________
 
ubstance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away.

10:9 then all the men of judah and benjamin gathered themselves
together unto jerusalem within three days. it was the ninth month, on
the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street
of the house of god, trembling because of this matter, and for the
great rain.

10:10 and ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, ye have
transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass
of israel.

10:11 now therefore make confession unto the lord god of your fathers,
and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the
land, and from the strange wives.

10:12 then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice,
as thou hast said, so must we do.

10
 
 ___________________________
 
:13 but the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we
are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or
two: for we are many that have transgressed in this thing.

10:14 let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all
them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed
times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof,
until the fierce wrath of our god for this matter be turned from us.

10:15 only jonathan the son of asahel and jahaziah the son of tikvah
were employed about this matter: and meshullam and shabbethai the
levite helped them.

10:16 and the children of the captivity did so. and ezra the priest,
with certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers,
and all of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the
first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.

10:17 and they made an end with all t
 
 ___________________________
 
tain men
of judah; and i asked them concerning the jews that had escaped, which
were left of the captivity, and concerning jerusalem.

1:3 and they said unto me, the remnant that are left of the captivity
there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall
of jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned
with fire.

1:4 and it came to pass, when i heard these words, that i sat down and
wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the god
of heaven, 1:5 and said, i beseech thee, o lord god of heaven, the
great and terrible god, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that
love him and observe his commandments: 1:6 let thine ear now be
attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of
thy servant, which i pray before thee now, day and night, for the
children of israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children
of israel, which we have sinned against thee: both i and my father's
house have sinned
 
 ___________________________
 
 been beforetime sad in his
presence.

2:2 wherefore the king said unto me, why is thy countenance sad,
seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart.
then i was very sore afraid, 2:3 and said unto the king, let the king
live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city,
the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire?  2:4 then the king said unto me, for
what dost thou make request? so i prayed to the god of heaven.

2:5 and i said unto the king, if it please the king, and if thy
servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me
unto judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that i may build
it.

2:6 and the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) for
how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? so it
pleased the king to send me; and i set him a time.

2:7 moreover i said unto the king, if it please the king, let letters
be given me to 
 
 ___________________________
 
the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me
over till i come into judah; 2:8 and a letter unto asaph the keeper of
the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the
gates of the palace which appertained to the house, and for the wall
of the city, and for the house that i shall enter into. and the king
granted me, according to the good hand of my god upon me.

2:9 then i came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the
king's letters. now the king had sent captains of the army and
horsemen with me.

2:10 when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the
ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come
a man to seek the welfare of the children of israel.

2:11 so i came to jerusalem, and was there three days.

2:12 and i arose in the night, i and some few men with me; neither
told i any man 
 
 ___________________________
 
what my god had put in my heart to do at jerusalem:
neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that i rode upon.

2:13 and i went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before
the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of
jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed
with fire.

2:14 then i went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.

2:15 then went i up in th
 
 ___________________________
 
te of the valley, and so
returned.

2:16 and the rulers knew not whither i went, or what i did; neither
had i as yet told it to the jews, nor to the priests, nor to the
nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.

2:17 then said i unto them, ye see the distress that we are in, how
jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire:
come, and let us build up the wall of jerusalem, that we be no more a
reproach.

2:18 then i told them of the hand of my god which was good upon me; as
also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. and they said, let
us rise up and build. so they strengthened their hands for this good
work.

2:19 but when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the
ammonite, and geshem the arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn,
and despised us, and said, what is this thing that ye do? will ye
rebel against the king?  2:20 then answered i them, and said unto
them, the god of heaven, he will prosper us; there
 
 ___________________________
 

wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the jews.

4:2 and he spake before his brethren and the army of samaria, and
said, what do these feeble jews? will they fortify themselves? will
they sacrifice?  will they make an end in a day? will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?  4:3 now
tobiah the ammonite was by him, and he said, even that which they
build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

4:4 hear, o our god; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon
their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity: 4:5
and cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the
builders.

4:6 so built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto
the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.

4:7 but it came to pass, that when sanballat, and tobiah, and the
arabians, and the ammonites, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
e ashdodites, heard that the walls
of jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped,
then they were very wroth, 4:8 and conspired all of them together to
come and to fight against jerusalem, and to hinder it.

4:9 nevertheless we made our prayer unto our god, and set a watch
against them day and night, because of them.

4:10 and judah said, the strength of the bearers of burdens is
decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build
the wall.

4:11 and our adversaries said, they shall not know, neither see, till
we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to
cease.

4:12 and it came to pass, that when the jews which dwelt by them came,
they said unto us ten times, from all places whence ye shall r
 
 ___________________________
 
s behind the wall, and on the
higher places, i even set the people after their families with their
swords, their spears, and their bows.

4:14 and i looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the
rulers, and to the rest of the people, be not ye afraid of them:
remember the lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.

4:15 and it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known
unto us, and god had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned
all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.

4:16 and it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my
servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers
were behind all the house of judah.

4:17 they which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with
those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work,

 
 ___________________________
 
and with the other hand held a weapon.

4:18 for the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and
so builded. and he that sounded the trumpet was by me.

4:19 and i said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of
the people, the work is great and large, and we are separated upon the
wall, one far from another.

4:20 in what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort
ye thither unto us: our god shall fight for us.

4:21 so we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from
the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.

4:22 likewise at the same time said i unto the people, let every one
with his servant lodge within jerusalem, that in the night they may be
a guard to us, and labour on the day.

4:23 so neither i, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of
the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving
that every one put them off f
 
 ___________________________
 
ed with myself, and i rebuked the nobles, and the
rulers, and said unto them, ye exact usury, every one of his brother.
and i set a great assembly against them.

5:8 and i said unto them, we after our ability have redeemed our
brethren the jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even
sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? then held they
their peace, and found nothing to answer.

5:9 also i said, it is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in
the fear of our god because of the reproach of the heathen our
enemies?  5:10 i likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might
exact of them money and corn: i pray you, let us leave off this usury.

5:11 restore, i pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part
of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of
them.

5:12 then said they, we will restore them, and will require nothing of
them; so will we d
 
 ___________________________
 
o as thou sayest. then i called the priests, and
took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.

5:13 also i shook my lap, and said, so god shake out every man from
his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even
thus be he shaken out, and emptied. and all the congregation said,
amen, and praised the lord. and the people did according to this
promise.

5:14 moreover from the time that i was appointed to be their governor
in the land of judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and
thirtieth year of artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, i and my
brethren have not eaten the bread of the go
 
 ___________________________
 
vernor.

5:15 but the former governors that had been before me were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty
shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people:
but so did not i, because of the fear of god.

5:16 yea, also i continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we
any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.

5:17 moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the jews
and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that
are about us.

5:18 now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six
choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days
store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not 
 
 ___________________________
 
i the bread
of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.

5:19 think upon me, my god, for good, according to all that i have
done for this people.

6:1 now it came to pass when sanballat, and tobiah, and geshem the
arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that i had builded the
wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time
i had not set up the doors upon the gates;) 6:2 that sanballat and
geshem sent unto me, saying, come, let us meet together in some one of
the villages in the plain of ono. but they thought to do me mischief.

6:3 and i sen
 
 ___________________________
 
ords.

6:7 and thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at
jerusalem, saying, there is a king in judah: and now shall it be
reported to the king according to these words. come now therefore, and
let us take counsel together.

6:8 then i sent unto him, saying, there are no such things done as
thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

6:9 for they all made us afraid, saying, their hands shall be weakened
from the work, that it be not done. now therefore, o god, strengthen
my hands.

6:10 afterward i came unto the house of shemaiah the son of delaiah
the son of mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, let us meet
together in the house of god, within the temple, and let us shut the
doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee.

6:11 and i said, should such a man as i flee? and who is there, that,
being as i am, would go into the temple to save his life? i will not
go in.

6:12 and, lo
 
 ___________________________
 
, i perceived that god had not sent him; but that he
pronounced this prophecy against me: for tobiah and sanballat had
hired him.

6:13 therefore was he hired, that i should be afraid, and do so, and
sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they
might reproach me.

6:14 my god, think thou upon tobiah and sanballat according to these
their works, and on the prophetess noadiah, and the rest of the
prophets, that would have put me in fear.

6:15 so the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month
elul, in fifty and two days.

6:16 and it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and
all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much
cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was
wrought of our god
 
 ___________________________
 
on of arah; and his son johanan had
taken the daughter of meshullam the son of berechiah.

6:19 also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words
to him. and tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

7:1 now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and i had set up the
doors, and the porters and the singers and the levites were appointed,
7:2 that i gave my brother hanani, and hananiah the ruler of the
palace, charge over jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared
god above many.

7:3 and i said unto them, let not the gates of jerusalem be opened
until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the
doors, and bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of
jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against
his house.

7:4 now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein,
and the houses were not builded.

7:5 and my god put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and
the rulers, and the peop
 
 ___________________________
 
ra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had
made for the purpose; and beside him stood mattithiah, and shema, and
anaiah, and urijah, and hilkiah, and maaseiah, on his right hand; and
on his left hand, pedaiah, and mishael, and malchiah, and hashum, and
hashbadana, zechariah, and meshullam.

8:5 and ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people; (for he
was above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood
up: 8:6 and ezra blessed the lord, the great god. and all the people
answered, amen, amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed
their heads, and worshipped the lord with their faces to the ground.

8:7 also jeshua, and bani, and sherebiah, jamin, akkub, shabbethai,
hodijah, maaseiah, kelita, azariah, jozabad, hanan, pelaiah, and the
levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stood
in their place.

8:8 so they read in the book in the law of god distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand
 
 ___________________________
 
 the reading.

8:9 and nehemiah, which is the tirshatha, and ezra the priest the
scribe, and the levites that taught the people, said unto all the
people, this day is holy unto the lord your god; mourn not, nor weep.
for all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.

8:10 then he said unto them, go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for
this day is holy unto our lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of
the lord is your strength.

8:11 so the levites stilled all the people, saying, hold your peace,
for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

8:12 and all the people went their way to eat, and to 
 
 ___________________________
 
d dwell in booths in the feast
of the seventh month: 8:15 and that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in jerusalem, saying, go forth unto the
mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle
branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make
booths, as it is written.

8:16 so the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves
booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and
in the courts of the house of god, and in the street of the water
gate, and in the street of the gate of ephraim.

8:17 and all the congregation of them that were come again out of the
captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of
jeshua the son of nun unto that day had not the children of israel
done so. and there was very great gladness.

8:18 also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in
the book of the law of god. and they kept the feast seven days; and on
the eighth da
 
 ___________________________
 
y was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner.

9:1 now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of
israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth
upon them.

9:2 and the seed of israel separated themselves from all strangers,
and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
fathers.

9:3 and they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law
of the lord their god one fourth part of the day; and another fourth
part they confessed, and worshipped the lord their god.

9:4 then stood up upon the stairs, of the levites, jeshua, and bani,
kadmiel, shebaniah, bunni, sherebiah, bani, and chenani, and cried
with a loud voice unto the lord their god.

9:5 then the levites, jeshua, and kadmiel, bani, hashabniah,
sherebiah, hodijah, shebaniah, and pethahiah, said, stand up and bless
the lord your god for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name,
wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich is exalted above all blessing and praise.

9:6 thou, even thou, art lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven
of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are
therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them
all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

9:7 thou art the lord the god, who didst choose abram, and broughtest
him forth out of ur of the chaldees, and gavest him the name of
abraham; 9:8 and foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a
covenant with him to give the land of the canaanites, the hittites,
the amorites, and the perizzites, and the jebusites, and the
girgashites, to give it, i say, to his seed, and hast performed thy
words; for thou art righteous: 9:9 and didst see the affliction of our
fathers in egypt, and heardest their cry by the r
 
 ___________________________
 
 hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for
their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess
the land which thou hadst sworn to give them.

9:16 but they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
and hearkened not to thy commandments, 9:17 and refused to obey,
neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but
hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to
return to their bondage: but thou art a god ready to pardon, gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest
them not.

9:18 yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, this is thy
god that brought thee up out of egypt, and had wrought great
provocations; 9:19 yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them
not in the wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them
by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night,
to shew them light, and the way wherein they s
 
 ___________________________
 
 sinned against
thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and
withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.

9:30 yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against
them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear:
therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands.

9:31 nevertheless for thy great mercies' sake thou didst not utterly
consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful
god.

9:32 now therefore, our god, the great, the mighty, and the terrible
god, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem
little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our
princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers,
and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of assyria unto
this day.

9:33 howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou
hast done right, but we have done wickedly: 9:34 neither have our
king
 
 ___________________________
 
hum, bezai, 10:19 hariph, anathoth,
nebai, 10:20 magpiash, meshullam, hezir, 10:21 meshezabeel, zadok,
jaddua, 10:22 pelatiah, hanan, anaiah, 10:23 hoshea, hananiah, hashub,
10:24 hallohesh, pileha, shobek, 10:25 rehum, hashabnah, maaseiah,
10:26 and ahijah, hanan, anan, 10:27 malluch, harim, baanah.

10:28 and the rest of the people, the priests, the levites, the
porters, the singers, the nethinims, and all they that had separated
themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of god, their
wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge,
and having understanding; 10:29 they clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in god's
law, which was given by moses the servant of god, and to observe and
do all the commandments of the lord our lord, and his judgments and
his statutes; 10:30 and that we would not give our daughters unto the
people of the land, not take their daughters for our sons: 10:31 and
if 
 
 ___________________________
 
the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath
day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on
the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the
exaction of every debt.

10:32 also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with
the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our god;
10:33 for the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for
the continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for
the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to
make an atonement for israel, and for all the work of the house of our
god.

10:34 and we cast the lots among the priests, the levites, and the
people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our god,
after the houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, 
 
 ___________________________
 
to
burn upon the altar of the lord our god, as it is written in the law:
10:35 and to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits
of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the lord:
10:36 also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is
written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks,
to bring to the house of our god, unto the priests that minister in
the house of our god: 10:37 and that we should bring the firstfruits
of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees,
of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of
our god; and the tithes of our ground unto the levites, that the same
levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.

10:38 and the priest the son of aaron shall be with the levites, when
the levites take tithes: and the levites shall bring up the tithe of
the tithes unto the house of
 
 ___________________________
 
 our god, to the chambers, into the
treasure house.

10:39 for the children of israel and the children of levi shall bring
the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the
chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that
minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake
the house of our god.

11:1 and the rulers of the people dwelt at jerusalem: the rest of the
people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in jerusalem the
holy city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities.

11:2 and the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered
themselves to dwell at jerusalem.

11:3 now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in jerusalem:
but in the cities of judah dwelt every one in his possession in their
cities, to wit, israel, the priests, and the levites, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 of joed, the son of pedaiah, the son of kolaiah, the son of
maaseiah, the son of ithiel, the son of jesaiah.

11:8 and after him gabbai, sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.

11:9 and joel the son of zichri was their overseer: and judah the son
of senuah was second over the city.

11:10 of the priests: jedaiah the son of joiarib, jachin.

11:11 seraiah the son of hilkiah, the son of meshullam, the son of
zadok, the son of meraioth, the son of ahitub, was the ruler of the
house of god.

11:12 and their brethren that did the work of the house were eight
hundred twenty and two: and adaiah the son of jeroham, the son of
pelaliah, the son of amzi, the son of zechariah, the son of pashur,
the son of malchiah.

11:13 and his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and
two: and amashai the son of azareel, the son of ahasai, the son of
meshillemoth, the son of immer, 11:14 and their brethren, mighty men
of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer w
 
 ___________________________
 
as
zabdiel, the son of one of the great men.

11:15 also of the levites: shemaiah the son of hashub, the son of
azrikam, the son of hashabiah, the son of bunni; 11:16 and shabbethai
and jozabad, of the chief of the levites, had the oversight of the
outward business of the house of god.

11:17 and mattaniah the son of micha, the son of zabdi, the son of
asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and
bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and abda the son of shammua,
the son of galal, the son of jeduthun.

11:18 all the levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and
four.

11:19 moreover the porters, akkub, talmon, and their brethren that
kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two.

11:20 and the residue of israel, of the priests
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the levites, were
in all the cities of judah, every one in his inheritance.

11:21 but the nethinims dwelt in ophel: and ziha and gispa were over
the nethinims.

11:22 the overseer also of the levites at jerusalem was uzzi the son
of bani, the son of hashabiah, the son of mattaniah, the son of micha.
of the sons of asaph, the singers were over the business of the house
of god.

11:23 for it was the king's commandment concerning them, that a
certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day.

11:24 and pethahiah the son of meshezabeel, of the children of zerah
the son of judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the
people.

11:25 and for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of
judah dwelt at kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at dibon,
and in the villages thereof, and at jekabzeel, and in the villages

 
 ___________________________
 
 eliashib, joiada, and johanan, and
jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
reign of darius the persian.

12:23 the sons of levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the
book of the chronicles, even until the days of johanan the son of
eliashib.

12:24 and the chief of the levites: hashabiah, sherebiah, and jeshua
the son of kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise
and to give thanks, according to the commandment of david the man of
god, ward over against ward.

12:25 mattaniah, and bakbukiah, obadiah, meshullam, talmon, akkub,
were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.

12:26 these were in the days of joiakim the son of jeshua, the son of
jozadak, and in the days of nehemiah the governor, and of ezra the
priest, the scribe.

12:27 and at the dedication of the wall of jerusalem they sought the
levites out of all their places, to bring them to jerusalem, to keep
the dedication with gladness, both w
 
 ___________________________
 
them went hoshaiah, and half of the princes of judah, 12:33 and
azariah, ezra, and meshullam, 12:34 judah, and benjamin, and shemaiah,
and jeremiah, 12:35 and certain of the priests' sons with trumpets;
namely, zechariah the son of jonathan, the son of shemaiah, the son of
mattaniah, the son of michaiah, the son of zaccur, the son of asaph:
12:36 and his brethren, shemaiah, and azarael, milalai, gilalai, maai,
nethaneel, and judah, hanani, with the musical instruments of david
the man of god, and ezra the scribe before them.

12:37 and at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went
up by the stairs of the city of david, at the going up of the wall,
above the house of david, even unto the water gate eastward.

12:38 and the other company of them that gave thanks went over against
them, and i after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from
beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall; 12:39 and
from above the gate of ephraim, and above t
 
 ___________________________
 
he old gate, and above the
fish gate, and the tower of hananeel, and the tower of meah, even unto
the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.

12:40 so stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house
of god, and i, and the half of the rulers with me: 12:41 and the
priests; eliakim, maaseiah, miniamin, michaiah, elioenai, zechariah,
and hananiah, with trumpets; 12:42 and maaseiah, and shemaiah, and
eleazar, and uzzi, and jehohanan, and malchijah, and elam, and ezer.
and the singers sang loud, with jezrahiah their overseer.

12:43 also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for
god had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the
children rejoiced: so that the joy 
 
 ___________________________
 
of jerusalem was heard even afar
off.

12:44 and at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of
the law for the priests and levites: for judah rejoiced for the
priests and for the levites that waited.

12:45 and both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their god,
and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of
david, and of solomon his son.

12:46 for in the days of david and asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the days of zerubbabel, and in the days of
nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the levites; and the
levites sanctified them unto the children of aaron.

 
 ___________________________
 

13:1 on that day they read in the book of moses in the audience of the
people; and therein was found written, that the ammonite and the
moabite should not come into the congregation of god for ever; 13:2
because they met not the children of israel with bread and with water,
but hired balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our
god turned the curse into a blessing.

13:3 now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separated from israel all the mixed multitude.

13:4 and before this, eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the
chamber of the house of our god, was allied unto tobiah: 13:5 and he
had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the
meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of
the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to be gi
 
 ___________________________
 
ven
to the levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offerings of
the priests.

13:6 but in all this time was not i at jerusalem: for in the two and
thirtieth year of artaxerxes king of babylon came i unto the king, and
after certain days obtained i leave of the king: 13:7 and i came to
jerusalem, and understood of the evil that eliashib did for tobiah, in
preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of god.

13:8 and it grieved me sore: therefore i cast forth all the household
stuff to tobiah out of the chamber.

13:9 then i commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither
brought i again the vessels of the house of god, with the meat
offering and the frankincense.

13:10 and i perceived that the portions of the levites had not been
given them: for the levites and the singers, that did the work, were
fled every one to his field.

13:11 then contended i with the rulers, and said
 
 ___________________________
 
, why is the house of
god forsaken? and i gathered them together, and set them in their
place.

13:12 then brought all judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine
and the oil unto the treasuries.

13:13 and i made treasurers over the treasuries, shelemiah the priest,
and zadok the scribe, and of the levites, pedaiah: and next to them
was hanan the son of zaccur, the son of mattaniah: for they were
counted faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their
brethren.

13:14 remember me, o my god, concern
 
 ___________________________
 
ing this, and wipe not out my good
deeds that i have done for the house of my god, and for the offices
thereof.

13:15 in those days saw i in judah some treading wine presses on the
sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine,
grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into
jerusalem on the sabbath day: and i testified against them in the day
wherein they sold victuals.

13:16 there dwelt men of tyre also therein, which brought fish, and
all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of
judah, and in jerusal
 
 ___________________________
 
em.

13:17 then i contended with the nobles of judah, and said unto them,
what evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?
13:18 did not your fathers thus, and did not our god bring all this
evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon israel
by profaning the sabbath.

13:19 and it came to pass, that when the gates of jerusalem began to
be dark before the sabbath, i commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and
some of my servants set i at the gates, that there should no burden be
brought in on the sabbath day.

13:20 so the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged w
 
 ___________________________
 
ithout
jerusalem once or twice.

13:21 then i testified against them, and said unto them, why lodge ye
about the wall? if ye do so again, i will lay hands on you. from that
time forth came they no more on the sabbath.

13:22 and i commanded the levites that they should cleanse themselves,
and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath
day.

remember me, o my god, concerning this also, and spare me according to
the greatness of thy mercy.

13:23 in those days also saw i jews that had married wives of ashdod,
of ammon, and of moab: 13:24 and their children spake half in the
speech of ashdod, and could not speak in the jews' language, but
according to the language of each people.

13:25 and i contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of
them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by god, saying,
ye shall not give your dau
 
 ___________________________
 
ghters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.

13:26 did not solomon king of israel sin by these things? yet among
many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his god,
and god made him king over all israel: nevertheless even him did
outlandish women cause to sin.

13:27 shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
transgress against our god in marrying strange wives?  13:28 and one
of the sons of joiada, the son of eliashib the high priest, was son in
law to sanballat the horonite: therefore i chased him from me.

13:29 remember them, o my god, because they have defiled the
priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the levites.

13:30 thus cleansed i them from all strangers, and appointed the wards
of the priests and the levites, every one in his business; 13:31 and
for the wood offering, at times appointed, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and for the firstfruits.
remember me, o my god, for good.




the book of esther


1:1 now it came to pass in the days of ahasuerus, (this is ahasuerus
which reigned, from india even unto ethiopia, over an hundred and
seven and twenty provinces:) 1:2 that in those days, when the king
ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in shushan the
palace, 1:3 in the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all
his princes and his servants; the power of persia and media, the
nobles and princes of the provinces, being b
 
 ___________________________
 
f the greatness of mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of media and persia?  10:3 for mordecai the jew was next unto king
ahasuerus, and great among the jews, and accepted of the multitude of
his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to
all his seed.




the book of job


1:1 there was a man in the land of uz, whose name was job; and that
man was perfect and upright, and one that feared god, and eschewed evil.

1:2 and there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.

1:3 his substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the
men of the east.

1:4 and his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day;
and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them.

1:5 and it was so, when the
 
 ___________________________
 
 days of their feasting were gone about,
that job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for
job said, it may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed god in their
hearts. thus did job continually.

1:6 now there was a day when the sons of god came to present
themselves before the lord, and satan came also among them.

1:7 and the lord said unto satan, whence comest thou? then satan
answered the lord, and said, from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it.

1:8 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil?  1:9 then satan
answered the lord, and said, doth job fear g
 
 ___________________________
 
ence of the lord.

1:13 and there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating
and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 1:14 and there came
a messenger unto job, and said, the oxen were plowing, and the asses
feeding beside them: 1:15 and the sabeans fell upon them, and took
them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and i only am escaped alone to tell thee.

1:16 while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the
fire of god is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
the servants, and consumed them; and i only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

1:17 while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the
chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have
carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and i only am escaped alone to tell thee.

1:18 while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, thy
sons and thy daughters were e
 
 ___________________________
 
a great wind from the
wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon
the young men, and they are dead; and i only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

1:20 then job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and
fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, 1:21 and said, naked came i
out of my mother's womb, and naked shall i return thither: the lord
gave, and the lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the lord.

1:22 in all this job sinned not, nor charged god foolishly.

2:1 again there was a day when the sons of god came to present
themselves before the lord, and satan came also among them to present
himself before the lord.

2:2 and the lord said unto satan, from whence comest thou? and satan
answered the lord, and said, from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it.

2:3 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, on
 
 ___________________________
 
e that feareth god, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause.

2:4 and satan answered the lord, and said, skin for skin, yea, all
that a man hath will he give for his life.

2:5 but put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face.

2:6 and the lord said unto satan, behold, he is in thine hand; but
save his life.

2:7 so went satan forth from the presence of the lord, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd smote job
with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.

2:8 and he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes.

2:9 then said his wife unto him, dost thou still retain thine
integrity?  curse god, and die.

2:10 but he said unto her, thou speakest as one of the foolish women
speaketh. what? shall we receive good at the hand of god, and shall we
not receive evil? in all this did not job sin with his lips.

2:11 now when job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come
upon him, they came every one from his own place; eliphaz the
temanite, and bildad the shuhite, and zophar the naamathite: for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to
comfort him.

2:12 and when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not,
they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one 
 
 ___________________________
 
his
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.

2:13 so they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief
was very great.

3:1 after this opened job his mouth, and cursed his day.

3:2 and job spake, and said, 3:3 let the day perish wherein i was
born, and the night in which it was said, there is a man child
conceived.

3:4 let that day be darkness; let not god regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it.

3:5 let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell
upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.

3:6 as for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be
joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of
the months.

3:7 lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.

3:8 let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up
their mourning.

3
 
 ___________________________
 
t
rest.

3:18 there the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
oppressor.

3:19 the small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
master.

3:20 wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto
the bitter in soul; 3:21 which long for death, but it cometh not; and
dig for it more than for hid treasures; 3:22 which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave?  3:23 why is
light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom god hath hedged in?
3:24 for my sighing cometh before i eat, and my roarings are poured
out like the waters.

3:25 for the thing which i greatly feared is come upon me, and that
which i was afraid of is come unto me.

3:26 i was not in safety, neither had i rest, neither was i quiet; yet
trouble came.

4:1 then eliphaz the temanite answered and said, 4:2 if we assay to
commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself
from speaking?  4:3 behold, thou hast instructed 
 
 ___________________________
 
.

4:4 thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast
strengthened the feeble knees.

4:5 but now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee,
and thou art troubled.

4:6 is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the
uprightness of thy ways?  4:7 remember, i pray thee, who ever
perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?  4:8
even as i have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap
the same.

4:9 by the blast of god they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils
are they consumed.

4:10 the roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and
the teeth of the young lions, are broken.

4:11 the old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's
whelps are scattered abroad.

4:12 now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a
little thereof.

4:13 in thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, 4:14 fear came upon me, and trembling, which 
 
 ___________________________
 
made all
my bones to shake.

4:15 then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood
up: 4:16 it stood still, but i could not discern the form thereof: an
image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and i heard a voice,
saying, 4:17 shall mortal man be more just than god? shall a man be
more pure than his maker?  4:18 behold, he put no trust in his
servants; and his angels he charged with folly: 4:19 how much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,
which are crushed before the moth?  4:20 they are destroyed from
morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it.

4:21 doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die,
even without wisdom.

5:1 call now, if there be any that will answer the
 
 ___________________________
 
en the foolish taking root: but suddenly i cursed his
habitation.

5:4 his children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the
gate, neither is there any to deliver them.

5:5 whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the
thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance.

5:6 although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth
trouble spring out of the ground; 5:7 yet man is born unto trouble, as
the sparks fly upward.

5:8 i would seek unto god, and unto god would i commit my cause: 5:9
which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without
number: 5:10 who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon
the fields: 5:11 to set up on high those that be low; that those which
mourn may be exalted to safety.

5:12 he disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise.

5:13 he taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of
the froward is carried headlong.
 
 ___________________________
 


5:14 they meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noonday
as in the night.

5:15 but he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
the hand of the mighty.

5:16 so the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.

5:17 behold, happy is the man whom god correcteth: therefore despise
not thou the chastening of the almighty: 5:18 for he maketh sore, and
bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole.

5:19 he shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee.

5:20 in famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the
power of the sword.

5:21 thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt
thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.

5:22 at destruction and famine thou sh
 
 ___________________________
 
thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season.

5:27 lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thy good.

6:1 but job answered and said, 6:2 oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together!  6:3 for now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up.

6:4 for the arrows of the almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of god do set themselves in array
against me.

6:5 doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder?  6:6 can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or
is there any taste in the white of an egg?  6:7 the things that my
soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat.

6:8 oh that i might have my request; and that god would grant me the
thing that i long for!  6:9 even that it would please god to destroy
me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!  
 
 ___________________________
 
7:20 i have sinned; what shall i do unto thee, o thou
preserver of men?  why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that i am a burden to myself?  7:21 and why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall i sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but i shall not be.

8:1 then answered bildad the shuhite, and said, 8:2 how long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind?  8:3 doth god pervert judgment? or doth the almighty
pervert justice?  8:4 if thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 if thou wouldest seek
unto god betimes, and make thy supplication to the almighty; 8:6 if
thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and
make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

8:7 though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase.

8:8 for enquire, i pray thee, of the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ormer age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (for we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart?  8:11 can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water?  8:12 whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth before any other herb.

8:13 so are the paths of all that forget god; and the hypocrite's hope
shall perish: 8:14 whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
be a spider's web.

8:15 he shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure.

8:16 he is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
garden.

8:17 his roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones.

8:18 if he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
i have not seen thee.

8:19 behold
 
 ___________________________
 
, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow.

8:20 behold, god will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing.

8:22 they that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought.

9:1 then job answered and said, 9:2 i know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with god?  9:3 if he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand.

9:4 he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered?  9:5 which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger.

9:6 which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble.

9:7 which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars.

9:8 which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadet
 
 ___________________________
 
h upon the waves
of the sea.

9:9 which maketh arcturus, orion, and pleiades, and the chambers of
the south.

9:10 which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders
without number.

9:11 lo, he goeth by me, and i see him not: he passeth on also, but i
perceive him not.

9:12 behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, what doest thou?  9:13 if god will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him.

9:14 how much less shall i answer him, and choose out my words to
reason with him?  9:15 whom, though i were righteous, yet would i not
answer, but i would make supplication to my judge.

9:16 if i had called, and he had answered me; yet would i not believe
that he had hearkened unto my voice.

9:17 for he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds
without cause.

9:18 he will not suffer me to take my br
 
 ___________________________
 
hall abhor me.

9:32 for he is not a man, as i am, that i should answer him, and we
should come together in judgment.

9:33 neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon us both.

9:34 let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify
me: 9:35 then would i speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with
me.

10:1 my soul is weary of my life; i will leave my complaint upon
myself; i will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

10:2 i will say unto god, do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou
contendest with me.

10:3 is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou
shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel
of the wicked?  10:4 hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man
seeth?  10:5 are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's
days, 10:6 that thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest
after my sin?  10:7 thou knowest that i am not wicked; and there is
none that can deliver
 
 ___________________________
 
ow of death; 10:22 a land of
darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is as darkness.

11:1 then answered zophar the naamathite, and said, 11:2 should not
the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be
justified?  11:3 should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when
thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?  11:4 for thou hast
said, my doctrine is pure, and i am clean in thine eyes.

11:5 but oh that god would speak, and open his lips against thee; 11:6
and that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are
double to that which is! know therefore that god exacteth of thee less
than thine iniquity deserveth.

11:7 canst thou by searching find out god? canst thou find out the
almighty unto perfection?  11:8 it is as high as heaven; what canst
thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?  11:9 the measure
thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.

11:10 if
 
 ___________________________
 
alt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea,
many shall make suit unto thee.

11:20 but the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.

12:1 and job answered and said, 12:2 no doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you.

12:3 but i have understanding as well as you; i am not inferior to
you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these?  12:4 i am as one
mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon god, and he answereth him:
the just upright man is laughed to scorn.

12:5 he that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in
the thought of him that is at ease.

12:6 the tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke god are
secure; into whose hand god bringeth abundantly.

12:7 but ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee: 12:8 or speak to the earth, and
it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall de
 
 ___________________________
 
nd straiteneth them again.

12:24 he taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the
earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no
way.

12:25 they grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to
stagger like a drunken man.

13:1 lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and
understood it.

13:2 what ye know, the same do i know also: i am not inferior unto
you.

13:3 surely i would speak to the almighty, and i desire to reason with
god.

13:4 but ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.

13:5 o that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your
wisdom.

13:6 hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.

13:7 will ye speak wickedly for god? and talk deceitfully for him?
13:8 will ye accept his person? will ye contend for god?  13:9 is it
good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do
ye so mock him?  13:10 he will surely reprove you, if ye do 
 
 ___________________________
 
4:21 his sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are
brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them.

14:22 but his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
shall mourn.

15:1 then answered eliphaz the temanite, and said, 15:2 should a wise
man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind?  15:3
should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he
can do no good?  15:4 yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest
prayer before god.

15:5 for thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the
tongue of the crafty.

15:6 thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not i: yea, thine own lips
testify against thee.

15:7 art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before
the hills?  15:8 hast thou heard the secret of god? and dost thou
restrain wisdom to thyself?  15:9 what knowest thou, that we know not?
what understandest thou, which is not in us?  15:10 with us are both
the grayheaded and very aged m
 
 ___________________________
 
en, much elder than thy father.

15:11 are the consolations of god small with thee? is there any secret
thing with thee?  15:12 why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what
do thy eyes wink at, 15:13 that thou turnest thy spirit against god,
and lettest such words go out of thy mouth?  15:14 what is man, that
he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous?  15:15 behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the
heavens are not clean in his sight.

15:16 how much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh
iniquity like water?  15:17 i will shew thee, hear me; and that which
i have seen i will declare; 15:18 which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hid it: 15:19 u
 
 ___________________________
 
idden to the oppressor.

15:21 a dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him.

15:22 he believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is
waited for of the sword.

15:23 he wandereth abroad for bread, saying, where is it? he knoweth
that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

15:24 trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a king ready to the battle.

15:25 for he stretcheth out his hand against god, and strengtheneth
himself against the almighty.

15:26 he runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of
his bucklers: 15:27 because he covereth his face with his fatness, and
maketh collops of fat on his flanks.

15:28 and he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man
inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.

15:29 he shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue,
neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.

15:30 he sh
 
 ___________________________
 
 now he hath made me weary: thou hast made
desolate all my company.

16:8 and thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against
me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face.

16:9 he teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me
with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.

16:10 they have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me
upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together
against me.

16:11 god hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into
the hands of the wicked.

16:12 i was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken
me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.

16:13 his archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins
asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground.

16:14 he breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like
a giant.

16:15 i have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and def
 
 ___________________________
 
iled my horn in the
dust.

16:16 my face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of
death; 16:17 not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is
pure.

16:18 o earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.

16:19 also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on
high.

16:20 my friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto god.

16:21 o that one might plead for a man with god, as a man pleadeth for
his neighbour!  16:22 when a few years are come, then i shall go the
way whence i shall not return.

17:1 my breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready
for me.

17:2 are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in
their provocation?  17:3 lay down now, put me in a surety with thee;
who is he that will strike hands with me?  17:4 for thou hast hid
their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them.

17:5 he th
 
 ___________________________
 
e cut off.

18:17 his remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have
no name in the street.

18:18 he shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of
the world.

18:19 he shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any
remaining in his dwellings.

18:20 they that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they
that went before were affrighted.

18:21 surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the
place of him that knoweth not god.

19:1 then job answered and said, 19:2 how long will ye vex my soul,
and break me in pieces with words?  19:3 these ten times have ye
reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to
me.

19:4 and be it indeed that i have erred, mine error remaineth with
myself.

19:5 if indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead
against me my reproach: 19:6 know now that god hath overthrown me, and
hath compassed me with his net.

19:7 behold, i cry out of wrong,
 
 ___________________________
 
 me no answer; i intreated him
with my mouth.

19:17 my breath is strange to my wife, though i intreated for the
children's sake of mine own body.

19:18 yea, young children despised me; i arose, and they spake against
me.

19:19 all my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom i loved are
turned against me.

19:20 my bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and i am escaped
with the skin of my teeth.

19:21 have pity upon me, have pity upon me, o ye my friends; for the
hand of god hath touched me.

19:22 why do ye persecute me as god, and are not satisfied with my
flesh?  19:23 oh that my words were now written! oh that they were
printed in a book!  19:24 that they were graven with an iron pen and
lead in the rock for ever!  19:25 for i know that my redeemer liveth,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: 19:26 and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall i
see god: 19:27 whom i shall see for myself, and mine eyes shal
 
 ___________________________
 
dren shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall
restore their goods.

20:11 his bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust.

20:12 though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under
his tongue; 20:13 though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it
still within his mouth: 20:14 yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it
is the gall of asps within him.

20:15 he hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again:
god shall cast them out of his belly.

20:16 he shall suck the poison of asps: the viper's tongue shall slay
him.

20:17 he shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and
butter.

20:18 that which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not
swallow it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be,
and he shall not rejoice therein.

20:19 because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor; because he
hath violently taken away an house which he builded no
 
 ___________________________
 
t; 20:20 surely
he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired.

20:21 there shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man
look for his goods.

20:22 in the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every
hand of the wicked shall come upon him.

20:23 when he is about to fill his belly, god shall cast the fury of
his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.

20:24 he shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him through.

20:25 it is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering
sword cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon him.

20:26 all darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown
shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his
tabernacle.

20:27 the heaven shall reveal his ini
 
 ___________________________
 
quity; and the earth shall rise
up against him.

20:28 the increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow
away in the day of his wrath.

20:29 this is the portion of a wicked man from god, and the heritage
appointed unto him by god.

21:1 but job answered and said, 21:2 hear diligently my speech, and
let this be your consolations.

21:3 suffer me that i may speak; and after that i have spoken, mock
on.

21:4 as for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should
not my spirit be troubled?  21:5 mark me, and be astonished, and lay
your hand upon your mouth.

21:6 even when i remember i am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my
flesh.

21:7 wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty 
 
 ___________________________
 
in
power?  21:8 their seed is established in their sight with them, and
their offspring before their eyes.

21:9 their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of god upon
them.

21:10 their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and
casteth not her calf.

21:11 they send forth their little ones like a flock, and their
children dance.

21:12 they take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
organ.

21:13 they spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the
grave.

21:14 therefore they say unto god, depart from us; for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways.

21:15 what is the almighty, that we should s
 
 ___________________________
 
erve him? and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him?  21:16 lo, their good is not in
their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

21:17 how oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh
their destruction upon them! god distributeth sorrows in his anger.

21:18 they are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm
carrieth away.

21:19 god layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him,
and he shall know it.

21:20 his eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the
wrath of the almighty.

21:21 for what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the
number of his months is cut off in the midst?  21:22 shall any teach
god knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are high.

21:23 one dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.

21:24 his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are
 
 ___________________________
 
to the
day of wrath.

21:31 who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him
what he hath done?  21:32 yet shall he be brought to the grave, and
shall remain in the tomb.

21:33 the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man
shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him.

21:34 how then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there
remaineth falsehood?  22:1 then eliphaz the temanite answered and
said, 22:2 can a man be profitable unto god, as he that is wise may be
profitable unto himself?  22:3 is it any pleasure to the almighty,
that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy
ways perfect?  22:4 will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he
enter with thee into judgment?  22:5 is not thy wickedness great? and
thine iniquities infinite?  22:6 for thou hast taken a pledge from thy
brother for nought, and stripped the naked of their clothing.

22:7 thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou hast
withholden bread from the hungry.

22:8 but as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable
man dwelt in it.

22:9 thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless
have been broken.

22:10 therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth
thee; 22:11 or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abundance of
waters cover thee.

22:12 is not god in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
stars, how high they are!  22:13 and thou sayest, how doth god know?
can he judge through the dark cloud?  22:14 thick clouds are a
covering to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of
heaven.

22:15 hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
22:16 which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown
with a flood: 22:17 which said unto god, depart from us: and what can
the almighty do for 
 
 ___________________________
 
ee.

22:22 receive, i pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his
words in thine heart.

22:23 if thou return to the almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou
shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.

22:24 then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of ophir as
the stones of the brooks.

22:25 yea, the almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have
plenty of silver.

22:26 for then shalt thou have thy delight in the almighty, and shalt
lift up thy face unto god.

22:27 thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shalt pay thy vows.

22:28 thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

22:29 when men are cast down, then thou shalt say, there is lifting
up; and he shall save the humble person.

22:30 he shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered
by the pureness of thine hands.

23:1 then job answered and said, 23:2 even to day is 
 
 ___________________________
 
ath held his steps, his way have i kept, and not
declined.

23:12 neither have i gone back from the commandment of his lips; i
have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.

23:13 but he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul
desireth, even that he doeth.

23:14 for he performeth the thing that is appointed for me: and many
such things are with him.

23:15 therefore am i troubled at his presence: when i consider, i am
afraid of him.

23:16 for god maketh my heart soft, and the almighty troubleth me:
23:17 because i was not cut off before the darkness, neither hath he
covered the darkness from my face.

24:1 why, seeing times are not hidden from the almighty, do they that
know him not see his days?  24:2 some remove the landmarks; they
violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.

24:3 they drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's
ox for a pledge.

24:4 they turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the ear
 
 ___________________________
 
at they have no
covering in the cold.

24:8 they are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the
rock for want of a shelter.

24:9 they pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of
the poor.

24:10 they cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away
the sheaf from the hungry; 24:11 which make oil within their walls,
and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.

24:12 men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded
crieth out: yet god layeth not folly to them.

24:13 they are of those that rebel against the light; they know not
the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

24:14 the murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy,
and in the night is as a thief.

24:15 the eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying,
no eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.

24:16 in the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime: they know not the light.

 
 ___________________________
 
ey are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought
low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the
tops of the ears of corn.

24:25 and if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my
speech nothing worth?  25:1 then answered bildad the shuhite, and
said, 25:2 dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high
places.

25:3 is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his
light arise?  25:4 how then can man be justified with god? or how can
he be clean that is born of a woman?  25:5 behold even to the moon,
and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight.

25:6 how much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a
worm?  26:1 but job answered and said, 26:2 how hast thou helped him
that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?
26:3 how hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast
thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?  26:4 to whom hast thou
 
 ___________________________
 
e day and
night come to an end.

26:11 the pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof.

26:12 he divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
smiteth through the proud.

26:13 by his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath
formed the crooked serpent.

26:14 lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?  27:1
moreover job continued his parable, and said, 27:2 as god liveth, who
hath taken away my judgment; and the almighty, who hath vexed my soul;
27:3 all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of god is in my
nostrils; 27:4 my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter
deceit.

27:5 god forbid that i should justify you: till i die i will not
remove mine integrity from me.

27:6 my righteousness i hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart
shall not reproach me so long as i live.

27:7 let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he th
 
 ___________________________
 
at riseth up against me
as the unrighteous.

27:8 for what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained,
when god taketh away his soul?  27:9 will god hear his cry when
trouble cometh upon him?  27:10 will he delight himself in the
almighty? will he always call upon god?  27:11 i will teach you by the
hand of god: that which is with the almighty will i not conceal.

27:12 behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus
altogether vain?  27:13 this is the portion of a wicked man with god,
and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of the
almighty.

27:14 if his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his
offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.

27:15 those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his
widows shall not weep.

27:16 though he hea
 
 ___________________________
 

clay; 27:17 he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the
innocent shall divide the silver.

27:18 he buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper
maketh.

27:19 the rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he
openeth his eyes, and he is not.

27:20 terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away
in the night.

27:21 the east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a
storm hurleth him out of his place.

27:22 for god shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee
out of his hand.

27:23 men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his
place.

28:1 surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where
they fine it.

28:2 iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the
stone.

28:3 he setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection:
the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.

28:4 the flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; e
 
 ___________________________
 

shall not be for jewels of fine gold.

28:18 no mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price
of wisdom is above rubies.

28:19 the topaz of ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be
valued with pure gold.

28:20 whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding?  28:21 seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living,
and kept close from the fowls of the air.

28:22 destruction and death say, we have heard the fame thereof with
our ears.

28:23 god understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place
thereof.

28:24 for he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the
whole heaven; 28:25 to make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth
the waters by measure.

28:26 when he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning
of the thunder: 28:27 then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared
it, yea, and searched it out.

28:28 and unto man he said, behold, the fear of the lord, that is
wisdom; and to depart f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom evil is understanding.

29:1 moreover job continued his parable, and said, 29:2 oh that i were
as in months past, as in the days when god preserved me; 29:3 when his
candle shined upon my head, and when by his light i walked through
darkness; 29:4 as i was in the days of my youth, when the secret of
god was upon my tabernacle; 29:5 when the almighty was yet with me,
when my children were about me; 29:6 when i washed my steps with
butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; 29:7 when i went out
to the gate through the city, when i prepared my seat in the street!
29:8 the young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and
stood up.

29:9 the princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their
mouth.

29:10 the nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to th
 
 ___________________________
 


30:27 my bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction
prevented me.

30:28 i went mourning without the sun: i stood up, and i cried in the
congregation.

30:29 i am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.

30:30 my skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat.

30:31 my harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice
of them that weep.

31:1 i made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should i think upon a
maid?  31:2 for what portion of god is there from above? and what
inheritance of the almighty from on high?  31:3 is not destruction to
the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?  31:4
doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?  31:5 if i have
walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit; 31:6 let me
be weighed in an even balance that god may know mine integrity.

31:7 if my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked
after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine h
 
 ___________________________
 
9 if mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if i have laid
wait at my neighbour's door; 31:10 then let my wife grind unto
another, and let others bow down upon her.

31:11 for this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be
punished by the judges.

31:12 for it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root
out all mine increase.

31:13 if i did despise the cause of my manservant or of my
maidservant, when they contended with me; 31:14 what then shall i do
when god riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall i answer him?
31:15 did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb?  31:16 if i have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; 31:17 or have
eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten
thereof; 31:18 (for from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a
father, and i have guided her from my mother's womb;) 31:19 if i have
seen any perish for wan
 
 ___________________________
 
t of clothing, or any poor without covering;
31:20 if his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with
the fleece of my sheep; 31:21 if i have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, when i saw my help in the gate: 31:22 then let mine arm
fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

31:23 for destruction from god was a terror to me, and by reason of
his highness i could not endure.

31:24 if i have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, thou
art my confidence; 31:25 if i rejoice because my wealth was great, and
because mine hand had gotten much; 31:26 if i beheld the sun when it
shined, or the moon walking in brightness; 31:27 and my heart hath
been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand: 31:28 this
also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for i should have
denie
 
 ___________________________
 
d the god that is above.

31:29 if i rejoice at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted
up myself when evil found him: 31:30 neither have i suffered my mouth
to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.

31:31 if the men of my tabernacle said not, oh that we had of his
flesh!  we cannot be satisfied.

31:32 the stranger did not lodge in the street: but i opened my doors
to the traveller.

31:33 if i covered my transgressions as adam, by hiding mine iniquity
in my bosom: 31:34 did i fear a 
 
 ___________________________
 
reof
complain; 31:39 if i have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or
have caused the owners thereof to lose their life: 31:40 let thistles
grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley.

the words of job are ended.

32:1 so these three men ceased to answer job, because he was righteous
in his own eyes.

32:2 then was kindled the wrath of elihu the son of barachel the
buzite, of the kindred of ram: against job was his wrath kindled,
because he justified himself rather than god.

32:3 also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemned job.

32:4 now elihu had waited till job had spoken, because they were elder
than he.

32:5 when elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these
three men, then his wrath was kindled.

32:6 and elihu the son of barachel the buzite answered and said, i am
young, and ye are very old; wherefore i was afraid, and durst not shew
you mine opinion.

32:7 i said, 
 
 ___________________________
 
n: and the inspiration of the almighty
giveth them understanding.

32:9 great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand
judgment.

32:10 therefore i said, hearken to me; i also will shew mine opinion.

32:11 behold, i waited for your words; i gave ear to your reasons,
whilst ye searched out what to say.

32:12 yea, i attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you
that convinced job, or that answered his words: 32:13 lest ye should
say, we have found out wisdom: god thrusteth him down, not man.

32:14 now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will i
answer him with your speeches.

32:15 they were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.

32:16 when i had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and
answered no more;) 32:17 i said, i will answer also my part, i also
will shew mine opinion.

32:18 for i am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.

32:19 behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; 
 
 ___________________________
 
swer.

32:21 let me not, i pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me
give flattering titles unto man.

32:22 for i know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker
would soon take me away.

33:1 wherefore, job, i pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all
my words.

33:2 behold, now i have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my
mouth.

33:3 my words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips
shall utter knowledge clearly.

33:4 the spirit of god hath made me, and the breath of the almighty
hath given me life.

33:5 if thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand
up.

33:6 behold, i am according to thy wish in god's stead: i also am
formed out of the clay.

33:7 behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my
hand be heavy upon thee.

33:8 surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and i have heard the
voice of thy words, saying, 33:9 i am clean without transgression, i
am innocent; neither is
 
 ___________________________
 
 there iniquity in me.

33:10 behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his
enemy, 33:11 he putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my
paths.

33:12 behold, in this thou art not just: i will answer thee, that god
is greater than man.

33:13 why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of
any of his matters.

33:14 for god speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not.

33:15 in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth
upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; 33:16 then he openeth the ears
of men, and sealeth their instruction, 33:17 that he may withdraw man
from his purpose, and hide pride from man.

33:18 he keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from
perishing by the sword.

33:19 he is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude
of his bones with strong 
 
 ___________________________
 
at it cannot be seen; and his
bones that were not seen stick out.

33:22 yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the
destroyers.

33:23 if there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness: 33:24 then he is gracious
unto him, and saith, deliver him from going down to the pit: i have
found a ransom.

33:25 his flesh shall be fresher than a child's: he shall return to
the days of his youth: 33:26 he shall pray unto god, and he will be
favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will
render unto man his righteousness.

33:27 he looketh upon men, and if any say, i have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; 33:28 he will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the
light.

33:29 lo, all these things worketh god oftentimes with man, 33:30 to
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living.

33:3
 
 ___________________________
 
 will
speak.

33:32 if thou hast anything to say, answer me: speak, for i desire to
justify thee.

33:33 if not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and i shall teach thee
wisdom.

34:1 furthermore elihu answered and said, 34:2 hear my words, o ye
wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.

34:3 for the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.

34:4 let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is
good.

34:5 for job hath said, i am righteous: and god hath taken away my
judgment.

34:6 should i lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
transgression.

34:7 what man is like job, who drinketh up scorning like water?  34:8
which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with
wicked men.

34:9 for he hath said, it profiteth a man nothing that he should
delight himself with god.

34:10 therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it
from god, that he should do wickedness; and from the almighty
 
 ___________________________
 
, that he
should commit iniquity.

34:11 for the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every
man to find according to his ways.

34:12 yea, surely god will not do wickedly, neither will the almighty
pervert judgment.

34:13 who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed
the whole world?  34:14 if he set his heart upon man, if he gather
unto himself his spirit and his breath; 34:15 all flesh shall perish
together, and man shall turn again unto dust.

34:16 if now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice
of my words.

34:17 shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn
him that is mo
 
 ___________________________
 
st just?  34:18 is it fit to say to a king, thou art
wicked? and to princes, ye are ungodly?  34:19 how much less to him
that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more
than the poor? for they all are the work of his hands.

34:20 in a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at
midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without
hand.

34:21 for his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his
goings.

34:22 there is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves.

34:23 
 
 ___________________________
 
for he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should
enter into judgment with god.

34:24 he shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set
others in their stead.

34:25 therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the
night, so that they are destroyed.

34:26 he striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;
34:27 because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of
his ways: 34:28 so that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto
him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted.

34:29 when he giveth quietness, who
 
 ___________________________
 
 then can make trouble? and when he
hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a
nation, or against a man only: 34:30 that the hypocrite reign not,
lest the people be ensnared.

34:31 surely it is meet to be said unto god, i have borne
chastisement, i will not offend any more: 34:32 that which i see not
teach thou me: if i have done iniquity, i will do no more.

34:33 should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it,
whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not i: therefore
speak what thou knowest.

34:34 let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken
unto me.

34:35 job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
wisdom.

34:36 my desire is that job may
 
 ___________________________
 
 be tried unto the end because of his
answers for wicked men.

34:37 for he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands
among us, and multiplieth his words against god.

35:1 elihu spake moreover, and said, 35:2 thinkest thou this to be
right, that thou saidst, my righteousness is more than god's?  35:3
for thou saidst, what advantage will it be unto thee? and, what profit
shall i have, if i be cleansed from my sin?  35:4 i will answer thee,
and thy companions with thee.

35:5 look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds which are
higher than thou.

35:6 if thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?  35:7 if thou
be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine
hand?  35:8 thy wicked
 
 ___________________________
 
ness may hurt a man as thou art; and thy
righteousness may profit the son of man.

35:9 by reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed
to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.

35:10 but none saith, where is god my maker, who giveth songs in the
night; 35:11 who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and
maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?  35:12 there they cry, but
none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men.

35:13 surely god will not hear vanity, neither will the almighty
regard it.

35:14 although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is
before him; therefore trust thou in him.

35:15 but now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet
he knoweth it not in great extremity: 35:16 therefore doth job open
his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.

36:1 elihu also proceeded, and said, 36:2 suffer me a little, and i
will shew thee that i have yet to speak on god's beh
 
 ___________________________
 
alf.

36:3 i will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe
righteousness to my maker.

36:4 for truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.

36:5 behold, god is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in
strength and wisdom.

36:6 he preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the
poor.

36:7 he withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings
are they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they
are exalted.

36:8 and if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction; 36:9 then he sheweth them their work, and their
transgressions that they have exceeded.

36:10 he openeth 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of fatness.

36:17 but thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and
justice take hold on thee.

36:18 because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his
stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

36:19 will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of
strength.

36:20 desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.

36:21 take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather
than affliction.

36:22 behold, god exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him?  36:23
who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, thou hast wrought
iniquity?  36:24 remember that thou magnify his work, which men
behold.

36:25 every man may see it; man may behold it afar off.

36:26 behold, god is great, and we know him not, neither can the
number of his years be searched out.

36:27 for he maketh small the drops of water: they pour down rain
according to the vapour thereof: 36:28 which the clouds do drop and
di
 
 ___________________________
 
etwixt.

36:33 the noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattle also
concerning the vapour.

37:1 at this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place.

37:2 hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth
out of his mouth.

37:3 he directeth it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto
the ends of the earth.

37:4 after it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his
excellency; and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.

37:5 god thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth
he, which we cannot comprehend.

37:6 for he saith to the snow, be thou on the earth; likewise to the
small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.

37:7 he sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his
work.

37:8 then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.

37:9 out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.

37:10 by the breath of god frost is given: and the breadth of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
waters is straitened.

37:11 also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his
bright cloud: 37:12 and it is turned round about by his counsels: that
they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world
in the earth.

37:13 he causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for his land,
or for mercy.

37:14 hearken unto this, o job: stand still, and consider the wondrous
works of god.

37:15 dost thou know when god disposed them, and caused the light of
his cloud to shine?  37:16 dost thou know the balancings of the
clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
37:17 how thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the
south wind?  37:18 hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is
strong, and as a molten looking glass?  37:19 teach us what we shall
say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.

37:20 shall it be told him that i speak? if a man s
 
 ___________________________
 
peak, surely he
shall be swallowed up.

37:21 and now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but
the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.

37:22 fair weather cometh out of the north: with god is terrible
majesty.

37:23 touching the almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent
in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not
afflict.

37:24 men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise
of heart.

38:1 then the lord answered job out of the whirlwind, and said, 38:2
who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?  38:3
gird up now thy loins like a man; for i will demand of thee, and
answer thou me.

38:4 where wast th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou when i laid the foundations of the earth?
declare, if thou hast understanding.

38:5 who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath
stretched the line upon it?  38:6 whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; 38:7 when the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of god shouted for joy?
38:8 or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it
had issued out of the womb?  38:9 when i made the cloud the garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it, 38:10 and brake up
for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors, 38:11 and said,
hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed?  38:12 hast thou commanded the morning since thy
days; and caused the dayspring to know his place; 38:13 that it migh
 
 ___________________________
 
 38:36 who hath put
wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the
heart?  38:37 who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the
bottles of heaven, 38:38 when the dust groweth into hardness, and the
clods cleave fast together?  38:39 wilt thou hunt the prey for the
lion? or fill the appetite of the young lions, 38:40 when they couch
in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?  38:41 who
provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto god,
they wander for lack of meat.

39:1 knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring
forth? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?  39:2 canst thou
number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they
bring forth?  39:3 they bow themselves, they bring forth their young
ones, they cast out their sorrows.

39:4 their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they
go forth, and return not unto them.

39:5 who hath sent out the wild ass fr
 
 ___________________________
 
 labour to him?  39:12
wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it
into thy barn?  39:13 gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks?
or wings and feathers unto the ostrich?  39:14 which leaveth her eggs
in the earth, and warmeth them in dust, 39:15 and forgetteth that the
foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them.

39:16 she is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not
her's: her labour is in vain without fear; 39:17 because god hath
deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her understanding.

39:18 what time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse
and his rider.

39:19 hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck
with thunder?  39:20 canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the
glory of his nostrils is terrible.

39:21 he paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth
on to meet the armed men.

39:22 he mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and stretch her wings toward
the south?  39:27 doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her
nest on high?  39:28 she dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the
crag of the rock, and the strong place.

39:29 from thence she seeketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.

39:30 her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are,
there is she.

40:1 moreover the lord answered job, and said, 40:2 shall he that
contendeth with the almighty instruct him? he that reproveth god, let
him answer it.

40:3 then job answered the lord, and said, 40:4 behold, i am vile;
what shall i answer thee? i will lay mine hand upon my mouth.

40:5 once have i spoken; but i will not answer: yea, twice; but i will
proceed no further.

40:6 then answered the lord unto job out of the whirlwind, and said,
40:7 gird up thy loins now like a man: i will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me.

40:8 wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that
thou mayest be 
 
 ___________________________
 
righteous?  40:9 hast thou an arm like god? or canst
thou thunder with a voice like him?  40:10 deck thyself now with
majesty and excellency; and array thyself with glory and beauty.

40:11 cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is
proud, and abase him.

40:12 look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread
down the wicked in their place.

40:13 hide them in the dust together; and bind their faces in secret.

40:14 then will i also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can
save thee
 
 ___________________________
 
.

40:15 behold now behemoth, which i made with thee; he eateth grass as
an ox.

40:16 lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the
navel of his belly.

40:17 he moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are
wrapped together.

40:18 his bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars
of iron.

40:19 he is the chief of the ways of god: he that made him can make
his sword to approach unto him.

40:20 surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts
of the field play.

40:21 he lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and
fens.

40:22 the shady trees cover him with their shadow; the willows of the
brook compass him about.

40:23 behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth
that he can draw up jordan into his mouth.

40:24 he taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth
 
 ___________________________
 
st, jemima; and the name of the
second, kezia; and the name of the third, kerenhappuch.

42:15 and in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters
of job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.

42:16 after this lived job an hundred and forty years, and saw his
sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.

42:17 so job died, being old and full of days.




the book of psalms


1:1 blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful.

1:2 but his delight is in the law of the lord; and in his law doth he
meditate day and night.

1:3 and he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not
wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

1:4 the ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind
driveth away.

1:5 therefore the ungodly shall not stand in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e judgment, nor sinners
in the congregation of the righteous.

1:6 for the lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the
ungodly shall perish.



2:1 why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

2:2 the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the lord, and against his anointed, saying,

2:3 let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from
us.

2:4 he that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the lord shall have
them in derision.

2:5 then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure.

2:6 yet have 
 
 ___________________________
 
s like a potter's vessel.

2:10 be wise now therefore, o ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of
the earth.

2:11 serve the lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

2:12 kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little. blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.



3:1 lord, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that
rise up against me.

3:2 many there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in
god.

selah.

3:3 but thou, o lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up
of mine head.

3:4 i cried unto the lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his
holy hill. selah.

3:5 i laid me down and slept; i awaked; for the lord sustained me.

3:6 i will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
themselves against me round about.

3:7 arise, o lord; save me, o my god: for thou hast smitten all mine
enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
ungodly.

3:8 salvation belongeth unto the lord: thy blessing is upon thy
people.

selah.



4:1 hear me when i call, o god of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged
me when i was in distress; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.

4:2 o ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how
long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? selah.

4:3 but know that the lord hath set apart him that is godly for
himself: the lord will hear when i call unto him.

4:4 stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still. selah.

4:5 offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the
lord.

4:6 there be many that say, who will shew us any good? lord, lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us.

4:7 thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that
their corn and their wine increased.

4:8 i will both lay me down in peace,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and sleep: for thou, lord, only
makest me dwell in safety.



5:1 give ear to my words, o lord, consider my meditation.

5:2 hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my god: for unto
thee will i pray.

5:3 my voice shalt thou hear in the morning, o lord; in the morning
will i direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

5:4 for thou art not a god that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither
shall evil dwell with thee.

5:5 the foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers
of iniquity.

5:6 thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the lord will abhor
the bloody and deceitful man.

5:7 but as for me, i will come into thy house in the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy fear will i worship toward thy holy temple.

5:8 lead me, o lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies;
make thy way straight before my 
 
 ___________________________
 
face.

5:9 for there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is
very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with
their tongue.

5:10 destroy thou them, o god; let them fall by their own counsels;
cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have
rebelled against thee.

5:11 but let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them
ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that
love thy name be joyful in thee.

5:12 for thou, lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou
compass him as with a shield.



6:1 o lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy
hot displea
 
 ___________________________
 
anks?

6:6 i am weary with my groaning; all the night make i my bed to swim;
i water my couch with my tears.

6:7 mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of
all mine enemies.

6:8 depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the lord hath
heard the voice of my weeping.

6:9 the lord hath heard my supplication; the lord will receive my
prayer.

6:10 let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return
and be ashamed suddenly.



7:1 o lord my god, in thee do i put my trust: save me from all them
that persecute me, and deliver me:

7:2 lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while
there is none to deliver.

7:3 o lord my god, if i have done this; if there be iniquity in my
hands;

7:4 if i have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea,
i have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:)

7:5 let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread
down my life upon the earth, and lay
 
 ___________________________
 
 arise, o lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage
of mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast
commanded.

7:7 so shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for
their sakes therefore return thou on high.

7:8 the lord shall judge the people: judge me, o lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.

7:9 oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end; but establish
the just: for the righteous god trieth the hearts and reins.

7:10 my defence is of god, which saveth the upright in heart.

7:11 god judgeth the righteous, and god is angry with the wicked every
day.

7:12 if he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and
made it ready.

7:13 he hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he
ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.

7:14 behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief,
and brought forth falsehood.

7:15 he made a
 
 ___________________________
 
t hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:

9:14 that i may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter
of zion: i will rejoice in thy salvation.

9:15 the heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net
which they hid is their own foot taken.

9:16 the lord is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked
is snared in the work of his own hands. higgaion. selah.

9:17 the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that
forget god.

9:18 for the needy shall not alway be forgotten: the expectation of
the poor shall not perish for ever.

9:19 arise, o lord; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in
thy sight.

9:20 put them in fear, o lord: that the nations may know themselves to
be but men. selah.



10:1 why standest thou afar off, o lord? why hidest thou thyself in
times of trouble?

10:2 the wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them be
taken in the devices that they have imagined.

 
 ___________________________
 

10:3 for the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the
covetous, whom the lord abhorreth.

10:4 the wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek
after god: god is not in all his thoughts.

10:5 his ways are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of
his sight: as for all his enemies, he puffeth at them.

10:6 he hath said in his heart, i shall not be moved: for i shall
never be in adversity.

10:7 his mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his
tongue is mischief and vanity.

10:8 he sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret
places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against
the p
 
 ___________________________
 
oor.

10:9 he lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth in wait
to catch the poor: he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into
his net.

10:10 he croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by
his strong ones.

10:11 he hath said in his heart, god hath forgotten: he hideth his
face; he will never see it.

10:12 arise, o lord; o god, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.

10:13 wherefore doth the wicked contemn god? he hath said in his
heart, thou wilt not require it.

10:14 thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to
requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou
art the helper of the fatherless.

10:15 break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: seek out his
wickedness till thou find none.

10:16 the lord is king for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out
of his land.

10:17 lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt
prepar
 
 ___________________________
 
ghteous do?

11:4 the lord is in his holy temple, the lord's throne is in heaven:
his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.

11:5 the lord trieth the righteous: but the wicked and him that loveth
violence his soul hateth.

11:6 upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

11:7 for the righteous lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth
behold the upright.



12:1 help, lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from
among the children of men.

12:2 they speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering
lips and with a double heart do they speak.

12:3 the lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaketh proud things:

12:4 who have said, with our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our
own: who is lord over us?

12:5 for the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will i arise, saith the lord; i will set 
 
 ___________________________
 
 silver tried in a
furnace of earth, purified seven times.

12:7 thou shalt keep them, o lord, thou shalt preserve them from this
generation for ever.

12:8 the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.



13:1 how long wilt thou forget me, o lord? for ever? how long wilt
thou hide thy face from me?

13:2 how long shall i take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my
heart daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

13:3 consider and hear me, o lord my god: lighten mine eyes, lest i
sleep the sleep of death;

13:4 lest mine enemy say, i have prevailed against him; and those that
trouble me rejoice when i am moved.

13:5 but i have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation.

13:6 i will sing unto the lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with
me.



14:1 the fool hath said in his heart, there is no god. they are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth
good.

14:2 the lord looked do
 
 ___________________________
 
wn from heaven upon the children of men, to see
if there were any that did understand, and seek god.

14:3 they are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy:
there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

14:4 have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread, and call not upon the lord.

14:5 there were they in great fear: for god is in the generation of
the righteous.

14:6 ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the lord is his
refuge.

14:7 oh that the salvation of israel were come out of zion! when the
lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, jacob shall rejoice,
and israel shall be glad.



15:1 lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy
holy hill?

15:2 he that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and
speaketh the truth in his heart.

15:3 he that backb
 
 ___________________________
 
iteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his
neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.

15:4 in whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them
that fear the lord. he that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth
not.

15:5 he that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward
against the innocent. he that doeth these things shall never be moved.



16:1 preserve me, o god: for in thee do i put my trust.

16:2 o my soul, thou hast said unto the lord, thou art my lord: my
goodness extendeth not to thee;

16:3 but to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in
whom is all my delight.

16:4 their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god:
their drink offerings of blood will i not offer, nor take up their
names into my lips.

16:5 the lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou
maintainest my lot.

16:6 th
 
 ___________________________
 
let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes
behold the things that are equal.

17:3 thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night;
thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; i am purposed that my
mouth shall not transgress.

17:4 concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips i have kept
me from the paths of the destroyer.

17:5 hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

17:6 i have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, o god: incline
thine ear unto me, and hear my speech.

17:7 shew thy marvellous lovingkindness, o thou that savest by thy
right hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up
against them.

17:8 keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy
wings,

17:9 from the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who
compass me about.

17:10 they are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak
proudly.

17:11 they have now compassed us in our
 
 ___________________________
 
 which is thy sword:

17:14 from men which are thy hand, o lord, from men of the world,
which have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest
with thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest
of their substance to their babes.

17:15 as for me, i will behold thy face in righteousness: i shall be
satisfied, when i awake, with thy likeness.



18:1 i will love thee, o lord, my strength.

18:2 the lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my god,
my strength, in whom i will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation, and my high tower.

18:3 i will call upon the lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall
i be saved from mine enemies.

18:4 the sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men
made me afraid.

18:5 the sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death
prevented me.

18:6 in my distress i called upon the lord, and cried unto my god: he
heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came
 
 ___________________________
 
8:17 he delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

18:18 they prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the lord was my
stay.

18:19 he brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me,
because he delighted in me.

18:20 the lord rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to
the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

18:21 for i have kept the ways of the lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my god.

18:22 for all his judgments were before me, and i did not put away his
statutes from me.

18:23 i was also upright before him, and i kept myself from mine
iniquity.

18:24 therefore hath the lord recompensed me according to my
righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

18:25 with the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright;

18:26 with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
tho
 
 ___________________________
 
u wilt shew thyself froward.

18:27 for thou wilt save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down
high looks.

18:28 for thou wilt light my candle: the lord my god will enlighten my
darkness.

18:29 for by thee i have run through a troop; and by my god have i
leaped over a wall.

18:30 as for god, his way is perfect: the word of the lord is tried:
he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.

18:31 for who is god save the lord? or who is a rock save our god?

18:32 it is god that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way
perfect.

18:33 he maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and setteth me upon my high
places.

18:34 he teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by
mine arms.

18:35 thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy
right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great.

18:36 thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip.

18:37 i have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: 
 
 ___________________________
 
them small as the dust before the wind: i did
cast them out as the dirt in the streets.

18:43 thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and
thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom i have not
known shall serve me.

18:44 as soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers
shall submit themselves unto me.

18:45 the strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close
places.

18:46 the lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the god of my
salvation be exalted.

18:47 it is god that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

18:48 he delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up
above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the
violent man.

18:49 therefore will i give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the
heathen, and sing praises unto thy name.

18:50 great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, to david, and to his seed for evermore.



19:1
 
 ___________________________
 
 the heavens declare the glory of god; and the firmament sheweth
his handywork.

19:2 day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth
knowledge.

19:3 there is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

19:4 their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to
the end of the world. in them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,

19:5 which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth
as a strong man to run a race.

19:6 his going forth is from the end of the heaven, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 keeping of them
there is great reward.

19:12 who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults.

19:13 keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not
have dominion over me: then shall i be upright, and i shall be
innocent from the great transgression.

19:14 let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be
acceptable in thy sight, o lord, my strength, and my redeemer.



20:1 the lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the god of
jacob defend thee;

20:2 send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
zion;

20:3 remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice;
selah.

20:4 grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy
counsel.

20:5 we will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our god we
will set up our banners: the lord fulfil all thy petitions.

20:6 now know i that the lord saveth his anointed; he will hear him
from his holy heaven with the saving str
 
 ___________________________
 
ength of his right hand.

20:7 some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember
the name of the lord our god.

20:8 they are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand
upright.

20:9 save, lord: let the king hear us when we call.



21:1 the king shall joy in thy strength, o lord; and in thy salvation
how greatly shall he rejoice!

21:2 thou hast given him his heart's desire, and hast not withholden
the request of his lips. selah.

21:3 for thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou
settest a crown of pure gold on his head.

21:4 he asked life of thee, and tho
 
 ___________________________
 
e fire shall devour
them.

21:10 their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed
from among the children of men.

21:11 for they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous
device, which they are not able to perform.

21:12 therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt
make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.

21:13 be thou exalted, lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing
and praise thy power.



22:1 my god, my god, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far
from helping me, and from the words of my roaring?

22:2 o my god, i cry in the day time, but thou hearest not; and in the
night season, and am not silent.

22:3 but thou art holy, o thou that inhabitest the praises of israel.

22:4 our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver
them.

22:5 they cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee,
and were not confounded.

22:6 but i am a worm, and no
 
 ___________________________
 
 man; a reproach of men, and despised of
the people.

22:7 all they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip,
they shake the head, saying,

22:8 he trusted on the lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver
him, seeing he delighted in him.

22:9 but thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me
hope when i was upon my mother's breasts.

22:10 i was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my god from my
mother's belly.

22:11 be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to
help.

22:12 many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of bashan have beset
me round.

22:13 they gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a
roaring lion.

22:14 i am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint:
my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

22:15 my strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth
to my jaws; and thou 
 
 ___________________________
 
f the lord for ever.



24:1 the earth is the lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and
they that dwell therein.

24:2 for he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the
floods.

24:3 who shall ascend into the hill of the lord? or who shall stand in
his holy place?

24:4 he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

24:5 he shall receive the blessing from the lord, and righteousness
from the god of his salvation.

24:6 this is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face,
o jacob. selah.

24:7 lift up your heads, o ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glory shall come in.

24:8 who is this king of glory? the lord strong and mighty, the lord
mighty in battle.

24:9 lift up your heads, o ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glory shall come in.

24:10 who is this king of glory? the lord of hosts, he is 
 
 ___________________________
 
the king of
glory. selah.



25:1 unto thee, o lord, do i lift up my soul.

25:2 o my god, i trust in thee: let me not be ashamed, let not mine
enemies triumph over me.

25:3 yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed
which transgress without cause.

25:4 shew me thy ways, o lord; teach me thy paths.

25:5 lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the god of my
salvation; on thee do i wait all the day.

25:6 remember, o lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses;
for they have been ever of old.

25:7 remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions:
according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness' sake, o
lord.

25:8 good and upright is the lord: therefore will he teach sinners in
the way.

25:9 the meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach
his way.

25:10 all the paths of the lord are mer
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and have mercy upon me; for i am desolate and
afflicted.

25:17 the troubles of my heart are enlarged: o bring thou me out of my
distresses.

25:18 look upon mine affliction and my pain; and forgive all my sins.

25:19 consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with
cruel hatred.

25:20 o keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for i put
my trust in thee.

25:21 let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for i wait on thee.

25:22 redeem israel, o god, out of all his troubles.



26:1 judge me, o lord; for i have walked in mine integrity: i have
trusted also in the lord; therefore i shall not slide.

26:2 examine me, o lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.

26:3 for thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and i have walked in
thy truth.

26:4 i have not sat with vain persons, neither will i go in with
dissemblers.

26:5 i have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit
with the wicked.

26:6 i will wash
 
 ___________________________
 
hall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round
about me: therefore will i offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy;
i will sing, yea, i will sing praises unto the lord.

27:7 hear, o lord, when i cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me,
and answer me.

27:8 when thou saidst, seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, thy
face, lord, will i seek.

27:9 hide not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger:
thou hast been my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, o god of my
salvation.

27:10 when my father and my mother forsake me, then the lord will take
me up.

27:11 teach me thy way, o lord, and lead me in a plain path, because
of mine enemies.

27:12 deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false
witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.

27:13 i had fainted, unless i had believed to see the goodness of the
lord in the land of the living.

27:14 wait on the lord: be of good courage, and he shall stre
 
 ___________________________
 
d: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my
song will i praise him.

28:8 the lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his
anointed.

28:9 save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and
lift them up for ever.



29:1 give unto the lord, o ye mighty, give unto the lord glory and
strength.

29:2 give unto the lord the glory due unto his name; worship the lord
in the beauty of holiness.

29:3 the voice of the lord is upon the waters: the god of glory
thundereth: the lord is upon many waters.

29:4 the voice of the lord is powerful; the voice of the lord is full
of majesty.

29:5 the voice of the lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the lord breaketh
the cedars of lebanon.

29:6 he maketh them also to skip like a calf; lebanon and sirion like
a young unicorn.

29:7 the voice of the lord divideth the flames of fire.

29:8 the voice of the lord shaketh the wilderness; the lord shaketh
the wilderness of kadesh.

29:9 the voi
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of the lord maketh the hinds to calve, and discovereth
the forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.

29:10 the lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the lord sitteth king for
ever.

29:11 the lord will give strength unto his people; the lord will bless
his people with peace.



30:1 i will extol thee, o lord; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast
not made my foes to rejoice over me.

30:2 o lord my god, i cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.

30:3 o lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast
kept me alive, that i should not go down to the pit.

30:4 sing unto the lord, o ye saints of his, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.

30:5 for his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life:
weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.

30:6 and in my prosperity i said, i shall never be moved.

30:7 lord, by thy favour thou ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 i was troubled.

30:8 i cried to thee, o lord; and unto the lord i made supplication.

30:9 what profit is there in my blood, when i go down to the pit?
shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

30:10 hear, o lord, and have mercy upon me: lord, be thou my helper.

30:11 thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put
off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;

30:12 to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be
silent.

o lord my god, i will give thanks unto thee for ever.



31:1 in thee, o lord, do i put my trust; let me never be ashamed:
deliver me in thy righteousness.

31:2 bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong
rock, for an house of defence to save me.

31:3 for thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name's
sake lead me, and guide me.

31:4 pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for
thou art my strength.

31:5 into thine hand i commit my spirit
 
 ___________________________
 
: thou hast redeemed me, o lord
god of truth.

31:6 i have hated them that regard lying vanities: but i trust in the
lord.

31:7 i will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered
my trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities;

31:8 and hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set
my feet in a large room.

31:9 have mercy upon me, o lord, for i am in trouble: mine eye is
consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.

31:10 for my life is spent with grief, and my years with sigh
 
 ___________________________
 
f mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.

31:11 i was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me
without fled from me.

31:12 i am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: i am like a broken
vessel.

31:13 for i have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side:
while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away
my life.

31:14 but i trusted in thee, o lord: i said, thou art my god.

31:15 my times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine
enemies, and from them that persecute me.

31:16 make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy
mercies' sake.

31:17 let me not be ashamed, o lord; for i have called upon thee: let
the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

31:18 let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous
things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.

31:19 oh how great is thy goodness, which 
 
 ___________________________
 
o whom the lord imputeth not iniquity, and
in whose spirit there is no guile.

32:3 when i kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all
the day long.

32:4 for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer. selah.

32:5 i acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have i not hid.
i said, i will confess my transgressions unto the lord; and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. selah.

32:6 for this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time
when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they
shall not come nigh unto him.

32:7 thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble;
thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. selah.

32:8 i will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt
go: i will guide thee with mine eye.

32:9 be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no
understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, 
 
 ___________________________
 
s of the sea together as an heap: he layeth
up the depth in storehouses.

33:8 let all the earth fear the lord: let all the inhabitants of the
world stand in awe of him.

33:9 for he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.

33:10 the lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he
maketh the devices of the people of none effect.

33:11 the counsel of the lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his
heart to all generations.

33:12 blessed is the nation whose god is the lord; and the people whom
he hath chosen for his own inheritance.

33:13 the lord looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men.

33:14 from the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the
inhabitants of the earth.

33:15 he fashioneth their hearts alike; he considereth all their
works.

33:16 there is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man
is not delivered by much strength.

33:17 an horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver
a
 
 ___________________________
 
 let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me:
neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

35:20 for they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters
against them that are quiet in the land.

35:21 yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, aha,
aha, our eye hath seen it.

35:22 this thou hast seen, o lord: keep not silence: o lord, be not
far from me.

35:23 stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause,
my god and my lord.

35:24 judge me, o lord my god, according to thy righteousness; and let
them not rejoice over me.

35:25 let them not say in their hearts, ah, so would we have it: let
them not say, we have swallowed him up.

35:26 let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that
rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour
that magnify themselves against me.

35:27 let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous
cause: yea, let them say co
 
 ___________________________
 
ntinually, let the lord be magnified, which
hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.

35:28 and my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise
all the day long.



36:1 the transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there
is no fear of god before his eyes.

36:2 for he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
found to be hateful.

36:3 the words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off
to be wise, and to do good.

36:4 he deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way
that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.

36:5 thy mercy, o lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness
reacheth unto the clouds.

36:6 thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are
a gr
 
 ___________________________
 
eat deep: o lord, thou preservest man and beast.

36:7 how excellent is thy lovingkindness, o god! therefore the
children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

36:8 they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house;
and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

36:9 for with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see
light.

36:10 o continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart.

36:11 let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand
of the wicked r
 
 ___________________________
 
aken, nor his seed begging bread.

37:26 he is ever merciful, and lendeth; and his seed is blessed.

37:27 depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.

37:28 for the lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they
are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

37:29 the righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for
ever.

37:30 the mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his tongue
talketh of judgment.

37:31 the law of his god is in his heart; none of his steps shall
slide.

37:32 the wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.

37:33 the lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he
is judged.

37:34 wait on the lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to
inherit the land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.

37:35 i have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree.

37:36 yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, i sough
 
 ___________________________
 
om me.

38:11 my lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my
kinsmen stand afar off.

38:12 they also that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they
that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all
the day long.

38:13 but i, as a deaf man, heard not; and i was as a dumb man that
openeth not his mouth.

38:14 thus i was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
reproofs.

38:15 for in thee, o lord, do i hope: thou wilt hear, o lord my god.

38:16 for i said, hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me:
when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

38:17 for i am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.

38:18 for i will declare mine iniquity; i will be sorry for my sin.

38:19 but mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that
hate me wrongfully are multiplied.

38:20 they also that render evil for good are mine adversaries;
because i follow the thing that good is.

 
 ___________________________
 

38:21 forsake me not, o lord: o my god, be not far from me.

38:22 make haste to help me, o lord my salvation.



39:1 i said, i will take heed to my ways, that i sin not with my
tongue: i will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before
me.

39:2 i was dumb with silence, i held my peace, even from good; and my
sorrow was stirred.

39:3 my heart was hot within me, while i was musing the fire burned:
then spake i with my tongue,

39:4 lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what
it is:
 
 ___________________________
 
ear unto my cry; hold not thy
peace at my tears: for i am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as
all my fathers were.

39:13 o spare me, that i may recover strength, before i go hence, and
be no more.



40:1 i waited patiently for the lord; and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry.

40:2 he brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.

40:3 and he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our god:
many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the lord.

40:4 blessed is that man that maketh the lord his trust, and
respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

40:5 many, o lord my god, are thy wonderful works which thou hast
done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee: if i would declare and speak of them, they are
more than can be numbered.

40:6 sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou
ope
 
 ___________________________
 
ned: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required.

40:7 then said i, lo, i come: in the volume of the book it is written
of me,

40:8 i delight to do thy will, o my god: yea, thy law is within my
heart.

40:9 i have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, i
have not refrained my lips, o lord, thou knowest.

40:10 i have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; i have
declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: i have not concealed thy
lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.

40:11 withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, o lord: let thy
lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.

40:12 for innumer
 
 ___________________________
 
 let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my
soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that
wish me evil.

40:15 let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto
me, aha, aha.

40:16 let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let
such as love thy salvation say continually, the lord be magnified.

40:17 but i am poor and needy; yet the lord thinketh upon me: thou art
my help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, o my god.



41:1 blessed is he that considereth the poor: the lord will deliver
him in time of trouble.

41:2 the lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be
blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of
his enemies.

41:3 the lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou
wilt make all his bed in his sickness.

41:4 i said, lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for i have
sinned against thee.

41:5 mine enemies speak evil of me, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t unto him: and now that
he lieth he shall rise up no more.

41:9 yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom i trusted, which did eat
of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.

41:10 but thou, o lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that i
may requite them.

41:11 by this i know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth
not triumph over me.

41:12 and as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest
me before thy face for ever.

41:13 blessed be the lord god of israel from everlasting, and to
everlasting. amen, and amen.



42:1 as the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul
after thee, o god.

42:2 my soul thirsteth for god, for the living god: when shall i come
and appear before god?

42:3 my tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, where is thy god?

42:4 when i remember these things, i pour out my soul in me: for i had
gone with the multitude, i went with them to the house of god,
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.

42:5 why art thou cast down, o my soul? and why art thou disquieted in
me?  hope thou in god: for i shall yet praise him for the help of his
countenance.

42:6 o my god, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will i
remember thee from the land of jordan, and of the hermonites, from the
hill mizar.

42:7 deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy
waves and thy billows are gone over me.

42:8 yet the lord will command his lovingkindness in the day time, and
in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the god of
my life.

42:9 i will say unto god my rock, why hast thou forgotten me? why go i
mourning because of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he oppression of the enemy?

42:10 as with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while
they say daily unto me, where is thy god?

42:11 why art thou cast down, o my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope thou in god: for i shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my god.



43:1 judge me, o god, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: o
deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.

43:2 for thou art the god of my strength: why dost thou cast me off?
why go i mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

43:3 o send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them
bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.

43:4 then will i go unto the altar of god, unto god my exceeding joy:
yea, upon the harp will i praise thee, o god my god.

43:5 why art thou cast down, o my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope in god: for i shall yet praise him, who is the health
of
 
 ___________________________
 
 my countenance, and my god.



44:1 we have heard with our ears, o god, our fathers have told us,
what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old.

44:2 how thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst
them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.

44:3 for they got not the land in possession by their own sword,
neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine
arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour
unto them.

44:4 thou art my king, o god: command deliverances for jacob
 
 ___________________________
 
.

44:5 through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will
we tread them under that rise up against us.

44:6 for i will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

44:7 but thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to
shame that hated us.

44:8 in god we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever.

selah.

44:9 but thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth
with our armies.

44:10 thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate
us spoil for themselves.

44:11 thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat; and hast
scattered us among the heathen.

44:12 thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy
wealth by their price.

44:13 thou makest us a reproach to our neig
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the shame of my face
hath covered me,

44:16 for the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason
of the enemy and avenger.

44:17 all this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee,
neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.

44:18 our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way;

44:19 though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and
covered us with the shadow of death.

44:20 if we have forgotten the name of our god, or stretched out our
hands to a strange god;

44:21 shall not god search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the
heart.

44:22 yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter.

44:23 awake, why sleepest thou, o lord? arise, cast us not off for
ever.

44:24 wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction
and our oppression?

44:25 for our soul is bowed down to the dust: our belly cleaveth unto
the earth.

44:26 aris
 
 ___________________________
 
e for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies' sake.



45:1 my heart is inditing a good matter: i speak of the things which i
have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

45:2 thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into
thy lips: therefore god hath blessed thee for ever.

45:3 gird thy sword upon thy thigh, o most mighty, with thy glory and
thy majesty.

45:4 and in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and
meekness and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things.

45:5 thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies;
whereby the people fall under thee.

45:6 thy throne, o god, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy
kingdom is a right sceptre.

45:7 thou lovest righteousness,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and hatest wickedness: therefore god,
thy god, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.

45:8 all thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of
the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

45:9 kings' daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right
hand did stand the queen in gold of ophir.

45:10 hearken, o daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget
also thine own people, and thy father's house;

45:11 so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy lo
 
 ___________________________
 
wrought gold.

45:14 she shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the
virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

45:15 with gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall
enter into the king's palace.

45:16 instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest
make princes in all the earth.

45:17 i will make thy name to be remembered in all generations:
therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.



46:1 god is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

46:2 therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;

46:3 though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. selah.

46:4 there is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of
god, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most high.

46:5 god is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: 
 
 ___________________________
 
god shall
help her, and that right early.

46:6 the heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice,
the earth melted.

46:7 the lord of hosts is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.

46:8 come, behold the works of the lord, what desolations he hath made
in the earth.

46:9 he maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh
the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in
the fire.

46:10 be still, and know that i am god: i will be exalted among the
heathen, i will be exalted in the earth.

46:11 the lord of hosts is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.



47:1 o clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto god with the voice
of triumph.

47:2 for the lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all
the earth.

47:3 he shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our
feet.

47:4 he shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of jacob
whom he loved. selah.


 
 ___________________________
 
47:5 god is gone up with a shout, the lord with the sound of a
trumpet.

47:6 sing praises to god, sing praises: sing praises unto our king,
sing praises.

47:7 for god is the king of all the earth: sing ye praises with
understanding.

47:8 god reigneth over the heathen: god sitteth upon the throne of his
holiness.

47:9 the princes of the people are gathered together, even the people
of the god of abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto god:
he is greatly exalted.



48:1 great is the lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our
god, in the mountain of his holiness.

48:2 beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount
zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great king.

48:3 god is known in her palaces for a refuge.

48:4 for, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.

48:5 they saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and
hasted away.

48:6 fear took hold upon
 
 ___________________________
 
 them there, and pain, as of a woman in
travail.

48:7 thou breakest the ships of tarshish with an east wind.

48:8 as we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the lord of
hosts, in the city of our god: god will establish it for ever. selah.

48:9 we have thought of thy lovingkindness, o god, in the midst of thy
temple.

48:10 according to thy name, o god, so is thy praise unto the ends of
the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.

48:11 let mount zion rejoice, let the daughters of judah be glad,
because of thy judgments.

48:12 walk about zion, and go round about her: tell the towers
thereof.

48:13 mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may
tell it to the generation following.

48:14 for this god is our god for ever and ever: he will be our guide
even unto death.



49:1 hear this, all ye people; gi
 
 ___________________________
 
w and high, rich and poor, together.

49:3 my mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart
shall be of understanding.

49:4 i will incline mine ear to a parable: i will open my dark saying
upon the harp.

49:5 wherefore should i fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of
my heels shall compass me about?

49:6 they that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches;

49:7 none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to god
a ransom for him:

49:8 (for the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for
ever:)

49:9 that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

49:10 for he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool and the
brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others.

49:11 their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their
lands after their own names.

49:12 nevertheless man being in 
 
 ___________________________
 
honour abideth not: he is like the
beasts that perish.

49:13 this their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their
sayings. selah.

49:14 like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them;
and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and
their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.

49:15 but god will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he
shall receive me. selah.

49:16 be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his
house is increased;

49:17 for when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall
not descend after him.

49:18 though while he lived he blessed his soul: and men will praise
thee, when thou doest well to thyself.

49:19 he shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never
see light.

49:20 man that is in honour,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and understandeth not, is like the beasts
that perish.



50:1 the mighty god, even the lord, hath spoken, and called the earth
from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.

50:2 out of zion, the perfection of beauty, god hath shined.

50:3 our god shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall
devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

50:4 he shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that
he may judge his people.

50:5 gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a
covenant with me by sacrifice.

50:6 and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for god is judge
himself. selah.

50:7 hear, o my people, and i will speak; o israel, and i will testify
against thee: 
 
 ___________________________
 
i am god, even thy god.

50:8 i will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt
offerings, to have been continually before me.

50:9 i will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy
folds.

50:10 for every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a
thousand hills.

50:11 i know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of
the field are mine.

50:12 if i were hungry, i would not tell thee: for the world is mine,
and the fulness thereof.

50:13 will i eat the fle
 
 ___________________________
 
sh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

50:14 offer unto god thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most
high:

50:15 and call upon me in the day of trouble: i will deliver thee, and
thou shalt glorify me.

50:16 but unto the wicked god saith, what hast thou to do to declare
my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?

50:17 seeing thou hatest instruction, and casteth my words behind
thee.

50:18 when thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and
hast been partaker with adulterers.

50:19 thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.

50:20 thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest
thine own mother's son.

50:21 these things hast thou done, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d i kept silence; thou thoughtest
that i was altogether such an one as thyself: but i will reprove thee,
and set them in order before thine eyes.

50:22 now consider this, ye that forget god, lest i tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

50:23 whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth
his conversation aright will i shew the salvation of god.



51:1 have mercy upon me, o god, according to thy lovingkindness:
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions.

51:2 wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

51:3 for i acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before
me.

51:4 against thee, thee only, have i sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be
clear when thou judgest.

51:5 behold, i was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother
 
 ___________________________
 

conceive me.

51:6 behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the
hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

51:7 purge me with hyssop, and i shall be clean: wash me, and i shall
be whiter than snow.

51:8 make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast
broken may rejoice.

51:9 hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

51:10 create in me a clean heart, o god; and renew a right spirit
within me.

51:11 cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit
from me.

51:12 restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy
free spirit.

51:13 then will i teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

51:14 deliver me from bloodguiltiness, o god, thou god of my
salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

51:15 o lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth 
 
 ___________________________
 
thy
praise.

51:16 for thou desirest not sacrifice; else would i give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering.

51:17 the sacrifices of god are a broken spirit: a broken and a
contrite heart, o god, thou wilt not despise.

51:18 do good in thy good pleasure unto zion: build thou the walls of
jerusalem.

51:19 then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer
bullocks upon thine altar.



52:1 why boastest thou thyself in mischief, o mighty man? the goodness
of god endureth continually.

52:2 the tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working
deceitfully.

52:3 thou lovest evil more 
 
 ___________________________
 
than good; and lying rather than to speak
righteousness. selah.

52:4 thou lovest all devouring words, o thou deceitful tongue.

52:5 god shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee
away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of
the land of the living. selah.

52:6 the righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:

52:7 lo, this is the man that made not god his strength; but trusted
in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his
wickedness.

52:8 but i am like a green olive tree in the house of god: i trust in
the mercy of god for ever and ever.

52:9 i will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and i
will wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.



53:1 the fool hath said in his heart, there is no god. corrupt are
they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth
good.

53:2 g
 
 ___________________________
 
od looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
there were any that did understand, that did seek god.

53:3 every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become
filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

53:4 have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people
as they eat bread: they have not called upon god.

53:5 there were they in great fear, where no fear was: for god hath
scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put
them to shame, because god hath despised them.

53:6 oh that the salvation of israel were come out of zion! when god
bringeth back the captivity of his people, jacob shall rejoice, and
israel shall be glad.



54:1 save me, o god, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.

54:2 hear my prayer, o god; give ear to the words of my mouth.

54:3 for strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after

 
 ___________________________
 
my soul: they have not set god before them. selah.

54:4 behold, god is mine helper: the lord is with them that uphold my
soul.

54:5 he shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy
truth.

54:6 i will freely sacrifice unto thee: i will praise thy name, o
lord; for it is good.

54:7 for he hath delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye hath
seen his desire upon mine enemies.



55:1 give ear to my prayer, o god; and hide not thyself from my
supplication.

55:2 attend unto me, and hear me: i mourn in my complaint, and make a
noise;

55:3 because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of
the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

55:4 my heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are
fallen upon me.

55:5 fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath
overwhelmed me.

55:6 and i said, oh that i had wings like a dove! fo
 
 ___________________________
 
the walls thereof: mischief
also and sorrow are in the midst of it.

55:11 wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not
from her streets.

55:12 for it was not an enemy that reproached me; then i could have
borne it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself
against me; then i would have hid myself from him:

55:13 but it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine
acquaintance.

55:14 we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of god
in company.

55:15 let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell:
for wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

55:16 as for me, i will call upon god; and the lord shall save me.

55:17 evening, and morning, and at noon, will i pray, and cry aloud:
and he shall hear my voice.

55:18 he hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was
against me: for there were many with me.

55:19 god shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old.


 
 ___________________________
 
selah. because they have no changes, therefore they fear not god.

55:20 he hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with
him: he hath broken his covenant.

55:21 the words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in
his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.

55:22 cast thy burden upon the lord, and he shall sustain thee: he
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.

55:23 but thou, o god, shalt bring them down into the pit of
destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days; but i will trust in thee.



56:1 be merciful unto me, o god: for man would swallow me up; he
fighting daily oppresseth me.

56:2 mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that
fight against me, o thou most high.

56:3 what time i am afraid, i will trust in thee.

56:4 in god i will praise his word, in god i have put my trust; i will
not fear what flesh 
 
 ___________________________
 
can do unto me.

56:5 every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me
for evil.

56:6 they gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark
my steps, when they wait for my soul.

56:7 shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the
people, o god.

56:8 thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle:
are they not in thy book?

56:9 when i cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this i
know; for god is for me.

56:10 in god will i praise his word: in the lord will i praise his
word.

56:11 in god have i put my trust: i will not be afraid what man can do
unto me.

56:12 thy vows are upon me, o god: i will render praises unto thee.

56:13 for thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou
deliver my feet from falling, that i may walk before god in the light
of the living?



57:1 be merciful unto me, o god, be merciful unto me: for my soul
trusteth in thee: yea, in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e shadow of thy wings will i make my
refuge, until these calamities be overpast.

57:2 i will cry unto god most high; unto god that performeth all
things for me.

57:3 he shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him
that would swallow me up. selah. god shall send forth his mercy and
his truth.

57:4 my soul is among lions: and i lie even among them that are set on
fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword.

57:5 be thou exalted, o god, above the heavens; let thy glory be above
all the earth.

57:6 they have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down:
they have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are
fallen themselves. selah.

57:7 my heart is fixed, o go
 
 ___________________________
 
d, my heart is fixed: i will sing and give
praise.

57:8 awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: i myself will awake
early.

57:9 i will praise thee, o lord, among the people: i will sing unto
thee among the nations.

57:10 for thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the
clouds.

57:11 be thou exalted, o god, above the heavens: let thy glory be
above all the earth.



58:1 do ye indeed speak righteousness, o congregation? do ye judge
uprightly, o ye sons of men?

58:2 yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of your
hands in the earth.

58:3 the wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies.

58:4 their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the
deaf adder that stoppeth her ear;

58:5 which will not hearken t
 
 ___________________________
 
o the voice of charmers, charming never
so wisely.

58:6 break their teeth, o god, in their mouth: break out the great
teeth of the young lions, o lord.

58:7 let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he
bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

58:8 as a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away: like
the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

58:9 before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.

58:10 the righteous shall rejo
 
 ___________________________
 
ice when he seeth the vengeance: he
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.

58:11 so that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the
righteous: verily he is a god that judgeth in the earth.



59:1 deliver me from mine enemies, o my god: defend me from them that
rise up against me.

59:2 deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody
men.

59:3 for, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered
against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, o lord.

59:4 they run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help
me, and behold.

59:5 thou therefore, o lord god of hosts, the god of israel, awake to
visit all the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors.
selah.
 
 ___________________________
 


59:6 they return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go
round about the city.

59:7 behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their
lips: for who, say they, doth hear?

59:8 but thou, o lord, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have all the
heathen in derision.

59:9 because of his strength will i wait upon thee: for god is my
defence.

59:10 the god of my mercy shall prevent me: god shall let me see my
desire upon mine enemies.

59:11 slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power;
and bring them down, o lord our shield.

59:12 for the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them
even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they
speak.

59:13 consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and
let them know that god ruleth in jacob unto the ends of the earth.
selah.

59:14 and at evening let them return;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and let them make a noise like a
dog, and go round about the city.

59:15 let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
satisfied.

59:16 but i will sing of thy power; yea, i will sing aloud of thy
mercy in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the
day of my trouble.

59:17 unto thee, o my strength, will i sing: for god is my defence,
and the god of my mercy.



60:1 o god, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast
been displeased; o turn thyself to us again.

60:2 thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal
the breaches thereof; for it shaketh.

60:3 thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to
drink the wine of astonishment.

60:4 thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
displayed because of the truth. selah.

60:5 that thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
hear me.

60:6 god hath spoken in his holiness; i will rejoice, i will divide
shechem, and mete out the valley of succoth.

60:7 gilead is mine, and manasseh is mine; ephraim also is the
strength of mine head; judah is my lawgiver;

60:8 moab is my washpot; over edom will i cast out my shoe: philistia,
triumph thou because of me.

60:9 who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
edom?

60:10 wilt not thou, o god, which hadst cast us off? and thou, o god,
which didst not go out with our armies?

60:11 give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

60:12 through god we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread
down our enemies.



61:1 hear my cry, o god; attend unto my prayer.

61:2 from the end of the earth will i cry unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than i.

61:3 for thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the
enemy.

61:4 i will abide in thy taber
 
 ___________________________
 
nacle for ever: i will trust in the
covert of thy wings. selah.

61:5 for thou, o god, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the
heritage of those that fear thy name.

61:6 thou wilt prolong the king's life: and his years as many
generations.

61:7 he shall abide before god for ever: o prepare mercy and truth,
which may preserve him.

61:8 so will i sing praise unto thy name for ever, that i may daily
perform my vows.



62:1 truly my soul waiteth upon god: from him cometh my salvation.

62:2 he only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; i shall
not be greatly moved.

62:3 how long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be
slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering
fence.

62:4 they only consult to cast him down from his excellency: they
delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly.
selah.

62:5 my soul, wait thou only upon god; for my expectation is from him.

62:
 
 ___________________________
 
6 he only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; i shall
not be moved.

62:7 in god is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and
my refuge, is in god.

62:8 trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before
him: god is a refuge for us. selah.

62:9 surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than
vanity.

62:10 trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

62:11 god hath spoken once; twice have i heard this; that power
belongeth unto god.

62:12 also unto thee, o lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to
every man according to his work.



63:1 
 
 ___________________________
 
o god, thou art my god; early will i seek thee: my soul thirsteth
for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where
no water is;

63:2 to see thy power and thy glory, so as i have seen thee in the
sanctuary.

63:3 because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall
praise thee.

63:4 thus will i bless thee while i live: i will lift up my hands in
thy name.

63:5 my soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my
mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips:

63:6 wh
 
 ___________________________
 
en i remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches.

63:7 because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will i rejoice.

63:8 my soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.

63:9 but those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the
lower parts of the earth.

63:10 they shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.

63:11 but the king shall rejoice in god; every one that sweareth by
him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be
stopped.



64:1 hear my voice, o god, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of
the enemy.

64:2 hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity:

64:3 who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot
their arrows, even bitter words:

64:4 that they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they
shoot at him, and fea
 
 ___________________________
 
r not.

64:5 they encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of
laying snares privily; they say, who shall see them?

64:6 they search out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search:
both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart, is deep.

64:7 but god shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall they be
wounded.

64:8 so they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all
that see them shall flee away.

64:9 and all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of god; for
they shall wisely consider of his doing.

64:10 the righteous shall be glad in the lord, and shall trust in him;
and all the upright in heart shall glory.



65:1 praise waiteth for thee, o god, in sion: and unto thee shall the
vow be performed.
 
 ___________________________
 


65:2 o thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

65:3 iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou
shalt purge them away.

65:4 blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.

65:5 by terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, o god of
our salvation; who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth,
and of them that are afar off upon the sea:

65:6 which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being girded
with power:

65:7 which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves,
and the tumult of the people.

65:8 they also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy
tokens: thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to
rejoice.

65:9 thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou greatly enrichest
it with the river of god, which is full of water: thou preparest them
corn, when thou hast so provided for it.

65:10 thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the
furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the
springing thereof.

65:11 thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
fatness.

65:12 they drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little
hills rejoice on every side.

65:13 the pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are

 
 ___________________________
 
covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.



66:1 make a joyful noise unto god, all ye lands:

66:2 sing forth the honour of his name: make his praise glorious.

66:3 say unto god, how terrible art thou in thy works! through the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto
thee.

66:4 all the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they
shall sing to thy name. selah.

66:5 come and see the works of god: he is terrible in his doing toward
the children of men.

66:6 he turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on
foot: there did we rejoice in him.

66:7 he ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let
not the rebellious exalt themselves. selah.

66:8 o bless our god, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to
be heard:

66:9 which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be
moved.

66:10 for thou, o god, hast proved us: thou has
 
 ___________________________
 
on our
loins.

66:12 thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through
fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy
place.

66:13 i will go into thy house with burnt offerings: i will pay thee
my vows,

66:14 which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when i was
in trouble.

66:15 i will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the
incense of rams; i will offer bullocks with goats. selah.

66:16 come and hear, all ye that fear god, and i will declare what he
hath done for my soul.

66:17 i cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my
tongue.

66:18 if i regard iniquity in my heart, the lord will not hear me:

66:19 but verily god hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice of
my prayer.

66:20 blessed be god, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his
mercy from me.



67:1 god be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to
shine upon us; selah.

67:2 that thy way may be know
 
 ___________________________
 
n upon earth, thy saving health among all
nations.

67:3 let the people praise thee, o god; let all the people praise
thee.

67:4 o let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge
the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. selah.

67:5 let the people praise thee, o god; let all the people praise
thee.

67:6 then shall the earth yield her increase; and god, even our own
god, shall bless us.

67:7 god shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.



68:1 let god arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that
hate him flee before him.

68:2 as smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth
before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of god.

68:3 but let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before god: yea,
let them exceedingly rejoice.

68:4 sing unto god, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth
upon the heavens by his
 
 ___________________________
 
 name jah, and rejoice before him.

68:5 a father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is god in
his holy habitation.

68:6 god setteth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which
are bound with chains: but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

68:7 o god, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst
march through the wilderness; selah:

68:8 the earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of god:
even sinai itself was moved at the presence of god, the god of israel.

68:9 thou, o god, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst
confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary.

68:10 thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, o god, hast prepared
of thy goodness for the poor.

68:11 the lord gave the word: great was the company of those that
published it.

68:12 kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home
divided the spoil.

68:13 though ye have lien amo
 
 ___________________________
 
ng the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings
of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

68:14 when the almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in
salmon.

68:15 the hill of god is as the hill of bashan; an high hill as the
hill of bashan.

68:16 why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which god desireth
to dwell in; yea, the lord will dwell in it for ever.

68:17 the chariots of god are twenty thousand, even thousands of
angels: the lord is among them, as in sinai, in the holy place.

68:18 thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive:
thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that
the lord god might dwell among them.

68:19 blessed be the lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even
the god of our salvation. selah.

68:20 he that is our god is the god of salvation; and unto god the
lord belong the issues from death.

68:
 
 ___________________________
 
21 but god shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp
of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.

68:22 the lord said, i will bring again from bashan, i will bring my
people again from the depths of the sea:

68:23 that thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and
the tongue of thy dogs in the same.

68:24 they have seen thy goings, o god; even the goings of my god, my
king, in the sanctuary.

68:25 the singers went before, the players on instruments followed
after; among them were the damsels playing with timbrels.

68:26 bless ye god in the congregations, even the lord, from the
fountain of israel.

68:27 there is little benjamin with their ruler, the princes of judah
and their council, the princes of zebulun, and the princes of
naphtali.

68:28 thy god hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, o god, that
which thou hast wrought for us.

 
 ___________________________
 

68:29 because of thy temple at jerusalem shall kings bring presents
unto thee.

68:30 rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with
the calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of
silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war.

68:31 princes shall come out of egypt; ethiopia shall soon stretch out
her hands unto god.

68:32 sing unto god, ye kingdoms of the earth; o sing praises unto the
lord; selah:

68:33 to him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of
old; lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.

68:34 ascribe ye strength unto god: his excellency is over israel, and
his strength is in the clouds.

68:35 o god, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the god of
israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. blessed
be god.



69:1 save me, o god; for the waters are
 
 ___________________________
 
 come in unto my soul.

69:2 i sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: i am come into
deep waters, where the floods overflow me.

69:3 i am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while
i wait for my god.

69:4 they that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine
head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are
mighty: then i restored that which i took not away.

69:5 o god, thou knowest my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from
thee.

69:6 let not them that wait on thee, o lord god of hosts, be ashamed
for my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, o
god of israel.

69:7 because for thy sake i have borne reproach; shame hath covered my
face.

69:8 i am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my
mother's children.

69:9 for the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches
of them that reproached thee
 
 ___________________________
 
 are fallen upon me.

69:10 when i wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my
reproach.

69:11 i made sackcloth also my garment; and i became a proverb to
them.

69:12 they that sit in the gate speak against me; and i was the song
of the drunkards.

69:13 but as for me, my prayer is unto thee, o lord, in an acceptable
time: o god, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of
thy salvation.

69:14 deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be
delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

69:15 let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow
me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

69:16 hear me, o lord; for thy lovingkindness is good: turn unto me
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

69:17 and hide not thy face from thy servant;
 
 ___________________________
 
n them, and let thy wrathful anger
take hold of them.

69:25 let their habitation be desolate; and let none dwell in their
tents.

69:26 for they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to
the grief of those whom thou hast wounded.

69:27 add iniquity unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy
righteousness.

69:28 let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be
written with the righteous.

69:29 but i am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation, o god, set me up
on high.

69:30 i will praise the name of god with a song, and will magnify him
with thanksgiving.

69:31 this also shall please the lord better than an ox or bullock
that hath horns and hoofs.

69:32 the humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall
live that seek god.

69:33 for the lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.

69:34 let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing
that moveth therein.

69:35 for god will save zi
 
 ___________________________
 
on, and will build the cities of judah: that
they may dwell there, and have it in possession.

69:36 the seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that
love his name shall dwell therein.



70:1 make haste, o god, to deliver me; make haste to help me, o lord.

70:2 let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let
them be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.

70:3 let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say,
aha, aha.

70:4 let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: and let
such as love thy salvation say continually, let god be magnified.

70:5 but i am poor and needy: make haste unto me, o god: thou art my
help and my deli
 
 ___________________________
 
verer; o lord, make no tarrying.



71:1 in thee, o lord, do i put my trust: let me never be put to
confusion.

71:2 deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline
thine ear unto me, and save me.

71:3 be thou my strong habitation, whereunto i may continually resort:
thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my
fortress.

71:4 deliver me, o my god, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the
hand of the unrighteous and cruel man.

71:5 for thou art my hope, o lord god: thou art my trust from my
youth.

71:6 by thee have i been holden up from the womb: thou art he that
took me out of my mother's bowels: my praise shall be continually of
thee.

71:7 i am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.

71:8 let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honour all
the day.

71:9 cast me not off in the time of old ag
 
 ___________________________
 
e; forsake me not when my
strength faileth.

71:10 for mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my
soul take counsel together,

71:11 saying, god hath forsaken him: persecute and take him; for there
is none to deliver him.

71:12 o god, be not far from me: o my god, make haste for my help.

71:13 let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my
soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that seek my
hurt.

71:14 but i will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and
more.

71:15 my mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness and thy salvation
all the day; for i know not the numbers thereof.

71:16 i will go in the strength of the lord god: i will make mention
of thy righteousness, even of thine only.

71:17 o g
 
 ___________________________
 
od, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have i
declared thy wondrous works.

71:18 now also when i am old and greyheaded, o god, forsake me not;
until i have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power
to every one that is to come.

71:19 thy righteousness also, o god, is very high, who hast done great
things: o god, who is like unto thee!

71:20 thou, which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt
quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the
earth.

71:21 thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

71:22 i will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, o my
god: unto thee will i sing with the harp, o thou holy one of israel.

71:23 my lips shall greatly rejoice when i sing unto thee; and my
soul, which thou hast redeemed.

71:24 my 
 
 ___________________________
 
tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long:
for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my
hurt.



72:1 give the king thy judgments, o god, and thy righteousness unto
the king's son.

72:2 he shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment.

72:3 the mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
hills, by righteousness.

72:4 he shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children
of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

72:5 they shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations.

72:6 he shall come down like rain upon the mown 
 
 ___________________________
 
shall be given of the gold of
sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daily shall
he be praised.

72:16 there shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of
the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like lebanon: and they of
the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.

72:17 his name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as
long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall
call him blessed.

72:18 blessed be the lord god, the god of israel, who only doeth
wondrous things.

72:19 and blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory; amen, and amen.

72:20 the prayers of david the son of jesse are ended.



73:1 truly god is good to israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.

73:2 but as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh
slipped.

73:3 for i was envious at the foolish, when i saw the prosperity of
the wicked.

73:4 for there are n
 
 ___________________________
 
 other men.

73:6 therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence
covereth them as a garment.

73:7 their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart
could wish.

73:8 they are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they
speak loftily.

73:9 they set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue
walketh through the earth.

73:10 therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are
wrung out to them.

73:11 and they say, how doth god know? and is there knowledge in the
most high?

73:12 behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they
increase in riches.

73:13 verily i have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocency.

73:14 for all the day long have i been plagued, and chastened every
morning.

73:15 if i say, i will speak thus; behold, i should offend against the
generation of thy children.

73:16 when i thought to know this, it was too painful for me;

73:17 until i went int
 
 ___________________________
 
o the sanctuary of god; then understood i their
end.

73:18 surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst
them down into destruction.

73:19 how are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are
utterly consumed with terrors.

73:20 as a dream when one awaketh; so, o lord, when thou awakest, thou
shalt despise their image.

73:21 thus my heart was grieved, and i was pricked in my reins.

73:22 so foolish was i, and ignorant: i was as a beast before thee.

73:23 nevertheless i a
 
 ___________________________
 
m continually with thee: thou hast holden me by
my right hand.

73:24 thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory.

73:25 whom have i in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that i desire beside thee.

73:26 my flesh and my heart faileth: but god is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

73:27 for, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast
destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.

73:28 but it is good for me to draw near to god: i have put my trust
in the lord god, that i may declare all thy works.



74:1 o god, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger
smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?

74:2 remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the
rod of thi
 
 ___________________________
 
thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up
their ensigns for signs.

74:5 a man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the
thick trees.

74:6 but now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes
and hammers.

74:7 they have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by
casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.

74:8 they said in their hearts, let us destroy them together: they
have burned up all the synagogues of god in the land.

74:9 we see not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is
there among us any that knoweth how long.

74:10 o god, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy
blaspheme thy name for ever?

74:11 why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out
of thy bosom.

74:12 for god is my king of old, working salvation in the midst of the
earth.

74:13 thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the
heads of the dragons in the wa
 
 ___________________________
 
de
summer and winter.

74:18 remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, o lord, and that
the foolish people have blasphemed thy name.

74:19 o deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of
the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

74:20 have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth
are full of the habitations of cruelty.

74:21 o let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy
praise thy name.

74:22 arise, o god, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish
man reproacheth thee daily.

74:23 forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that
rise up against thee increaseth continually.



75:1 unto thee, o god, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks:
for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.

75:2 when i shall receive the congregation i will judge uprightly.

75:3 the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: i bear
up the pillars of it. sela
 
 ___________________________
 
h.

75:4 i said unto the fools, deal not foolishly: and to the wicked,
lift not up the horn:

75:5 lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

75:6 for promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor from the south.

75:7 but god is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up
another.

75:8 for in the hand of the lord there is a cup, and the wine is red;
it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs
thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink
them.

75:9 but i will declare for ever; i will sing praises to the god of
jacob.

75:10 all the horns of the wicked also will i cut off; but the horns
of the righteous shall be exalted.



76:1 in judah is god know
 
 ___________________________
 
n: his name is great in israel.

76:2 in salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in zion.

76:3 there brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword,
and the battle. selah.

76:4 thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.

76:5 the stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and
none of the men of might have found their hands.

76:6 at thy rebuke, o god of jacob, both the chariot and horse are
cast into a dead sleep.

76:7 thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight
when once thou art angry?

76:8 thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth
feared, and was still,

76:9 when god arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth.
selah.

76:10 surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of
wrath shalt thou restrain.

76:11 vow, and pay unto the lord your god: let all that be r
 
 ___________________________
 
ound about
him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

76:12 he shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the
kings of the earth.



77:1 i cried unto god with my voice, even unto god with my voice; and
he gave ear unto me.

77:2 in the day of my trouble i sought the lord: my sore ran in the
night, and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.

77:3 i remembered god, and was troubled: i complained, and my spirit
was overwhelmed. selah.

77:4 thou holdest mine eyes waking: i am so troubled that i cannot
speak.

77:5 i have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

77:6 i call to remembrance my song in the night: i commune with mine
own heart: and my spirit made diligent search.

77:7 will the lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no
more?

77:8 is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for
evermore?

 
 ___________________________
 

77:9 hath god forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his
tender mercies? selah.

77:10 and i said, this is my infirmity: but i will remember the years
of the right hand of the most high.

77:11 i will remember the works of the lord: surely i will remember
thy wonders of old.

77:12 i will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

77:13 thy way, o god, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as
our god?

77:14 thou art the god that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy
strength among the people.

77:15 thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of jacob
and joseph. selah.

77:16 the waters saw thee, o god, the waters saw thee; they were
afraid: the depths also were troubled.

77:17 the clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
arrows also went abroad.

77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings
lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.

77:19 
 
 ___________________________
 
 from their children, shewing to the
generation to come the praises of the lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he hath done.

78:5 for he established a testimony in jacob, and appointed a law in
israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them
known to their children:

78:6 that the generation to come might know them, even the children
which should be born; who should arise and declare them to their
children:

78:7 that they might set their hope in god, and not forget the works
of god, but keep his commandments:

78:8 and might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious
generation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose
spirit was not stedfast with god.

78:9 the children of ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned
back in the day of battle.

78:10 they kept not the covenant of god, and refused to walk in his
law;

78:11 and forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them.

78:12 marvel
 
 ___________________________
 
divided the sea, and caused them to pass through; and he made
the waters to stand as an heap.

78:14 in the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night
with a light of fire.

78:15 he clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out
of the great depths.

78:16 he brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to
run down like rivers.

78:17 and they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most high
in the wilderness.

78:18 and they tempted god in their heart by asking meat for their
lust.

78:19 yea, they spake against god; they said, can god furnish a table
in the wilderness?

78:20 behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for
his people?

78:21 therefore the lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was
kindled against jacob, and anger also came up against israel;

78:22 because they believed not in god, and trusted not in his
salva
 
 ___________________________
 
 full.

78:26 he caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power
he brought in the south wind.

78:27 he rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like
as the sand of the sea:

78:28 and he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
habitations.

78:29 so they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their
own desire;

78:30 they were not estranged from their lust. but while their meat
was yet in their mouths,

78:31 the wrath of god came upon them, and slew the fattest of them,
and smote down the chosen men of israel.

78:32 for all this they sinned still, and believed not for his
wondrous works.

78:33 therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years
in trouble.

78:34 when he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and
enquired early after god.

78:35 and they remembered that god was their rock, and the high god
their redeemer.

78:36 nevertheless they did flatter him with their mo
 
 ___________________________
 
.

78:37 for their heart was not right with him, neither were they
stedfast in his covenant.

78:38 but he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did
not stir up all his wrath.

78:39 for he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passeth
away, and cometh not again.

78:40 how oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him
in the desert!

78:41 yea, they turned back and tempted god, and limited the holy one
of israel.

78:42 they remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them
from the enemy.

78:43 how he had wrought his signs in egypt, and his wonders in the
field of zoan.

78:44 and had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that
they could not drink.

78:45 he sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them;
and frogs, which destroyed them.

78:46 he gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their
labour unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
le to go forth like sheep, and guided them
in the wilderness like a flock.

78:53 and he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea
overwhelmed their enemies.

78:54 and he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this
mountain, which his right hand had purchased.

78:55 he cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an
inheritance by line, and made the tribes of israel to dwell in their
tents.

78:56 yet they tempted and provoked the most high god, and kept not
his testimonies:

78:57 but turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they
were turned aside like a deceitful bow.

78:58 for they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved
him to jealousy with their graven images.

78:59 when god heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred israel:

78:60 so that he forsook the tabernacle of shiloh, the tent which he
placed among men;

78:61 and delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into
 
 ___________________________
 
78:68 but chose the tribe of judah, the mount zion which he loved.

78:69 and he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth
which he hath established for ever.

78:70 he chose david also his servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds:

78:71 from following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed
jacob his people, and israel his inheritance.

78:72 so he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.



79:1 o god, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy
temple have they defiled; they have laid jerusalem on heaps.

79:2 the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto
the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of
the earth.

79:3 their blood have they shed like water round about jerusalem; and
there was none to bury them.

79:4 we are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision
to them that are round about us.

79:5 how long, l
 
 ___________________________
 
ord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy
burn like fire?

79:6 pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

79:7 for they have devoured jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

79:8 o remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender
mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.

79:9 help us, o god of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and
deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake.

79:10 wherefore should the heathen say, where is their god? let him be
known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of
thy servants which is shed.

79:11 let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to
die;

79:12 and render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir
reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, o lord.

79:13 so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks
for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations.



80:1 give ear, o shepherd of israel, thou that leadest joseph like a
flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.

80:2 before ephraim and benjamin and manasseh stir up thy strength,
and come and save us.

80:3 turn us again, o god, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall
be saved.

80:4 o lord god of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the
prayer of thy people?

80:5 thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears
to drink in great measure.

80:6 thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies
laugh among themselves.

80:7 turn us again, o god of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and
we shall be saved.

80:8 thou hast brought a vine out of egypt: thou hast cast out 
 
 ___________________________
 
ore it, and didst cause it to take deep
root, and it filled the land.

80:10 the hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs
thereof were like the goodly cedars.

80:11 she sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the
river.

80:12 why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they
which pass by the way do pluck her?

80:13 the boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of
the field doth devour it.

80:14 return, we beseech thee, o god of hosts: look down from heaven,
and behold, and visit this vine;

80:15 and the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and the
branch that thou madest strong for thyself.

80:16 it is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the
rebuke of thy countenance.

80:17 let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of
man whom thou madest strong for thyself.

80:18 so will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call
upon thy name.

80:19 turn us ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ain, o lord god of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and
we shall be saved.



81:1 sing aloud unto god our strength: make a joyful noise unto the
god of jacob.

81:2 take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp
with the psaltery.

81:3 blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on
our solemn feast day.

81:4 for this was a statute for israel, and a law of the god of jacob.

81:5 this he ordained in joseph for a testimony, when he went out
through the land of egypt: where i heard a language that i understood
not.

81:6 i removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered
from the pots.

81:7 thou calledst in trouble, and i delivered thee; i answered thee
in the secret place of thunder: i proved thee at the waters of
meribah.

selah.

81:8 hear, o my people, and i will testify unto thee: o israel, if
thou wilt hearken unto me;
 
 ___________________________
 


81:9 there shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship
any strange god.

81:10 i am the lord thy god, which brought thee out of the land of
egypt: open thy mouth wide, and i will fill it.

81:11 but my people would not hearken to my voice; and israel would
none of me.

81:12 so i gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked
in their own counsels.

81:13 oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and israel had walked
in my ways!

81:14 i should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand
against their adversaries.

81:15 the haters of the lord should have subm
 
 ___________________________
 
itted themselves unto
him: but their time should have endured for ever.

81:16 he should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and
with honey out of the rock should i have satisfied thee.



82:1 god standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among
the gods.

82:2 how long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the
wicked? selah.

82:3 defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and
needy.

82:4 deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the
wicked.

82:5 they know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in
darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

82:6 i have said, ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most
high.

82:7 but ye shall die like men, and f
 
 ___________________________
 
all like one of the princes.

82:8 arise, o god, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all
nations.



83:1 keep not thou silence, o god: hold not thy peace, and be not
still, o god.

83:2 for, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee
have lifted up the head.

83:3 they have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted
against thy hidden ones.

83:4 they have said, come, and let us cut them off from being a
nation; that the name of israel may be no more in remembrance.

83:5 for they have consulted together with one consent: they are
confederate against thee:

83:6 the tabernacles of edom, and the ishmaelites; of moab, and the
hagar
 
 ___________________________
 

83:7 gebal, and ammon, and amalek; the philistines with the
inhabitants of tyre;

83:8 assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of
lot.

selah.

83:9 do unto them as unto the midianites; as to sisera, as to jabin,
at the brook of kison:

83:10 which perished at endor: they became as dung for the earth.

83:11 make their nobles like oreb, and like zeeb: yea, all their
princes as zebah, and as zalmunna:

83:12 who said, let us take to ourselves the houses of god in
possession.

83:13 o my god, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the
wind.

83:14 as the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the
mountains on fire;

83:15 so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with
thy storm.

83:16 fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, o
lord.

83:17 let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be
put to shame, and perish:

83:18 that men may know that thou, whose name alone is jehov
 
 ___________________________
 
ah, art
the most high over all the earth.



84:1 how amiable are thy tabernacles, o lord of hosts!

84:2 my soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the lord:
my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living god.

84:3 yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for
herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, o lord of
hosts, my king, and my god.

84:4 blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still
praising thee. selah.

84:5 blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are
the ways of them.

84:6 who passing through the valley of baca make it a well; the rain
also filleth the pools.

84:7 they go from strength to strength, every one of them in zion
appeareth before god.

84:8 o lord god of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, o god of jacob.
selah.

84:9 behold, o god our shield, and look upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n the face of thine
anointed.

84:10 for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. i had rather
be a doorkeeper in the house of my god, than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.

84:11 for the lord god is a sun and shield: the lord will give grace
and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.

84:12 o lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.



85:1 lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought
back the captivity of jacob.

85:2 thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered
all their sin. selah.

85:3 thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from
the fierceness of thine anger.

 
 ___________________________
 

85:4 turn us, o god of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us
to cease.

85:5 wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine
anger to all generations?

85:6 wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in
thee?

85:7 shew us thy mercy, o lord, and grant us thy salvation.

85:8 i will hear what god the lord will speak: for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to
folly.

85:9 surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may
dwell in our land.

85:10 mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

85:11 truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall
look down from heaven.

85:12 yea, the lord shall give that which is good; and our land shall
yield her increase.

85:
 
 ___________________________
 
13 righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us in the way
of his steps.



86:1 bow down thine ear, o lord, hear me: for i am poor and needy.

86:2 preserve my soul; for i am holy: o thou my god, save thy servant
that trusteth in thee.

86:3 be merciful unto me, o lord: for i cry unto thee daily.

86:4 rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, o lord, do i lift
up my soul.

86:5 for thou, lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in
mercy unto all them that call upon thee.

86:6 give ear, o lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
supplications.

86:7 in the day of my trouble i will call upon thee: for thou wilt
answer me.

86:8 among the god
 
 ___________________________
 
s there is none like unto thee, o lord; neither are
there any works like unto thy works.

86:9 all nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before
thee, o lord; and shall glorify thy name.

86:10 for thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art god
alone.

86:11 teach me thy way, o lord; i will walk in thy truth: unite my
heart to fear thy name.

86:12 i will praise thee, o lord my god, with all my heart: and i will
glorify thy name for evermore.

86:13 for great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my
soul from the lowest hell.

86:14 o god, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of
violent men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before
them.

86:15 but thou, o lord, art a god full of compassion, and gracious,
long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

86:16 o turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unt
 
 ___________________________
 
o
thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

86:17 shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: because thou, lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.



87:1 his foundation is in the holy mountains.

87:2 the lord loveth the gates of zion more than all the dwellings of
jacob.

87:3 glorious things are spoken of thee, o city of god. selah.

87:4 i will make mention of rahab and babylon to them that know me:
behold philistia, and tyre, with ethiopia; this man was born there.

87:5 and of zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her:
and the highest himself shall establish her.

87:6 the lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this
man was born there. selah.

87:7 as well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there:
all my springs are in thee.



88:1 o lord god of my s
 
 ___________________________
 
 for ever: thy
faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

89:3 i have made a covenant with my chosen, i have sworn unto david my
servant,

89:4 thy seed will i establish for ever, and build up thy throne to
all generations. selah.

89:5 and the heavens shall praise thy wonders, o lord: thy
faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.

89:6 for who in the heaven can be compared unto the lord? who among
the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the lord?

89:7 god is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are about him.

89:8 o lord god of hosts, who is a strong lord like unto thee? or to
thy faithfulness round about thee?

89:9 thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise,
thou stillest them.

89:10 thou hast broken rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou
hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

89:11 the heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as f
 
 ___________________________
 
:

89:21 with whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

89:22 the enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.

89:23 and i will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them
that hate him.

89:24 but my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my
name shall his horn be exalted.

89:25 i will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers.

89:26 he shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my god, and the rock
of my salvation.

89:27 also i will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the
earth.

89:28 my mercy will i keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
stand fast with him.

89:29 his seed also will i make to endure for ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven.

89:30 if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

89:31 if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

89:32 then will i visit their transgression with the rod
 
 ___________________________
 
 the reproach of thy servants; how i do bear in
my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;

89:51 wherewith thine enemies have reproached, o lord; wherewith they
have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

89:52 blessed be the lord for evermore. amen, and amen.



90:1 lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

90:2 before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting,
thou art god.

90:3 thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, return, ye children
of men.

90:4 for a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is
past, and as a watch in the night.

90:5 thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in
the morning they are like grass which groweth up.

90:6 in the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it
is cut down, and withereth.

90:7 for we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we
troubled.

 
 ___________________________
 
:12 so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.

90:13 return, o lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants.

90:14 o satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days.

90:15 make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted
us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

90:16 let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children.

90:17 and let the beauty of the lord our god be upon us: and establish
thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands
establish thou it.



91:1 he that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall abide
under the shadow of the almighty.

91:2 i will say of the lord, he is my refuge and my fortress: my god;
in him will i trust.

91:3 surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence.

91:4 he shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt
thou t
 
 ___________________________
 
nemies shall
perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

92:10 but my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: i
shall be anointed with fresh oil.

92:11 mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears
shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

92:12 the righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow
like a cedar in lebanon.

92:13 those that be planted in the house of the lord shall flourish in
the courts of our god.

92:14 they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing;

92:15 to shew that the lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.



93:1 the lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the lord is
clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world
also is stablished, that it cannot be moved.

93:2 thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

93:3 the floods have lifted up, o lord, the floods
 
 ___________________________
 
 have lifted up
their voice; the floods lift up their waves.

93:4 the lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea,
than the mighty waves of the sea.

93:5 thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, o
lord, for ever.



94:1 o lord god, to whom vengeance belongeth; o god, to whom vengeance
belongeth, shew thyself.

94:2 lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the
proud.

94:3 lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph?

94:4 how long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the
workers of iniquity boast themselves?

94:5 they break in pieces thy people, o lord, and afflict thine
heritage.

94:6 they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

94:7 yet they say, the lord shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
not see, neither shall the god of
jacob regard it.

94:8 understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will
ye be wise?

94:9 he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the
eye, shall he not see?

94:10 he that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?

94:11 the lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

94:12 blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, o lord, and teachest
him out of thy law;

94:13 that thou ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 of iniquity?

94:17 unless the lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

94:18 when i said, my foot slippeth; thy mercy, o lord, held me up.

94:19 in the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight
my soul.

94:20 shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frameth mischief by a law?

94:21 they gather themselves together against the soul of the
righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.

94:22 but the lord is my defence; and my god is the rock of my refuge.

94:23 and he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut
them off in their own wickedness; yea, the lord our god shall cut them
off.



95:1 o come, let us sing unto the lord: let us make a joyful noise to
the rock of our salvation.

95:2 let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with psalms.

95:3 for the lord is a great god, and a great king above all gods.

95:4 in his hand are the deep places of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the earth: the strength of the
hills is his also.

95:5 the sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry
land.

95:6 o come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the lord
our maker.

95:7 for he is our god; and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand. to day if ye will hear his voice,

95:8 harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day
of temptation in the wilderness:

95:9 when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.

95:10 forty years long was i grieved with this generation, and said,
it is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my
ways:

95:11 unto whom i sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my
r
 
 ___________________________
 
est.



96:1 o sing unto the lord a new song: sing unto the lord, all the
earth.

96:2 sing unto the lord, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from
day to day.

96:3 declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all
people.

96:4 for the lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be
feared above all gods.

96:5 for all the gods of the nations are idols: but the lord made the
heavens.

96:6 honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his
sanctuary.

96:7 give unto the lord, o ye kindreds of the people, give unto the
lord glory and strength.

96:8 give unto the lord the glory due unto his name: bring an
offering, and come into his courts.

96:9 o worship the lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him,
all the earth.

96:10 say among the heathen that the lord reigneth: the world als
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
judgment are the habitation of his throne.

97:3 a fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.

97:4 his lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and
trembled.

97:5 the hills melted like wax at the presence of the lord, at the
presence of the lord of the whole earth.

97:6 the heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his
glory.

97:7 confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of idols: worship him, all ye gods.

97:8 zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of judah rejoiced
because of thy judgments, o lord.

97:9 for thou, lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted
far above all gods.

97:10 ye that love the lord, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his
saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.

97:11 light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart.

97:12 rejoice in the lord, ye righteous; and give thanks at the
remembrance of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s holiness.



98:1 o sing unto the lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous
things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.

98:2 the lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he
openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.

98:3 he hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our god.

98:4 make a joyful noise unto the lord, all the earth: make a loud
noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.

98:5 sing unto the lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of
a psalm.

98:6 with trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the
lord, the king.

98:7 let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they
that dwell therein.

98:8 let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together

98:9 before the lord; for he cometh to judge th
 
 ___________________________
 
e earth: with
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.



99:1 the lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the lord, and he answered them.

99:7 he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, o lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our god, and worship at his holy hill; 
 
 ___________________________
 
for the
lord our god is holy.



100:1 make a joyful noise unto the lord, all ye lands.

100:2 serve the lord with gladness: come before his presence with
singing.

100:3 know ye that the lord he is god: it is he that hath made us, and
not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

100:4 enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name.

100:5 for the lord is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth
endureth to all generations.



101:1 i will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, o lord, will i
sing.

101:2 i will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. o when wilt thou
come unto me? i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
l be created shall praise the lord.

102:19 for he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from
heaven did the lord behold the earth;

102:20 to hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are
appointed to death;

102:21 to declare the name of the lord in zion, and his praise in
jerusalem;

102:22 when the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to
serve the lord.

102:23 he weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.

102:24 i said, o my god, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
years are throughout all generations.

102:25 of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

102:26 they shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them
shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and
they shall be changed:

102:27 but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

102:28 the children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed
shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
mber his
commandments to do them.

103:19 the lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his
kingdom ruleth over all.

103:20 bless the lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do
his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.

103:21 bless ye the lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that
do his pleasure.

103:22 bless the lord, all his works in all places of his dominion:
bless the lord, o my soul.



104:1 bless the lord, o my soul. o lord my god, thou art very great;
thou art clothed with honour and majesty.

104:2 who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:

104:3 who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh
the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

104:4 who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:

104:5 who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be
removed for ever.

104:6 thou coveredst it wit
 
 ___________________________
 
re full of sap; the cedars of lebanon,
which he hath planted;

104:17 where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir
trees are her house.

104:18 the high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks
for the conies.

104:19 he appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going
down.

104:20 thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth.

104:21 the young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
god.

104:22 the sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them
down in their dens.

104:23 man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the
evening.

104:24 o lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made
them all: the earth is full of thy riches.

104:25 so is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts.

104:26 there go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast
made to play therein.

104
 
 ___________________________
 
d with good.

104:29 thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their
breath, they die, and return to their dust.

104:30 thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou
renewest the face of the earth.

104:31 the glory of the lord shall endure for ever: the lord shall
rejoice in his works.

104:32 he looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the
hills, and they smoke.

104:33 i will sing unto the lord as long as i live: i will sing praise
to my god while i have my being.

104:34 my meditation of him shall be sweet: i will be glad in the
lord.

104:35 let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the
wicked be no more. bless thou the lord, o my soul. praise ye the lord.



105:1 o give thanks unto the lord; call upon his name: make known his
deeds among the people.

105:2 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

105:3 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord.

105:4 seek the lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

105:5 remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth;

105:6 o ye seed of abraham his servant, ye children of jacob his
chosen.

105:7 he is the lord our god: his judgments are in all the earth.

105:8 he hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

105:9 which covenant he made with abraham, and his oath unto isaac;

105:10 and confirmed the same unto jacob for a law, and to israel for
an everlasting covenant:

105:11 saying, unto thee will i give the land of canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
strangers in it.

105:1
 
 ___________________________
 
ebuked the red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them
through the depths, as through the wilderness.

106:10 and he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and
redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

106:11 and the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them
left.

106:12 then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

106:13 they soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:

106:14 but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted god in
the desert.

106:15 and he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their
soul.

106:16 they envied moses also in the camp, and aaron the saint of the
lord.

106:17 the earth opened and swallowed up dathan and covered the
company of abiram.

106:18 and a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up
the wicked.

106:19 they made a calf in horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

106:20 thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
eateth gr
 
 ___________________________
 
ass.

106:21 they forgat god their saviour, which had done great things in
egypt;

106:22 wondrous works in the land of ham, and terrible things by the
red sea.

106:23 therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them.

106:24 yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his
word:

106:25 but murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice
of the lord.

106:26 therefore he lifted up
 
 ___________________________
 
 oppressed them, and they were brought into
subjection under their hand.

106:43 many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with
their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.

106:44 nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their
cry:

106:45 and he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according
to the multitude of his mercies.

106:46 he made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them
captives.

106:47 save us, o lord our god, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

106:48 blessed be the lord god of israel from everlasting to
everlasting: and let all the people say, amen. praise ye the lord.



107:1 o give thanks unto the lord, for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

107:2 let the redeemed of the lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from
the hand of the enemy;

107:3 and gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and he delivered
them out of their distresses.

107:7 and he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a
city of habitation.

107:8 oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:9 for he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul
with goodness.

107:10 such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound
in affliction and iron;

107:11 because they rebelled against the words of god, and contemned
the counsel of the most high:

107:12 therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they fell
down, and there was none to help.

107:13 then they cried unto the lord in their trouble, and he saved
them out of their distresses.

107:14 he brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and
brake their bands in sunder.

107:15 oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:16 for he hath broken 
 
 ___________________________
 
shed and brought low through oppression,
affliction, and sorrow.

107:40 he poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in
the wilderness, where there is no way.

107:41 yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him
families like a flock.

107:42 the righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall
stop her mouth.

107:43 whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the lovingkindness of the lord.



108:1 o god, my heart is fixed; i will sing and give praise, even with
my glory.

108:2 awake, psaltery and harp: i myself will awake early.

108:3 i will praise thee, o lord, among the people: and i will sing
praises unto thee among the nations.

108:4 for thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth
unto the clouds.

108:5 be thou exalted, o god, above the heavens: and thy glory above
all the earth;

108:6 that thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and
ans
 
 ___________________________
 
wer me.

108:7 god hath spoken in his holiness; i will rejoice, i will divide
shechem, and mete out the valley of succoth.

108:8 gilead is mine; manasseh is mine; ephraim also is the strength
of mine head; judah is my lawgiver;

108:9 moab is my washpot; over edom will i cast out my shoe; over
philistia will i triumph.

108:10 who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
edom?

108:11 wilt not thou, o god, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou,
o god, go forth with our hosts?

108:12 give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

108:13 through god we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.



109:1 hold not thy peace, o god of my praise;

109:2 for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are
opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

109:3 they compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought
against me without a cause.

109:4 for my lov
 
 ___________________________
 
sing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted
not in blessing, so let it be far from him.

109:18 as he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so
let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

109:19 let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a
girdle wherewith he is girded continually.

109:20 let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the lord, and
of them that speak evil against my soul.

109:21 but do thou for me, o god the lord, for thy name's sake:
because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.

109:22 for i am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

109:23 i am gone like the shadow when it declineth: i am tossed up and
down as the locust.

109:24 my knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of
fatness.

109:25 i became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me
they shaked their heads.

109:26 help me, o lord my god: o save me according to thy mercy:

109:27 that
 
 ___________________________
 
d be grieved; he shall gnash with
his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.



113:1 praise ye the lord. praise, o ye servants of the lord, praise
the name of the lord.

113:2 blessed be the name of the lord from this time forth and for
evermore.

113:3 from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the
lord's name is to be praised.

113:4 the lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the
heavens.

113:5 who is like unto the lord our god, who dwelleth on high,

113:6 who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven,
and in the earth!

113:7 he raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy
out of the dunghill;

113:8 that he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his
people.

113:9 he maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
mother of children. praise ye the lord.



114:1 when israel went out of egypt, the house of jacob from a people
of strange language;

 
 ___________________________
 

114:2 judah was his sanctuary, and israel his dominion.

114:3 the sea saw it, and fled: jordan was driven back.

114:4 the mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like
lambs.

114:5 what ailed thee, o thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou jordan,
that thou wast driven back?

114:6 ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills,
like lambs?

114:7 tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the lord, at the
presence of the god of jacob;

114:8 which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a
fountain of waters.



115:1 not unto us, o lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory,
for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.

115:2 wherefore should the heathen say, where is now their god?

115:3 but our god is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath
pleased.

115:4 their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

115:5 they have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they,
 
 ___________________________
 
his time forth and for
evermore.

praise the lord.



116:1 i love the lord, because he hath heard my voice and my
supplications.

116:2 because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will i call
upon him as long as i live.

116:3 the sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat
hold upon me: i found trouble and sorrow.

116:4 then called i upon the name of the lord; o lord, i beseech thee,
deliver my soul.

116:5 gracious is the lord, and righteous; yea, our god is merciful.

116:6 the lord preserveth the simple: i was brought low, and he helped
me.

116:7 return unto thy rest, o my soul; for the lord hath dealt
bountifully with thee.

116:8 for thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from
tears, and my feet from falling.

116:9 i will walk before the lord in the land of the living.

116:10 i believed, therefore have i spoken: i was greatly afflicted:

116:11 i said in my haste, all men are liars.

116:12 what shall i render 
 
 ___________________________
 
 hast heard me, and art become my
salvation.

118:22 the stone which the builders refused is become the head stone
of the corner.

118:23 this is the lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

118:24 this is the day which the lord hath made; we will rejoice and
be glad in it.

118:25 save now, i beseech thee, o lord: o lord, i beseech thee, send
now prosperity.

118:26 blessed be he that cometh in the name of the lord: we have
blessed you out of the house of the lord.

118:27 god is the lord, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice
with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.

118:28 thou art my god, and i will praise thee: thou art my god, i
will exalt thee.

118:29 o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.



119:1 blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the
lord.

119:2 blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him
with the whole heart.

119:3 they also do no iniquity: t
 
 ___________________________
 
et thy
law.

119:110 the wicked have laid a snare for me: yet i erred not from thy
precepts.

119:111 thy testimonies have i taken as an heritage for ever: for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.

119:112 i have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even
unto the end.

119:113 i hate vain thoughts: but thy law do i love.

119:114 thou art my hiding place and my shield: i hope in thy word.

119:115 depart from me, ye evildoers: for i will keep the commandments
of my god.

119:116 uphold me according unto thy word, that i may live: and let me
not be ashamed of my hope.

119:117 hold thou me up, and i shall be safe: and i will have respect
unto thy statutes continually.

119:118 thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes:
for their deceit is falsehood.

119:119 thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross:
therefore i love thy testimonies.

119:120 my flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and i am afraid of thy
judgments.

 
 ___________________________
 
:

122:4 whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the lord, unto the
testimony of israel, to give thanks unto the name of the lord.

122:5 for there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house
of david.

122:6 pray for the peace of jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
thee.

122:7 peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

122:8 for my brethren and companions' sakes, i will now say, peace be
within thee.

122:9 because of the house of the lord our god i will seek thy good.



123:1 unto thee lift i up mine eyes, o thou that dwellest in the
heavens.

123:2 behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so
our eyes wait upon the lord our god, until that he have mercy upon us.

123:3 have mercy upon us, o lord, have mercy upon us: for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt.

123:4 our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that
are at
 
 ___________________________
 
redeem israel from all his iniquities.



131:1 lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do i
exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.

131:2 surely i have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is
weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

131:3 let israel hope in the lord from henceforth and for ever.



132:1 lord, remember david, and all his afflictions:

132:2 how he sware unto the lord, and vowed unto the mighty god of
jacob;

132:3 surely i will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go
up into my bed;

132:4 i will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

132:5 until i find out a place for the lord, an habitation for the
mighty god of jacob.

132:6 lo, we heard of it at ephratah: we found it in the fields of the
wood.

132:7 we will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his
footstool.

132:8 arise, o lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.

 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord commanded the blessing, even
life for evermore.



134:1 behold, bless ye the lord, all ye servants of the lord, which by
night stand in the house of the lord.

134:2 lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the lord.

134:3 the lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of zion.



135:1 praise ye the lord. praise ye the name of the lord; praise him,
o ye servants of the lord.

135:2 ye that stand in the house of the lord, in the courts of the
house of our god.

135:3 praise the lord; for the lord is good: sing praises unto his
name; for it is pleasant.

135:4 for the lord hath chosen jacob unto himself, and israel for his
peculiar treasure.

135:5 for i know that the lord is great, and that our lord is above
all gods.

135:6 whatsoever the lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in
earth, in the seas, and all deep places.

135:7 he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he
maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringet
 
 ___________________________
 
ny breath
in their mouths.

135:18 they that make them are like unto them: so is every one that
trusteth in them.

135:19 bless the lord, o house of israel: bless the lord, o house of
aaron:

135:20 bless the lord, o house of levi: ye that fear the lord, bless
the lord.

135:21 blessed be the lord out of zion, which dwelleth at jerusalem.

praise ye the lord.



136:1 o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:2 o give thanks unto the god of gods: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:3 o give thanks to the lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:4 to him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:5 to him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth
for ever.

136:6 to him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

136:7 to him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:8 the sun to rule by day: for his me
 
 ___________________________
 
20 and og the king of bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:21 and gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for
ever:

136:22 even an heritage unto israel his servant: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:23 who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for
ever:

136:24 and hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth
for ever.

136:25 who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.

136:26 o give thanks unto the god of heaven: for his mercy endureth
for ever.



137:1 by the rivers of babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when
we remembered zion.

137:2 we hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.

137:3 for there they that carried us away captive required of us a
song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, sing us
one of the songs of zion.

137:4 how shall we sing the lord's song in a strange land?

137:5 if i forget thee, o jerusalem, let my right hand fo
 
 ___________________________
 
et my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth; if i prefer not jerusalem above my chief joy.

137:7 remember, o lord, the children of edom in the day of jerusalem;
who said, rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.

137:8 o daughter of babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he
be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.

137:9 happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones.



138:1 i will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will i
sing praise unto thee.

138:2 i will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for
thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word
above all thy name.

138:3 in the day when i cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst
me with strength in my soul.

138:4 all the kings of the earth shall praise thee, o lord, when they
hear the words of thy mouth.

138:5 yea, they shall sing in the ways of the lord: for great is the
glory of the lord.

13
 
 ___________________________
 
9:14 i will praise thee; for i am fearfully and wonderfully made:
marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.

139:15 my substance was not hid from thee, when i was made in secret,
and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

139:16 thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in
thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

139:17 how precious also are thy thoughts unto me, o god! how great is
the sum of them!

139:18 if i should count them, they are more in number than the sand:
when i awake, i am still with thee.

139:19 surely thou wilt slay the wicked, o god: depart from me
therefore, ye bloody men.

139:20 for they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take
thy name in vain.

139:21 do not i hate them, o lord, that hate thee? and am not i
grieved with those that rise up against thee?

139:22 i hate them with perfect hatred: i count them mine
 
 ___________________________
 
 enemies.

139:23 search me, o god, and know my heart: try me, and know my
thoughts:

139:24 and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.



140:1 deliver me, o lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the
violent man;

140:2 which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they
gathered together for war.

140:3 they have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders' poison
is under their lips. selah.

140:4 keep me, o lord, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me fro
 
 ___________________________
 
m
the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

140:5 the proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a
net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. selah.

140:6 i said unto the lord, thou art my god: hear the voice of my
supplications, o lord.

140:7 o god the lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered
my head in the day of battle.

140:8 grant not, o lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his
wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. selah.

140:9 as for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief
of their own lips cover them.

140:10 let burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the
fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.

140:11 let not an evil speaker be established in the earth
 
 ___________________________
 
ity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

141:5 let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him
reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my
head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.

141:6 when their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall
hear my words; for they are sweet.

141:7 our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth, as when one
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.

141:8 but mine eyes are unto thee, o god the lord: in thee is my
trust; leave not my soul destitute.

141:9 keep me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the
gins of the workers of iniquity.

141:10 let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that i withal
escape.



142:1 i cried unto the lord with my voice; with my voice unto the lord
did i make my supplication.

142:2 i poured out my complaint before him; i shewed before him my
trouble.

142:3 when my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewe
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto thee: my soul thirsteth after
thee, as a thirsty land. selah.

143:7 hear me speedily, o lord: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face
from me, lest i be like unto them that go down into the pit.

143:8 cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning; for in thee
do i trust: cause me to know the way wherein i should walk; for i lift
up my soul unto thee.

143:9 deliver me, o lord, from mine enemies: i flee unto thee to hide
me.

143:10 teach me to do thy will; for thou art my god: thy spirit is
good; lead me into the land of uprightness.

143:11 quicken me, o lord, for thy name's sake: for thy righteousness'
sake bring my soul out of trouble.

143:12 and of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them
that afflict my soul: for i am thy servant.



144:1 blessed be the lord my strength which teacheth my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight:

144:2 my goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer;
my shield, and he in whom i trust; who
 
 ___________________________
 
s like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth
away.

144:5 bow thy heavens, o lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and
they shall smoke.

144:6 cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows,
and destroy them.

144:7 send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

144:8 whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.

144:9 i will sing a new song unto thee, o god: upon a psaltery and an
instrument of ten strings will i sing praises unto thee.

144:10 it is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth david
his servant from the hurtful sword.

144:11 rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose
mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood:

144:12 that our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that
our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude
of a palace:

 
 ___________________________
 

144:13 that our garners may be full, affording all manner of store:
that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our
streets:

144:14 that our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no
breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our
streets.

144:15 happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is
that people, whose god is the lord.



145:1 i will extol thee, my god, o king; and i will bless thy name for
ever and ever.

145:2 every day will i bless thee; and i will praise thy name for ever
and ever.

145:3 great is the lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness
is unsearchable.

145:4 one generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall
declare thy mighty acts.

145:5 i will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy
wondrous works.

145:6 and men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and i
will declare 
 
 ___________________________
 
all upon him, to all that
call upon him in truth.

145:19 he will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will
hear their cry, and will save them.

145:20 the lord preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked
will he destroy.

145:21 my mouth shall speak the praise of the lord: and let all flesh
bless his holy name for ever and ever.



146:1 praise ye the lord. praise the lord, o my soul.

146:2 while i live will i praise the lord: i will sing praises unto my
god while i have any being.

146:3 put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help.

146:4 his breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very
day his thoughts perish.

146:5 happy is he that hath the god of jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the lord his god:

146:6 which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is:
which keepeth truth for ever:

146:7 which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to
the hungr
 
 ___________________________
 
y. the lord looseth the prisoners:

146:8 the lord openeth the eyes of the blind: the lord raiseth them
that are bowed down: the lord loveth the righteous:

146:9 the lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless
and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.

146:10 the lord shall reign for ever, even thy god, o zion, unto all
generations. praise ye the lord.



147:1 praise ye the lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our god;
for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.

147:2 the lord doth build up jerusalem: he gathereth together the
outcasts of israel.

147:3 he healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.

147:4 he telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their
names.

147:5 great is our lord, and of great power: his understanding is
infinite.

147:6 the lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the
ground.

147:7 sing unto the lord with thanksgiving; sing
 
 ___________________________
 
 praise upon the harp
unto our god:

147:8 who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the
earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.

147:9 he giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which
cry.

147:10 he delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not
pleasure in the legs of a man.

147:11 the lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy.

147:12 praise the lord, o jerusalem; praise thy god, o zion.

147:13 for he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed
thy children within thee.

147:14 he maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.

147:15 he sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth
very swiftly.

147:16 he giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like
ashes.

147:17 he casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his
cold?

147:18 he sendeth out his word, and melteth them: h
 
 ___________________________
 
d. sing unto the lord a new song, and his
praise in the congregation of saints.

149:2 let israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of
zion be joyful in their king.

149:3 let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises
unto him with the timbrel and harp.

149:4 for the lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the
meek with salvation.

149:5 let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon
their beds.

149:6 let the high praises of god be in their mouth, and a two-edged
sword in their hand;

149:7 to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the
people;

149:8 to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters
of iron;

149:9 to execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all
his saints. praise ye the lord.



150:1 praise ye the lord. praise god in his sanctuary: praise him in
the firmament of his power.

150:2 praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
oso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.

2:1 my son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments
with thee; 2:2 so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thine heart to understanding; 2:3 yea, if thou criest after knowledge,
and liftest up thy voice for understanding; 2:4 if thou seekest her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; 2:5 then shalt
thou understand the fear of the lord, and find the knowledge of god.

2:6 for the lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and
understanding.

2:7 he layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to
them that walk uprightly.

2:8 he keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his
saints.

2:9 then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity; yea, every good path.

2:10 when wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant
unto thy soul; 2:11 discretion shall preserve thee, underst
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee: 2:12 to deliver thee from the way of the evil man,
from the man that speaketh froward things; 2:13 who leave the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness; 2:14 who rejoice to do
evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked; 2:15 whose ways
are crooked, and they froward in their paths: 2:16 to deliver thee
from the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with
her words; 2:17 which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth
the covenant of her god.

2:18 for her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.

2:19 none that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life.

2:20 that thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths
of the righteous.

2:21 for the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall
remain in it.

2:22 but the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it.

3:1 my son, forget not my law; but let thine hea
 
 ___________________________
 
rt keep my
commandments: 3:2 for length of days, and long life, and peace, shall
they add to thee.

3:3 let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck;
write them upon the table of thine heart: 3:4 so shalt thou find
favour and good understanding in the sight of god and man.

3:5 trust in the lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine
own understanding.

3:6 in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

3:7 be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the lord, and depart from
evil.

3:8 it shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.

3:9 honour the lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of
all thine increase: 3:10 so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and
thy presses shall burst out with new wine.
 
 ___________________________
 
reaseth learning.

16:22 understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but
the instruction of fools is folly.

16:23 the heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to
his lips.

16:24 pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and
health to the bones.

16:25 there is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death.

16:26 he that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth
it of him.

16:27 an ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a
burning fire.

16:28 a froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief
friends.

16:29 a violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the
way that is not good.

16:30 he shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips
he bringeth evil to pass.

16:31 the hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.

16:32 he that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and h
 
 ___________________________
 
hall not be visited with evil.

19:24 a slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so
much as bring it to his mouth again.

19:25 smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one
that hath understanding, and he will understand knowledge.

19:26 he that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a
son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.

19:27 cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to err from
the words of knowledge.

19:28 an ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the
wicked devoureth iniquity.

19:29 judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
fools.

20:1 wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise.

20:2 the fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh
him to anger sinneth against his own soul.

20:3 it is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool
will be meddling.

20:4 the sluggard will not plow 
 
 ___________________________
 

to do judgment.

21:8 the way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his
work is right.

21:9 it is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman in a wide house.

21:10 the soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no
favour in his eyes.

21:11 when the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when
the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.

21:12 the righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked:
but god overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.

21:13 whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall
cry himself, but shall not be heard.

21:14 a gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom
strong wrath.

21:15 it is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity.

21:16 the man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall
remain in the congregation of the dead.

21:17 he that loveth pleasure shall be a poor
 
 ___________________________
 
rown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down.

24:32 then i saw, and considered it well: i looked upon it, and
received instruction.

24:33 yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep: 24:34 so shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth; and thy want as an armed man.

25:1 these are also proverbs of solomon, which the men of hezekiah
king of judah copied out.

25:2 it is the glory of god to conceal a thing: but the honour of
kings is to search out a matter.

25:3 the heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
kings is unsearchable.

25:4 take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer.

25:5 take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall
be established in righteousness.

25:6 put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not
in the place of great men: 25:7 for better it is that
 
 ___________________________
 
thou also be like
unto him.

26:5 answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit.

26:6 he that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
feet, and drinketh damage.

26:7 the legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth
of fools.

26:8 as he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth
honour to a fool.

26:9 as a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable
in the mouths of fools.

26:10 the great god that formed all things both rewardeth the fool,
and rewardeth transgressors.

26:11 as a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his
folly.

26:12 seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of
a fool than of him.

26:13 the slothful man saith, there is a lion in the way; a lion is in
the streets.

26:14 as the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon
his bed.

26:15 the slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to
bring it
 
 ___________________________
 
 the prophecy: the man
spake unto ithiel, even unto ithiel and ucal, 30:2 surely i am more
brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man.

30:3 i neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.

30:4 who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered
the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who
hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what
is his son's name, if thou canst tell?  30:5 every word of god is
pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.

30:6 add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar.

30:7 two things have i required of thee; deny me them not before i
die: 30:8 remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: 30:9 lest i be full,
and deny thee, and say, who is the lord? or lest i be poor, and steal,
and take the name of my god in vain.

30:10 accuse not a serva
 
 ___________________________
 
 no new thing
under the sun.

1:10 is there any thing whereof it may be said, see, this is new? it
hath been already of old time, which was before us.

1:11 there is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be
any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come
after.

1:12 i the preacher was king over israel in jerusalem.

1:13 and i gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning
all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath god
given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith.

1:14 i have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and,
behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

1:15 that which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is
wanting cannot be numbered.

1:16 i communed with mine own heart, saying, lo, i am come to great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been
before me in jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom
and knowledge.

1:1
 
 ___________________________
 
he
leave it for his portion. this also is vanity and a great evil.

2:22 for what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?  2:23 for all his days
are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in
the night. this is also vanity.

2:24 there is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. this
also i saw, that it was from the hand of god.

2:25 for who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than i?
2:26 for god giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and
to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before god. this also
is vanity and vexation of spirit.

3:1 to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the heaven: 3:2 a time to be born, and a time to die; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up that whic
 
 ___________________________
 
nd a
time to dance; 3:5 a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather
stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing; 3:6 a time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and
a time to cast away; 3:7 a time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to
keep silence, and a time to speak; 3:8 a time to love, and a time to
hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.

3:9 what profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
3:10 i have seen the travail, which god hath given to the sons of men
to be exercised in it.

3:11 he hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set
the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that
god maketh from the beginning to the end.

3:12 i know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice,
and to do good in his life.

3:13 and also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good
of all his labour, it is the gift of god.

3:14 i know that, whatsoever god doeth, 
 
 ___________________________
 
it shall be for ever: nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and god doeth it, that
men should fear before him.

3:15 that which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
been; and god requireth that which is past.

3:16 and moreover i saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity
was there.

3:17 i said in mine heart, god shall judge the righteous and the
wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for every
work.

3:18 i said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
that god might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselves are beasts.

3:19 for that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even
one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea,
they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a
beast: for all is v
 
 ___________________________
 

who will no more be admonished.

4:14 for out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is
born in his kingdom becometh poor.

4:15 i considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead.

4:16 there is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him.
surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

5:1 keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of god, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider
not that they do evil.

5:2 be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before god: for god is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefore let thy words be few.

5:3 for a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool's
voice is known by multitude of words.

5:4 when thou vowest a vow unto god, defer not to pay it; for he hath
no pleasure in fools: pay th
 
 ___________________________
 
at which thou hast vowed.

5:5 better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
vow and not pay.

5:6 suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should god be angry
at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?  5:7 for in the
multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but
fear thou god.

5:8 if thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for
he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than
they.

5:9 moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
served by the field.

5:10 he that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he
that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.

5:11 when goods increase, they are increased tha
 
 ___________________________
 
e nothing of his labour, which he may
carry away in his hand.

5:16 and this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?
5:17 all his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow
and wrath with his sickness.

5:18 behold that which i have seen: it is good and comely for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he
taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which god giveth him:
for it is his portion.

5:19 every man also to whom god hath given riches and wealth, and hath
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to
rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of god.

5:20 for he shall not much remember the days of his life; because god
answereth him in the joy of his heart.

6:1 there is an evil which i have seen under the sun, and it is common
among men: 6:2 a man to whom god hath given riches, wealth, and
honour, so that he wan
 
 ___________________________
 
teth nothing for his soul of all that he
desireth, yet god giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.

6:3 if a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that
the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good,
and also that he have no burial; i say, that an untimely birth is
better than he.

6:4 for he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his
name shall be covered with darkness.

6:5 moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any 
 
 ___________________________
 
spirit.

7:9 be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the
bosom of fools.

7:10 say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better
than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.

7:11 wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the sun.

7:12 for wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the
excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have
it.

7:13 consider the work of god: for who can make that straight, which
he hath made crooked?  7:14 in the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider: god also hath set the one over against
the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.

7:15 all things have i seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just
man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

7:16 be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: 
 
 ___________________________
 
why
shouldest thou destroy thyself ?  7:17 be not over much wicked,
neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?  7:18
it is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth god shall come forth of
them all.

7:19 wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are
in the city.

7:20 for there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
sinneth not.

7:21 also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear
thy servant curse thee: 7:22 for oftentimes also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others.

7:23 all this have i proved by wisdom: i said, i will be wise; but it
was far from me.

7:24 that
 
 ___________________________
 
 which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
7:25 i applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly,
even of foolishness and madness: 7:26 and i find more bitter than
death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as
bands: whoso pleaseth god shall escape from her; but the sinner shall
be taken by her.

7:27 behold, this have i found, saith the preacher, counting one by
one, to find out the account: 7:28 which yet my soul seeketh, but i
find not: one man among a thousand have i found; but a woman among all
those have i not found.

7:29 lo, this only have i found, that god hath made man upright; but
they have sought out many inventions.

8:1 who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a
thing?  a man's w
 
 ___________________________
 
isdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of
his face shall be changed.

8:2 i counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in regard
of the oath of god.

8:3 be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing;
for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.

8:4 where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto
him, what doest thou?  8:5 whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no
evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.

8:6 because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the
misery of man is great upon him.

8:7 for he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell
 
 ___________________________
 
man ruleth over
another to his own hurt.

8:10 and so i saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had
so done: this is also vanity.

8:11 because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil.

8:12 though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely i know that it shall be well with them that fear
god, which fear before him: 8:13 but it shall not be well with the
wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow;
because he feareth not before god.

8:14 there is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be
just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked;
again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work
of the righteous: i said that this also is vanity.

8:15 then i commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing u
 
 ___________________________
 
nder
the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall
abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which god giveth
him under the sun.

8:16 when i applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
night seeth sleep with his eyes:) 8:17 then i beheld all the work of
god, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun:
because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it;
yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it.

9:1 for all this i considered in my heart even to declare all this,
that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
god: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.

9:2 all things come alike to all: there is one event to the
 
 ___________________________
 
at is joined to all the living there is hope: for a
living dog is better than a dead lion.

9:5 for the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is
forgotten.

9:6 also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing
that is done under the sun.

9:7 go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart; for god now accepteth thy works.

9:8 let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
ointment.

9:9 live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the
life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the
days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy
labour which thou takest under the sun.

9:10 whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whi
 
 ___________________________
 
 not
what evil shall be upon the earth.

11:3 if the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in
the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.

11:4 he that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth
the clouds shall not reap.

11:5 as thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou
knowest not the works of god who maketh all.

11:6 in the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or
that, or whether they both shall be alike good.

11:7 truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the sun: 11:8 but if a man live many years, and rejoice in
them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be
many. all that cometh is vanity.

11:9 rejoice, o young man, in thy youth;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things god
will bring thee into judgment.

11:10 therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from
thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.

12:1 remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, i have no
pleasure in them; 12:2 while the sun, or the light, or the moon, or
the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain: 12:3
in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and
 
 ___________________________
 
when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree
shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets: 12:6 or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or
the wheel broken at the cistern.

12:7 then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto god who gave it.

12:8 vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.

12:9 and moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many proverbs.

12:10 the preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that which
was written was upright, even words of truth.

12:11 the words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
2:12 and further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many
books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

12:13 let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear god, and
keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

12:14 for god shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.




the song of solomon


1:1 the song of songs, which is solomon's.

1:2 let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is
better than wine.

1:3 because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as
ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

1:4 draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad 
 
 ___________________________
 
desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your
land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as
overthrown by strangers.

1:8 and the daughter of zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

1:9 except the lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we
should have been as sodom, and we should have been like unto gomorrah.

1:10 hear the word of the lord, ye rulers of sodom; give ear unto the
law of our god, ye people of gomorrah.

1:11 to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?
saith the lord: i am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; and i delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of
lambs, or of he goats.

1:12 when ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your
hand, to tread my courts?  1:13 bring no more vain oblations; incense
is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, i cannot away wit
 
 ___________________________
 
aker of it as a spark,
and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

2:1 the word that isaiah the son of amoz saw concerning judah and
jerusalem.

2:2 and it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

2:3 and many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the lord, to the house of the god of jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

2:4 and he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

2:5 o house of jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
lord.

2:6 therefo
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren are their oppressors, and women rule
over them. o my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and
destroy the way of thy paths.

3:13 the lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.

3:14 the lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard;
the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

3:15 what mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor? saith the lord god of hosts.

3:16 moreover the lord saith, because the daughters of zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking
and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 3:17
therefore the lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
daughters of zion, and the lord will discover their secret parts.

3:18 in that day the lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires

 
 ___________________________
 
ivity, because they have no
knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude
dried up with thirst.

5:14 therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

5:15 and the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall
be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: 5:16 but the
lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and god that is holy shall
be sanctified in righteousness.

5:17 then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

5:18 woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope: 5:19 that say, let him make speed, and
hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the holy
one of israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!  5:20 woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil; that put da
 
 ___________________________
 
ay of the fuller's field; 7:4 and say unto him, take heed,
and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of
these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of rezin with syria,
and of the son of remaliah.

7:5 because syria, ephraim, and the son of remaliah, have taken evil
counsel against thee, saying, 7:6 let us go up against judah, and vex
it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the
midst of it, even the son of tabeal: 7:7 thus saith the lord god, it
shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

7:8 for the head of syria is damascus, and the head of damascus is
rezin; and within threescore and five years shall ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people.

7:9 and the head of ephraim is samaria, and the head of samaria is
remaliah's son. if ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established.

7:10 moreover the lord spake again unto ahaz, saying, 7:11 ask thee a
sign of the lord thy god; ask it either in the depth, or i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the height
above.

7:12 but ahaz said, i will not ask, neither will i tempt the lord.

7:13 and he said, hear ye now, o house of david; is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but will ye weary my god also?  7:14 therefore
the lord himself shall give you a sign; behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name immanuel.

7:15 butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good.

7:16 for before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings.

7:17 the lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy
father's house, days that have
 
 ___________________________
 
all pass through
judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck;
and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy
land, o immanuel.

8:9 associate yourselves, o ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces.

8:10 take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the
word, and it shall not stand: for god is with us.

8:11 for the lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed
me that i should not walk in the way of this people, saying, 8:12 say
ye not, a confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, a
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

8:13 sanctify the lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread.

8:14 and he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and
for a rock of offence to both the houses of 
 
 ___________________________
 

8:16 bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

8:17 and i will wait upon the lord, that hideth his face from the
house of jacob, and i will look for him.

8:18 behold, i and the children whom the lord hath given me are for
signs and for wonders in israel from the lord of hosts, which dwelleth
in mount zion.

8:19 and when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should
not a people seek unto their god? for the living to the dead?  8:20 to
the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.

8:21 and they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it
shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their king and their god, and look upward.

8:22 and they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and
darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.

 
 ___________________________
 
 and as men rejoice
when they divide the spoil.

9:4 for thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his
shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of midian.

9:5 for every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of
fire.

9:6 for unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
wonderful, counsellor, the mighty god, the everlasting father, the
prince of peace.

9:7 of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of david, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. the zeal of the lord of hosts will perform this.

9:8 the lord sent a word into jacob, and it hath lighted upon israel.

9:9 and all the people shall know, even ephraim and the inhabitant of
samaria, that say in the pride and s
 
 ___________________________
 
tful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.

10:19 and the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

10:20 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
israel, and such as are escaped of the house of jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the lord, the
holy one of israel, in truth.

10:21 the remnant shall return, even the remnant of jacob, unto the
mighty god.

10:22 for though thy people israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow
with righteousness.

10:23 for the lord god of hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined, in the midst of all the land.

10:24 therefore thus saith the lord god of hosts, o my people that
dwellest in zion, be not afraid of the assyrian: he shall smite thee
with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner
of egypt.

1
 
 ___________________________
 

sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river,
and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.

11:16 and there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people,
which shall be left, from assyria; like as it was to israel in the day
that he came up out of the land of egypt.

12:1 and in that day thou shalt say, o lord, i will praise thee:
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortedst me.

12:2 behold, god is my salvation; i will trust, and not be afraid: for
the lord jehovah is my strength and my song; he also is become my
salvation.

12:3 therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.

12:4 and in that day shall ye say, praise the lord, call upon his
name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name
is exalted.

12:5 sing unto the lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is
known in all the earth.

12:6 cry out and shout, thou inhabi
 
 ___________________________
 
also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes;
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

13:17 behold, i will stir up the medes against them, which shall not
regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

13:18 their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not
spare children.

13:19 and babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the chaldees'
excellency, shall be as when god overthrew sodom and gomorrah.

13:20 it shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation: neither shall the arabian pitch tent there;
neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

13:21 but wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and
satyrs shall dance there.

13:22 and the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and dragons in their ple
 
 ___________________________
 

14:10 all they shall speak and say unto thee, art thou also become
weak as we? art thou become like unto us?  14:11 thy pomp is brought
down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread
under thee, and the worms cover thee.

14:12 how art thou fallen from heaven, o lucifer, son of the morning!
how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
14:13 for thou hast said in thine heart, i will ascend into heaven, i
will exalt my throne above the stars of god: i will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: 14:14 i will
ascend above the heights of the clouds; i will be like the most high.

14:15 yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

14:16 they that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did
shake kingdoms; 14:17 that made the world as a wilderness, and
destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the h
 
 ___________________________
 
day it shall come to pass, that the glory of jacob
shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.

17:5 and it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
ears in the valley of rephaim.

17:6 yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an
olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the lord
god of israel.

17:7 at that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes shall
have respect to the holy one of israel.

17:8 and he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands,
neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the
groves, or the images.

17:9 in that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and
an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of
israel: and there shall be desolation.

17:10 because thou hast forgotten the
 
 ___________________________
 
 god of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou
plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips: 17:11 in
the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt
thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

17:12 woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing
like the
 
 ___________________________
 
 rushing of mighty waters!  17:13 the nations shall rush like
the rushing of many waters: but god shall rebuke them, and they shall
flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before
the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.

17:14 and behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is
not.

this is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us.

18:1 woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers
of ethiopia: 18:2 that sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels
of bulrushes upon the waters, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 go, set a watchman, let him
declare what he seeth.

21:7 and he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of
asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much
heed: 21:8 and he cried, a lion: my lord, i stand continually upon the
watchtower in the daytime, and i am set in my ward whole nights: 21:9
and, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen.

and he answered and said, babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the
graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.

21:10 o my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which i have
heard of the lord of hosts, the god of israel, have i declared unto
you.

21:11 the burden of dumah. he calleth to me out of seir, watchman,
what of the night? watchman, what of the night?  21:12 the watchman
said, the morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire,
enquire ye: return, come.

21:13 the burden upon arabia. in the forest in arabia shall ye lodge,
o ye travelling
 
 ___________________________
 
bitants of the land of tema brought water to him that
was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.

21:15 for they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from
the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

21:16 for thus hath the lord said unto me, within a year, according to
the years of an hireling, and all the glory of kedar shall fail: 21:17
and the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the
children of kedar, shall be diminished: for the lord god of israel
hath spoken it.

22:1 the burden of the valley of vision. what aileth thee now, that
thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?  22:2 thou that art full of
stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city: thy slain men are not slain
with the sword, nor dead in battle.

22:3 all thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers:
all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from
far.

22:4 therefore said i, look away from me; i will weep bitterly, labour
no
 
 ___________________________
 
t to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my
people.

22:5 for it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of
perplexity by the lord god of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking
down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

22:6 and elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and
kir uncovered the shield.

22:7 and it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be
full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at
the gate.

22:8 and he discovered the covering of judah, and thou didst look in
that day to the armour of the house of the forest.

22:9 ye have seen also the brea
 
 ___________________________
 
ches of the city of david, that they
are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.

22:10 and ye have numbered the houses of jerusalem, and the houses
have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

22:11 ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the
old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

22:12 and in that day did the lord god of hosts call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: 22:13 and
behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall
die.

22:14 and it was revealed in mine ears by the lord of hosts, surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the lord
god of hosts.

22:15 thus saith the lord god of hosts, go, get thee unto this
treasurer, even unto shebna,
 
 ___________________________
 
ned,
the mirth of the land is gone.

24:12 in the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with
destruction.

24:13 when thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,
there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning
grapes when the vintage is done.

24:14 they shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty
of the lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea.

24:15 wherefore glorify ye the lord in the fires, even the name of the
lord god of israel in the isles of the sea.

24:16 from the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even
glory to the righteous. but i said, my leanness, my leanness, woe unto
me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the
treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.

24:17 fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, o inhabitant of
the earth.

24:18 and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of
the fear shall fall into the pit; and he tha
 
 ___________________________
 
o pass in that day, that the lord shall
punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of
the earth upon the earth.

24:22 and they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered
in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days
shall they be visited.

24:23 then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
lord of hosts shall reign in mount zion, and in jerusalem, and before
his ancients gloriously.

25:1 o lord, thou art my god; i will exalt thee, i will praise thy
name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are
faithfulness and truth.

25:2 for thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin:
a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.

25:3 therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the
terrible nations shall fear thee.

25:4 for thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the
needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shado
 
 ___________________________
 

dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the
terrible ones shall be brought low.

25:6 and in this mountain shall the lord of hosts make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things
full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

25:7 and he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.

25:8 he will swallow up death in victory; and the lord god will wipe
away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he
take away from off all the earth: for the lord hath spoken it.

25:9 and it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our god; we have
waited for him, and he will save us: this is the lord; we have waited
for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

25:10 for in this mountain shall the hand of the lord rest, and moab
shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the
dunghill.

 
 ___________________________
 

25:11 and he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he
that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring
down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.

25:12 and the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring
down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.

26:1 in that day shall this song be sung in the land of judah; we have
a strong city; salvation will god appoint for walls and bulwarks.

26:2 open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the
truth may enter in.

26:3 thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee: because he trusteth in thee.

26:4 trust ye in the lord for ever: for in the lord jehovah is
everlasting strength: 26:5 for he bringeth down them that dwell on
high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the
ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.

26:6 the foot shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
 will learn righteousness.

26:10 let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and
will not behold the majesty of the lord.

26:11 lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they
shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire
of thine enemies shall devour them.

26:12 lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought
all our works in us.

26:13 o lord our god, other lords beside thee have had dominion over
us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.

26:14 they are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they
shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and
made all their memory to perish.

26:15 thou hast increased the nation, o lord, thou hast increased the
nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto all the
ends of the earth.

26:16 lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured 
 
 ___________________________
 
d there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared, and taken.

28:14 wherefore hear the word of the lord, ye scornful men, that rule
this people which is in jerusalem.

28:15 because ye have said, we have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge,
and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: 28:16 therefore thus saith
the lord god, behold, i lay in zion for a foundation a stone, a tried
stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth
shall not make haste.

28:17 judgment also will i lay to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
waters shall overflow the hiding place.

28:18 and your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, then ye sha
 
 ___________________________
 
ht: and it shall be a
vexation only to understand the report.

28:20 for the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on
it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.

28:21 for the lord shall rise up as in mount perazim, he shall be
wroth as in the valley of gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange
work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

28:22 now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong:
for i have heard from the lord god of hosts a consumption, even
determined upon the whole earth.

28:23 give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

28:24 doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the
clods of his ground?  28:25 when he hath made plain the face thereof,
doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast
in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their
place?  28:26 for his god doth instruct him to discretion, and doth
teach him.
 
 ___________________________
 
ity are cut off: 29:21 that make
a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

29:22 therefore thus saith the lord, who redeemed abraham, concerning
the house of jacob, jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his
face now wax pale.

29:23 but when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the
midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one
of jacob, and shall fear the god of israel.

29:24 they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and
they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

30:1 woe to the rebellious children, saith the lord, that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my
spirit, that they may add sin to sin: 30:2 that walk to go down into
egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the
strength of pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of egypt!  30:3
therefore shall the strength
 
 ___________________________
 
rd, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:
30:13 therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to
fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at
an instant.

30:14 and he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel
that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not
be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth,
or to take water withal out of the pit.

30:15 for thus saith the lord god, the holy one of israel; in
returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence
shall be your strength: and ye would not.

30:16 but ye said, no; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall
ye flee: and, we will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that
pursue you be swift.

30:17 one thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of
five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a
mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.

30:18 and th
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore will the lord wait, that he may be gracious unto
you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon
you: for the lord is a god of judgment: blessed are all they that wait
for him.

30:19 for the people shall dwell in zion at jerusalem: thou shalt weep
no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry;
when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

30:20 and though the lord give you the bread of adversity, and the
water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers: 30:21 and
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, t
 
 ___________________________
 
eam of brimstone, doth kindle
it.

31:1 woe to them that go down to egypt for help; and stay on horses,
and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because
they are very strong; but they look not unto the holy one of israel,
neither seek the lord!  31:2 yet he also is wise, and will bring evil,
and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of
the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

31:3 now the egyptians are men, and not god; and their horses flesh,
and not spirit. when the lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that
helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they
all shall fail together.

31:4 for thus hath the lord spoken unto me, like as the lion and the
young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is
called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor
abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the lord of hosts come
down to fight for mount zion,
 
 ___________________________
 
 for them, and his hand hath divided it
unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
generation shall they dwell therein.

35:1 the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

35:2 it shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and
singing: the glory of lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency
of carmel and sharon, they shall see the glory of the lord, and the
excellency of our god.

35:3 strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

35:4 say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not:
behold, your god will come with vengeance, even god with a recompence;
he will come and save you.

35:5 then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf shall be unstopped.

35:6 then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams
in the desert.

35
 
 ___________________________
 
, thus saith
the great king, the king of assyria, what confidence is this wherein
thou trustest?  36:5 i say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words)
i have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that
thou rebellest against me?  36:6 lo, thou trustest in the staff of
this broken reed, on egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierce it: so is pharaoh king of egypt to all that trust in
him.

36:7 but if thou say to me, we trust in the lord our god: is it not
he, whose high places and whose altars hezekiah hath taken away, and
said to judah and to jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar?
36:8 now therefore give pledges, i pray thee, to my master the king of
assyria, and i will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on
thy part to set riders upon them.

36:9 how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least
of my master's servants, and put thy trust on egypt for chariots and
for horsemen?  36:10 and a
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the king of assyria.

36:16 hearken not to hezekiah: for thus saith the king of assyria,
make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye
every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye
every one the waters of his own cistern; 36:17 until i come and take
you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land
of bread and vineyards.

36:18 beware lest hezekiah persuade you, saying, the lord will deliver
us.

hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand
of the king of assyria?  36:19 where are the gods of hamath and
arphad? where are the gods of sepharvaim? and have they delivered
samaria out of my hand?  36:20 who are they among all the gods of
these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the
lord should deliver jerusalem out of my hand?  36:21 but they held
their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment
was, saying, answer him not.

36:22 th
 
 ___________________________
 
ent
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
house of the lord.

37:2 and he sent eliakim, who was over the household, and shebna the
scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto
isaiah the prophet the son of amoz.

37:3 and they said unto him, thus saith hezekiah, this day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

37:4 it may be the lord thy god will hear the words of rabshakeh, whom
the king of assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living god,
and will reprove the words which the lord thy god hath heard:
wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

37:5 so the servants of king hezekiah came to isaiah.

37:6 and isaiah said unto them, thus shall ye say unto your master,
thus saith the lord, be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,
wherewith the servants of the king of assyria have blasphemed me.

 
 ___________________________
 
im, and he shall hear a rumour,
and return to his own land; and i will cause him to fall by the sword
in his own land.

37:8 so rabshakeh returned, and found the king of assyria warring
against libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from lachish.

37:9 and he heard say concerning tirhakah king of ethiopia, he is come
forth to make war with thee. and when he heard it, he sent messengers
to hezekiah, saying, 37:10 thus shall ye speak to hezekiah king of
judah, saying, let not thy god, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee,
saying, jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
assyria.

37:11 behold, thou hast heard what the kings of assyria have done to
all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
37:12 have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed, as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of
eden which were in telassar?  37:13 where is the king of hamath, and
the king of arphad, and the king of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the city of sepharvaim, hena, and
ivah?  37:14 and hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and hezekiah went up unto the house of the
lord, and spread it before the lord.

37:15 and hezekiah prayed unto the lord, saying, 37:16 o lord of
hosts, god of israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art
the god, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast
made heaven and earth.

37:17 incline thine ear, o lord, and hear; open thine eyes, o lord,
and see: and hear all the words of sennacherib, which hath sent to
reproach the living god.

37:18 of a truth, lord, the kings of assyria have laid waste all the
nations, and their countries, 37:19 and have cast their gods into the
fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and
stone: therefore they have destroyed
 
 ___________________________
 
 them.

37:20 now therefore, o lord our god, save us from his hand, that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the lord, even thou
only.

37:21 then isaiah the son of amoz sent unto hezekiah, saying, thus
saith the lord god of israel, whereas thou hast prayed to me against
sennacherib king of assyria: 37:22 this is the word which the lord
hath spoken concerning him; the virgin, the daughter of zion, hath
despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.

37:23 whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the holy one of israel.

37:24 by thy servants hast thou reproach
 
 ___________________________
 
h the lord.

37:35 for i will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and
for my servant david's sake.

37:36 then the angel of the lord went forth, and smote in the camp of
the assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

37:37 so sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

37:38 and it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
nisroch his god, that adrammelech and sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword; and they escaped into the land of armenia: and esarhaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

38:1 in those days was hezekiah sick unto death. and isaiah the
prophet the son of amoz came unto him, and said unto him, thus saith
the lord, set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

38:2 then hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto
the lord, 38:3 and said, remember now, o lord, i beseech thee, 
 
 ___________________________
 
how i
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

38:4 then came the word of the lord to isaiah, saying, 38:5 go, and
say to hezekiah, thus saith the lord, the god of david thy father, i
have heard thy prayer, i have seen thy tears: behold, i will add unto
thy days fifteen years.

38:6 and i will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king
of assyria: and i will defend this city.

38:7 and this shall be a sign unto thee from the lord, that the lord
will do this thing that he hath spoken; 38:8 behold, i will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of
ahaz, ten degrees backward. so the sun returned ten 
 
 ___________________________
 
which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be
carried to babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the lord.

39:7 and of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of babylon.

39:8 then said hezekiah to isaiah, good is the word of the lord which
thou hast spoken. he said moreover, for there shall be peace and truth
in my days.

40:1 comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your god.

40:2 speak ye comfortably to jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath
received of the lord's hand double for all her sins.

40:3 the voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, prepare ye the
way of the lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our god.

40:4 every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall
be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
places plain: 40:5 and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the glory of the lord shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.

40:6 the voice said, cry. and he said, what shall i cry? all flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:
40:7 the grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the
lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

40:8 the grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our god
shall stand for ever.

40:9 o zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain; o jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of
judah, behold your god!  40:10 behold, the lord god will come with
strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is
with him, and his work before him.

40:11 he shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and car
 
 ___________________________
 
path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?  40:15 behold,
the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little
thing.

40:16 and lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt offering.

40:17 all nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to
him less than nothing, and vanity.

40:18 to whom then will ye liken god? or what likeness will ye compare
unto him?  40:19 the workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

40:20 he that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a
tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to
prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.

40:21 have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
ea
 
 ___________________________
 
wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble.

40:25 to whom then will ye liken me, or shall i be equal? saith the
holy one.

40:26 lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power;
not one faileth.

40:27 why sayest thou, o jacob, and speakest, o israel, my way is hid
from the lord, and my judgment is passed over from my god?  40:28 hast
thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting god, the
lord, the creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is
weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

40:29 he giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength.

40:30 even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall: 40:31 but they that wait upon the lord shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; t
 
 ___________________________
 
he hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, it is ready for the
sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 but thou, israel, art my servant, jacob whom i have chosen, the
seed of abraham my friend.

41:9 thou whom i have taken from the ends of the earth, and called
thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my
servant; i have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 fear thou not; for i am with thee: be not dismayed; for i am thy
god: i will strengthen thee; yea, i will help thee; yea, i will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish.

41:12 thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of nought.

41:13 for i the lord thy god will hold thy right h
 
 ___________________________
 
israel.

41:15 behold, i will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
make the hills as chaff.

41:16 thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the lord, and
shalt glory in the holy one of israel.

41:17 when the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
tongue faileth for thirst, i the lord will hear them, i the god of
israel will not forsake them.

41:18 i will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
the valleys: i will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
land springs of water.

41:19 i will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and
the myrtle, and the oil tree; i will set in the desert the fir tree,
and the pine, and the box tree together: 41:20 that they may see, and
know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the lord
hath done 
 
 ___________________________
 
this, and the holy one of israel hath created it.

41:21 produce your cause, saith the lord; bring forth your strong
reasons, saith the king of jacob.

41:22 let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let
them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them,
and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

41:23 shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,
and behold it together.

41:24 behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an
abomination is he that chooseth you.

41:25 i have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

41:26 who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and
beforetime, that we may say, he is righteous? y
 
 ___________________________
 
vant, whom i uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delighteth; i have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
judgment to the gentiles.

42:2 he shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the street.

42:3 a bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

42:4 he shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment
in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

42:5 thus saith god the lord, he that created the heavens, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which
cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein: 42:6 i the lord have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give
thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the gentiles; 42:7
to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
and them that sit in darkness out of
 
 ___________________________
 
ountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbs; and i will make the rivers islands, and i will dry up the
pools.

42:16 and i will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; i will
lead them in paths that they have not known: i will make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight. these things will i do
unto them, and not forsake them.

42:17 they shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that
trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, ye are our
gods.

42:18 hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

42:19 who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that i
sent?  who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the lord's
servant?  42:20 seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening
the ears, but he heareth not.

42:21 the lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
magnify the law, and make it honourable.

42:22 but this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
snared in ho
 
 ___________________________
 
knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

43:1 but now thus saith the lord that created thee, o jacob, and he
that formed thee, o israel, fear not: for i have redeemed thee, i have
called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

43:2 when thou passest through the waters, i will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

43:3 for i am the lord thy god, the holy one of israel, thy saviour: i
gave egypt for thy ransom, ethiopia and seba for thee.

43:4 since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable,
and i have loved thee: therefore will i give men for thee, and people
for thy life.

43:5 fear not: for i am with thee: i will bring thy seed from the
east, and gather thee from the west; 43:6 i will say to the north,
give up; and to the south, keep not back: bring my sons from far, and
my daughters from the ends of the e
 
 ___________________________
 
43:8 bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that
have ears.

43:9 let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be
assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
let them hear, and say, it is truth.

43:10 ye are my witnesses, saith the lord, and my servant whom i have
chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that i am he:
before me there was no god formed, neither shall there be after me.

43:11 i, even i, am the lord; and beside me there is no saviour.

43:12 i have declared, and have saved, and i have shewed, when there
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the
lord, that i am god.

43:13 yea, before the day was i am he; and there is none that can
deliver out of my hand: i will work, and who shall let it?  43:14 thus
saith the lord, your redeemer, the holy one of israel; for your sake i
have sent 
 
 ___________________________
 
will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring: 44:4 and they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the water courses.

44:5 one shall say, i am the lord's; and another shall call himself by
the name of jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
lord, and surname himself by the name of israel.

44:6 thus saith the lord the king of israel, and his redeemer the lord
of hosts; i am the first, and i am the last; and beside me there is no
god.

44:7 and who, as i, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in
order for me, since i appointed the ancient people? and the things
that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

44:8 fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not i told thee from that
time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. is there a god
beside me? yea, there is no god; i know not any.

44:9 they that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their
delectable things shall not profit; 
 
 ___________________________
 
and they are their own witnesses;
they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

44:10 who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is
profitable for nothing?  44:11 behold, all his fellows shall be
ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered
together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be
ashamed together.

44:12 the smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and
fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his
arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no
water, and is faint.

44:13 the carpent
 
 ___________________________
 
with planes, and he marketh it out with the
compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the
beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

44:14 he heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak,
which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he
planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

44:15 then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof,
and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he
maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and
falleth down thereto.

44:16 he burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth
flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself,
and saith, aha, i am warm, i have seen the fire: 44:17 and the residue
thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto
it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, deliver me;
for thou art my god.

44:18 they have not known nor understood: 
 
 ___________________________
 
to cyrus, whose right hand i
have holden, to subdue nations before him; and i will loose the loins
of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall
not be shut; 45:2 i will go before thee, and make the crooked places
straight: i will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder
the bars of iron: 45:3 and i will give thee the treasures of darkness,
and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that i, the
lord, which call thee by thy name, am the god of israel.

45:4 for jacob my servant's sake, and israel mine elect, i have even
called thee by thy name: i have surnamed thee, though thou hast not
known me.

45:5 i am the lord, and there is none else, there is no god beside me:
i girded thee, though thou hast not known me: 45:6 that they may know
from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none
beside me. i am the lord, and there is none else.

45:7 i form the light, and create darkness: i make peace, and create

 
 ___________________________
 
ave raised him up in righteousness, and i will direct all his
ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
price nor reward, saith the lord of hosts.

45:14 thus saith the lord, the labour of egypt, and merchandise of
ethiopia and of the sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto
thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains
they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall
make supplication unto thee, saying, surely god is in thee; and there
is none else, there is no god.

45:15 verily thou art a god that hidest thyself, o god of israel, the
saviour.

45:16 they shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they
shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.

45:17 but israel shall be saved in the lord with an everlasting
salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

45:18 for thus saith the lord that created the heavens; god himself
that formed the earth an
 
 ___________________________
 
ade it; he hath established it, he created
it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: i am the lord; and there
is none else.

45:19 i have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: i
said not unto the seed of jacob, seek ye me in vain: i the lord speak
righteousness, i declare things that are right.

45:20 assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are
escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

45:21 tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel
together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it
from that time?  have not i the lord? and there is no god else beside
me; a just god and a saviour; there is none beside me.

45:22 look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for i
am god, and there is none else.

45:23 i have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
to me, o house of jacob, and all the remnant of the
house of israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are
carried from the womb: 46:4 and even to your old age i am he; and even
to hoar hairs will i carry you: i have made, and i will bear; even i
will carry, and will deliver you.

46:5 to whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that
we may be like?  46:6 they lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, yea, they worship.

46:7 they bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in
his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea,
one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his
trouble.

46:8 remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, o
ye transgressors.

46:9 remember the former things of old: for i am god, and there is
none else; i am god, and there is none like me, 46:10 declaring the
end f
 
 ___________________________
 
n them; they
shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall
not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

47:15 thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even
thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his
quarter; none shall save thee.

48:1 hear ye this, o house of jacob, which are called by the name of
israel, and are come forth out of the waters of judah, which swear by
the name of the lord, and make mention of the god of israel, but not
in truth, nor in righteousness.

48:2 for they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves
upon the god of israel; the lord of hosts is his name.

48:3 i have declared the former things from the beginning; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and i shewed them; i did them suddenly,
and they came to pass.

48:4 because i knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass; 48:5 i have even from the beginning
declared it to thee
 
 ___________________________
 
l unto them, they stand
up together.

48:14 all ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
declared these things? the lord hath loved him: he will do his
pleasure on babylon, and his arm shall be on the chaldeans.

48:15 i, even i, have spoken; yea, i have called him: i have brought
him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

48:16 come ye near unto me, hear ye this; i have not spoken in secret
from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am i: and now the
lord god, and his spirit, hath sent me.

48:17 thus saith the lord, thy redeemer, the holy one of israel; i am
the lord thy god which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by
the way that thou shouldest go.

48:18 o that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:
48:19 thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy
bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off
nor destro
 
 ___________________________
 

lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath
he made mention of my name.

49:2 and he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver
hath he hid me; 49:3 and said unto me, thou art my servant, o israel,
in whom i will be glorified.

49:4 then i said, i have laboured in vain, i have spent my strength
for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the lord, and
my work with my god.

49:5 and now, saith the lord that formed me from the womb to be his
servant, to bring jacob again to him, though israel be not gathered,
yet shall i be glorious in the eyes of the lord, and my god shall be
my strength.

49:6 and he said, it is a light thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of jacob, and to restore the preserved
of israel: i will also give thee for a light to the gentiles, that
thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

49:7 thu
 
 ___________________________
 
nd they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

49:20 the children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the
other, shall say again in thine ears, the place is too strait for me:
give place to me that i may dwell.

49:21 then shalt thou say in thine heart, who hath begotten me these,
seeing i have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? behold, i was left
alone; these, where had they been?  49:22 thus saith the lord god,
behold, i will lift up mine hand to the gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms,
and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

49:23 and kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy
nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward
the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that
i am the lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

49:24 shall the prey be take
 
 ___________________________
 
s have ye sold
yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

50:2 wherefore, when i came, was there no man? when i called, was
there none to answer? is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot
redeem? or have i no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke i dry up
the sea, i make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because
there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

50:3 i clothe the heavens with blackness, and i make sackcloth their
covering.

50:4 the lord god hath given me the tongue of the learned, that i
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the
learned.

50:5 the lord god hath opened mine ear, and i was not rebellious,
neither turned away back.

50:6 i gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: i hid not my face from shame and spitting.

50:7 for the lord god will help me; therefore shall i not be
confounded: th
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore have i set my face like a flint, and i know that
i shall not be ashamed.

50:8 he is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

50:9 behold, the lord god will help me; who is he that shall condemn
me?  lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them
up.

50:10 who is among you that feareth the lord, that obeyeth the voice
of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him
trust in the name of the lord, and stay upon his god.

50:11 behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
have kindled. this shall ye have of 
 
 ___________________________
 
at shall die, and of the son of man
which shall be made as grass; 51:13 and forgettest the lord thy maker,
that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury
of the oppressor?  51:14 the captive exile hasteneth that he may be
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread
should fail.

51:15 but i am the lord thy god, that divided the sea, whose waves
roared: the lord of hosts is his name.

51:16 and i have put my words in thy mouth, and i have covered thee in
the shadow of mine hand, that i may plant the heavens, and lay the
foundations of the earth, and say unto zion, thou art my people.

51:17 awake, awake, stand up, o jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
hand of the lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of
the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

51:18 there is none to guide h
 
 ___________________________
 
er among all the sons whom she hath
brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all
the sons that she hath brought up.

51:19 these two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for
thee?  desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by
whom shall i comfort thee?  51:20 thy sons have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of
the fury of the lord, the rebuke of thy god.

51:21 therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not
with wine: 51:22 thus saith thy lord the lord, and thy god that
pleadeth the cause of his people, behold, i have taken out of thine
hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou
shalt no more drink it again: 51:23 but i will put it into the hand of
them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street, t
 
 ___________________________
 
em that went over.

52:1 awake, awake; put on thy strength, o zion; put on thy beautiful
garments, o jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no
more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

52:2 shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, o jerusalem:
loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, o captive daughter of zion.

52:3 for thus saith the lord, ye have sold yourselves for nought; and
ye shall be redeemed without money.

52:4 for thus saith the lord god, my people went down aforetime into
egypt to sojourn there; and the assyrian oppressed them without cause.

52:5 now therefore, what have i here, saith the lord, that my people
is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl,
saith the lord; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.

52:6 therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know
in that day that i am he that doth speak: behold, it is i.

52:7 how beautiful upon the mountains are the
 
 ___________________________
 
 feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto zion, thy
god reigneth!  52:8 thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the
voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when
the lord shall bring again zion.

52:9 break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of
jerusalem: for the lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed
jerusalem.

52:10 the lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
god.

52:11 depart ye, depart ye, go ye out f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom thence, touch no unclean
thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the
vessels of the lord.

52:12 for ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the
lord will go before you; and the god of israel will be your rereward.

52:13 behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
extolled, and be very high.

52:14 as many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: 52:15 so shall
he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him:
for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which
they had not heard shall they consider.

53:1 who hath believed our report? and t
 
 ___________________________
 
lord
revealed?  53:2 for he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and
as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

53:3 he is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he
was despised, and we esteemed him not.

53:4 surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we
did esteem him stricken, smitten of god, and afflicted.

53:5 but he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed.

53:6 all we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to
his own way; and the lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

53:7 he was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his
mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
her shearers is dumb, so he open
 
 ___________________________
 
; 54:3 for thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the gentiles, and
make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

54:4 fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget
the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy
widowhood any more.

54:5 for thy maker is thine husband; the lord of hosts is his name;
and thy redeemer the holy one of israel; the god of the whole earth
shall he be called.

54:6 for the lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy god.

54:7 for a small moment have i forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will i gather thee.

54:8 in a little wrath i hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will i have mercy on thee, saith the lord thy
redeemer.

54:9 for this is as the waters of noah unto me: for as i have sworn

 
 ___________________________
 
diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness.

55:3 incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live; and i will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of david.

55:4 behold, i have given him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the people.

55:5 behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the lord thy
god, and for the holy one of israel; for he hath glorified thee.

55:6 seek ye the lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near: 55:7 let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts: and let him return unto the lord, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our god, for he will abundantly pardon.

55:8 for my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, saith the lord.

55:9 for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
 
 ___________________________
 
 be cut off.

56:6 also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the lord,
to serve him, and to love the name of the lord, to be his servants,
every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold
of my covenant; 56:7 even them will i bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and
their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house
shall be called an house of prayer for all people.

56:8 the lord god, which gathereth the outcasts of israel saith, yet
will i gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.

56:9 all ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in
the forest.

56:10 his watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.

56:11 yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they
are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way,
every
 
 ___________________________
 
 smote him:
i hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart.

57:18 i have seen his ways, and will heal him: i will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

57:19 i create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, saith the lord; and i will heal him.

57:20 but the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

57:21 there is no peace, saith my god, to the wicked.

58:1 cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew
my people their transgression, and the house of jacob their sins.

58:2 yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their god:
they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in
approaching to god.

58:3 wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore
have we afflicted our soul, and thou take
 
 ___________________________
 
shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: 58:14
then shalt thou delight thyself in the lord; and i will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritage of jacob thy father: for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.

59:1 behold, the lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: 59:2 but your iniquities
have separated between you and your god, and your sins have hid his
face from you, that he will not hear.

59:3 for your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered
perverseness.

59:4 none calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust
in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity.

59:5 they hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that
eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed bre
 
 ___________________________
 
 as if we had
no eyes: we stumble at noon day as in the night; we are in desolate
places as dead men.

59:11 we roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

59:12 for our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our
iniquities, we know them; 59:13 in transgressing and lying against the
lord, and departing away from our god, speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

59:14 and judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar
off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

59:15 yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh
himself a prey: and the lord saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no judgment.

59:16 and he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessor: therefore his arm brou
 
 ___________________________
 
shew forth the praises of the lord.

60:7 all the flocks of kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the
rams of nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with
acceptance on mine altar, and i will glorify the house of my glory.

60:8 who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows?  60:9 surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of
tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their
gold with them, unto the name of the lord thy god, and to the holy one
of israel, because he hath glorified thee.

60:10 and the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their
kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath i smote thee, but in
my favour have i had mercy on thee.

60:11 therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be
shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

60:12 for the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 bring gold, and for iron i will bring silver,
and for wood brass, and for stones iron: i will also make thy officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

60:18 violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls
salvation, and thy gates praise.

60:19 the sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the lord shall be
unto thee an everlasting light, and thy god thy glory.

60:20 thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw
itself: for the lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of
thy mourning shall be ended.

60:21 thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that i
may be glorified.

60:22 a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
nation: i the lord will hasten it in his time.

61:1 the spirit of the lord 
 
 ___________________________
 
god is upon me; because the lord hath
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to
bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound; 61:2 to proclaim the
acceptable year of the lord, and the day of vengeance of our god; to
comfort all that mourn; 61:3 to appoint unto them that mourn in zion,
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the lord, that he might
be glorified.

61:4 and they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the
former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the
desolations of many generations.

61:5 and strangers shall stan
 
 ___________________________
 
d and feed your flocks, and the sons of
the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

61:6 but ye shall be named the priests of the lord: men shall call you
the ministers of our god: ye shall eat the riches of the gentiles, and
in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

61:7 for your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall
rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess
the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.

61:8 for i the lord love judgment, i hate robbery for burnt offering;
and i will direct their work in truth, and i will make an everlasting
covenant with them.

61:9 and their seed shall be known among the gent
 
 ___________________________
 
iles, and their
offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the seed which the lord hath blessed.

61:10 i will greatly rejoice in the lord, my soul shall be joyful in
my god; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath
covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
jewels.

61:11 for as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden
causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the lord
god will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the
nations.

62:1 for zion's sake will i not hold my peace, and for jerusalem's
sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ke i will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

62:2 and the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the
lord shall name.

62:3 thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the lord, and
a royal diadem in the hand of thy god.

62:4 thou shalt no more be termed forsaken; neither shall thy land any
more be termed desolate: but thou shalt be called hephzibah, and thy
land beulah: for the lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be
married.

62:5 for as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry
thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy god
rejoice over thee.

62:6 i have set watchmen upon thy walls, o jerusalem, which shall
never hold their peace day nor night: ye th
 
 ___________________________
 
 that thou wouldest come
down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, 64:2 as when
the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make
thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at
thy presence!  64:3 when thou didst terrible things which we looked
not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.

64:4 for since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, o god, beside thee,
what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

64:5 thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those
that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have
sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

64:6 but we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities,
like the wind, have taken us away.

64:7 and there is none that calleth upon thy name, 
 
 ___________________________
 
own in, for my people that have sought me.

65:11 but ye are they that forsake the lord, that forget my holy
mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the
drink offering unto that number.

65:12 therefore will i number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow
down to the slaughter: because when i called, ye did not answer; when
i spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did
choose that wherein i delighted not.

65:13 therefore thus saith the lord god, behold, my servants shall
eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye
shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed: 65:14 behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

65:15 and ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the
lord god shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name: 65:16
that he who blesseth himself in the earth 
 
 ___________________________
 
shall bless himself in the
god of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the god
of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they
are hid from mine eyes.

65:17 for, behold, i create new heavens and a new earth: and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

65:18 but be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which i create: for,
behold, i create jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

65:19 and i will rejoice in jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying
 
 ___________________________
 
ndereth recompence to his enemies.

66:7 before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came,
she was delivered of a man child.

66:8 who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall the
earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
once?  for as soon as zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

66:9 shall i bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith
the lord: shall i cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy
god.

66:10 rejoice ye with jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that
love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: 66:11
that ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory.

66:12 for thus saith the lord, behold, i will extend peace to her like
a river, and the glory of the gentiles like a flowing stream: then
shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upo
 
 ___________________________
 
teenth year of his reign.

1:3 it came also in the days of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of
judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of zedekiah the son of josiah
king of judah, unto the carrying away of jerusalem captive in the
fifth month.

1:4 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 1:5 before i
formed thee in the belly i knew thee; and before thou camest forth out
of the womb i sanctified thee, and i ordained thee a prophet unto the
nations.

1:6 then said i, ah, lord god! behold, i cannot speak: for i am a
child.

1:7 but the lord said unto me, say not, i am a child: for thou shalt
go to all that i shall send thee, and whatsoever i command thee thou
shalt speak.

1:8 be not afraid of their faces: for i am with thee to deliver thee,
saith the lord.

1:9 then the lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. and the
lord said unto me, behold, i have put my words in thy mouth.

1:10 see, i have this day set thee over the nations and over the
kingdom
 
 ___________________________
 
the north an evil shall break
forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

1:15 for, lo, i will call all the families of the kingdoms of the
north, saith the lord; and they shall come, and they shall set every
one his throne at the entering of the gates of jerusalem, and against
all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of
judah.

1:16 and i will utter my judgments against them touching all their
wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other
gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.

1:17 thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them
all that i command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest i
confound thee before them.

1:18 for, behold, i have made thee this day a defenced city, and an
iron pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the
kings of judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests
thereof, and against the people of the land.

1:19 and they shall fight against
 
 ___________________________
 
ion.

2:8 the priests said not, where is the lord? and they that handle the
law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the
prophets prophesied by baal, and walked after things that do not
profit.

2:9 wherefore i will yet plead with you, saith the lord, and with your
children's children will i plead.

2:10 for pass over the isles of chittim, and see; and send unto kedar,
and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.

2:11 hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my
people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.

2:12 be astonished, o ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be
ye very desolate, saith the lord.

2:13 for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water.

2:14 is israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?
2:15 the young lions roared upon him, and yelled
 
 ___________________________
 
, and they made his
land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.

2:16 also the children of noph and tahapanes have broken the crown of
thy head.

2:17 hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast
forsaken the lord thy god, when he led thee by the way?  2:18 and now
what hast thou to do in the way of egypt, to drink the waters of
sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of assyria, to drink the
waters of the river?  2:19 thine own wickedness shall correct thee,
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the lord thy
god, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the lord god of hosts.

2:20 for of old time i have broken thy yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ke, and burst thy bands; and
thou saidst, i will not transgress; when upon every high hill and
under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

2:21 yet i had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how
then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto
me?  2:22 for though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the lord god.

2:23 how canst thou say, i am not polluted, i have not gone after
baalim?  see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art
a swift dromedary traversing her ways; 2:24 a wild ass used to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion
who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary
themselves; in her month they shall find her.

2:25 withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst:
but thou saidst, there is no hope:
 
 ___________________________
 
 no; for i have loved strangers, and
after them will i go.

2:26 as the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of
israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests,
and their prophets.

2:27 saying to a stock, thou art my father; and to a stone, thou hast
brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not
their face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, arise, and
save us.

2:28 but where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise,
if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the
number of thy cities are thy gods, o judah.

2:29 wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against
me, saith the lord.

2:30 in vain have i smitten your children; they received no
correction: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a
destroying lion.

2:31 o generation, see ye the word of the lord. have i been a
wilderness unto israel? a land of
 
 ___________________________
 

unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the lord.

3:11 and the lord said unto me, the backsliding israel hath justified
herself more than treacherous judah.

3:12 go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, return,
thou backsliding israel, saith the lord; and i will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you: for i am merciful, saith the lord, and i will
not keep anger for ever.

3:13 only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed
against the lord thy god, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers
under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the
lord.

3:14 turn, o backsliding children, saith the lord; for i am married
unto you: and i will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and
i will bring you to zion: 3:15 and i will give you pastors according
to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

3:16 and it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in
the land, in those d
 
 ___________________________
 
t thee among the children, and give
thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and i
said, thou shalt call me, my father; and shalt not turn away from me.

3:20 surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so
have ye dealt treacherously with me, o house of israel, saith the
lord.

3:21 a voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications
of the children of israel: for they have perverted their way, and they
have forgotten the lord their god.

3:22 return, ye backsliding children, and i will heal your
backslidings.

behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the lord our god.

3:23 truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the
multitude of mountains: truly in the lord our god is the salvation of
israel.

3:24 for shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth;
their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

3:25 we lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for 
 
 ___________________________
 
we
have sinned against the lord our god, we and our fathers, from our
youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the lord
our god.

4:1 if thou wilt return, o israel, saith the lord, return unto me: and
if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt
thou not remove.

4:2 and thou shalt swear, the lord liveth, in truth, in judgment, and
in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and
in him shall they glory.

4:3 for thus saith the lord to the men of judah and jerusalem, break
up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

4:4 circumcise yourselves to the lord, and
 
 ___________________________
 
e
gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy
land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an
inhabitant.

4:8 for this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce
anger of the lord is not turned back from us.

4:9 and it shall come to pass at that day, saith the lord, that the
heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the
priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.

4:10 then said i, ah, lord god! surely thou hast greatly deceived this
people and jerusalem, saying, ye shall have peace; whereas the sword
reacheth unto the soul.

4:11 at that time shall it be said to this people and to jerusalem, a
dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of
my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 4:12 even a full wind from
those places shall come unto me: now also will i give sentence against
them.

4:13 behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as
a
 
 ___________________________
 
at seeketh the truth; and i
will pardon it.

5:2 and though they say, the lord liveth; surely they swear falsely.

5:3 o lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken
them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder
than a rock; they have refused to return.

5:4 therefore i said, surely these are poor; they are foolish: for
they know not the way of the lord, nor the judgment of their god.

5:5 i will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for
they have known the way of the lord, and the judgment of their god:
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

5:6 wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of
the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their
cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces:
because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are
increased.

5:7 how
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall i pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them that are no gods: when i had fed them to the full,
they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in
the harlots' houses.

5:8 they were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after
his neighbour's wife.

5:9 shall i not visit for these things? saith the lord: and shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?  5:10 go ye up upon her
walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her
battlements; for they are not the lord's.

5:11 for the house of israel a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the house of judah have dealt very
treacherously against me, saith the lord.

5:12 they have belied the lord, and said, it is not he; neither shall
evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine: 5:13 and the
prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them: thus shall it
be done unto them.

5:14 wherefore thus saith the lord god of hosts, because ye speak this
word, behold, i will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people
wood, and it shall devour them.

5:15 lo, i will bring a nation upon you from far, o house of israel,
saith the lord: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a
nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what
they say.

5:16 their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.

5:17 and they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy
son
 
 ___________________________
 
s and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and
thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall
impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

5:18 nevertheless in those days, saith the lord, i will not make a
full end with you.

5:19 and it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, wherefore doeth the
lord our god all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them,
like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so
shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not your's.

5:20 declare this in the house of jacob, and publish it in judah,
saying, 5:21 hear now this, o foolish people, and without
understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear
not: 5:22 fear ye not me? saith the lord: will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a
perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof
toss themselves
 
 ___________________________
 
, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can
they not pass over it?  5:23 but this people hath a revolting and a
rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.

5:24 neither say they in their heart, let us now fear the lord our
god, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season:
he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

5:25 your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
withholden good things from you.

5:26 for among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he
that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.

5:27 as a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit:
therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.

5:28 they are wa
 
 ___________________________
 
.

6:29 the bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the
founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.

6:30 reprobate silver shall men call them, because the lord hath
rejected them.

7:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord, saying, 7:2 stand in
the gate of the lord's house, and proclaim there this word, and say,
hear the word of the lord, all ye of judah, that enter in at these
gates to worship the lord.

7:3 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, amend your ways
and your doings, and i will cause you to dwell in this place.

7:4 trust ye not in lying words, saying, the temple of the lord, the
temple of the lord, the temple of the lord, are these.

7:5 for if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye
throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour; 7:6 if ye
oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not
innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your
hur
 
 ___________________________
 
t: 7:7 then will i cause you to dwell in this place, in the land
that i gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

7:8 behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.

7:9 will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and
burn incense unto baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;
7:10 and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations?  7:11 is
this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in
your eyes? behold, even i have seen it, saith the lord.

7:12 but go ye now unto my place which was in shiloh, where i set my
name at the first, and see what i did to it for the wickedness of my
people israel.

7:13 and now, because ye have done all these works
 
 ___________________________
 
ht, as i have cast out all your
brethren, even the whole seed of ephraim.

7:16 therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor
prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for i will not hear
thee.

7:17 seest thou not what they do in the cities of judah and in the
streets of jerusalem?  7:18 the children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the
queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that
they may provoke me to anger.

7:19 do they provoke me to anger? saith the lord: do they not provoke
themselves to the confusion of their own faces?  7:20 therefore thus
saith the lord god; behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out
upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the
field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall
not be quenched.

7:21 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; put your burnt
offerings unto
 
 ___________________________
 
 your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

7:22 for i spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that i brought them out of the land of egypt, concerning burnt
offerings or sacrifices: 7:23 but this thing commanded i them, saying,
obey my voice, and i will be your god, and ye shall be my people: and
walk ye in all the ways that i have commanded you, that it may be well
unto you.

7:24 but they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the
counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went
backward, and not forward.

7:25 since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of
egypt unto this day i have even sent unto you all my servants the
prophets, daily rising up early and sending them: 7:26 yet they
hearkened not un
 
 ___________________________
 
to me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their
neck: they did worse than their fathers.

7:27 therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they
will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they
will not answer thee.

7:28 but thou shalt say unto them, this is a nation that obeyeth not
the voice of the lord their god, nor receiveth correction: truth is
perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

7:29 cut off thine hair, o jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a
lamentation on high places; for the lord hath rejected and forsaken
the generation of his wrath.

7:30 for the children of judah have done evil in my sight, saith the
lord: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by
my name, to pollute it.

7:31 and they have built the high places of tophet, which is in the
valley
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, neither could they blush: therefore shall
they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they
shall be cast down, saith the lord.

8:13 i will surely consume them, saith the lord: there shall be no
grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade;
and the things that i have given them shall pass away from them.

8:14 why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into
the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the lord our god
hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because
we have sinned against the lord.

8:15 we looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health,
and behold trouble!  8:16 the snorting of his horses was heard from
dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his
strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all
that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

8:17 for, behold, i will send serpents, cockatrices, among 
 
 ___________________________
 
y understand this? and who is he to
whom the mouth of the lord hath spoken, that he may declare it, for
what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none
passeth through?  9:13 and the lord saith, because they have forsaken
my law which i set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither
walked therein; 9:14 but have walked after the imagination of their
own heart, and after baalim, which their fathers taught them: 9:15
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, i
will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water
of gall to drink.

9:16 i will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor
their fathers have known: and i will send a sword after them, till i
have consumed them.

9:17 thus saith the lord of hosts, consider ye, and call for the
mourning women, that they may come; and send for cunning women, that
they may come: 9:18 and let them make haste, and take up a wailing for
us, that our 
 
 ___________________________
 
o king of nations? for to thee doth it
appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in
all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

10:8 but they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a
doctrine of vanities.

10:9 silver spread into plates is brought from tarshish, and gold from
uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue
and purple is their clothing: they are all the work of cunning men.

10:10 but the lord is the true god, he is the living god, and an
everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the
nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.

10:11 thus shall ye say unto them, the gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from
under these heavens.

10:12 he hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the
world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his
discretion.

10:13 when he uttereth his voice, the
 
 ___________________________
 
t; not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing.

10:25 pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up jacob,
and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation
desolate.

11:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord saying, 11:2 hear ye
the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of judah, and to
the inhabitants of jerusalem; 11:3 and say thou unto them, thus saith
the lord god of israel; cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words
of this covenant, 11:4 which i commanded your fathers in the day that
i brought them forth out of the land of egypt, from the iron furnace,
saying, obey my voice, and do them, according to all which i command
you: so shall ye be my people, and i will be your god: 11:5 that i may
perform the oath which i have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a
land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. then answered i,
and said, so be 
 
 ___________________________
 
bey my voice.

11:8 yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one
in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore i will bring upon
them all the words of this covenant, which i commanded them to do: but
they did them not.

11:9 and the lord said unto me, a conspiracy is found among the men of
judah, and among the inhabitants of jerusalem.

11:10 they are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers,
which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to
serve them: the house of israel and the house of judah have broken my
covenant which i made with their fathers.

11:11 therefore thus saith the lord, behold, i will bring evil upon
them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall
cry unto me, i will not hearken unto them.

11:12 then shall the cities of judah and inhabitants of jerusalem go,
and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not
save them at all in the time of their trouble.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
1:13 for according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, o
judah; and according to the number of the streets of jerusalem have ye
set up altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto
baal.

11:14 therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry
or prayer for them: for i will not hear them in the time that they cry
unto me for their trouble.

11:15 what hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath
wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee?
when thou doest evil, then thou rej
 
 ___________________________
 
ich i
commanded thee to hide there.

13:7 then i went to euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from
the place where i had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it
was profitable for nothing.

13:8 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 13:9 thus saith
the lord, after this manner will i mar the pride of judah, and the
great pride of jerusalem.

13:10 this evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in
the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve
them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good
for nothing.

13:11 for as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have i
caused to cleave unto me the whole house of israel and the whole house
of judah, saith the lord; that they might be unto me for a people, and
for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear.

13:12 therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; thus saith the
lord god of israel, every bottle shall be 
 
 ___________________________
 
them, thus saith
the lord, behold, i will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even
the kings that sit upon david's throne, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all the inhabitants of jerusalem, with drunkenness.

13:14 and i will dash them one against another, even the fathers and
the sons together, saith the lord: i will not pity, nor spare, nor
have mercy, but destroy them.

13:15 hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the lord hath spoken.

13:16 give glory to the lord your god, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look
for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness.

13:17 but if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places
for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears,
because the lord's flock is carried away captive.

13:18 say unto the king and to the queen, humble yourselves, sit down:
for your principalities shall come down, even the
 
 ___________________________
 
 people, thus have they loved to
wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the lord doth
not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their
sins.

14:11 then said the lord unto me, pray not for this people for their
good.

14:12 when they fast, i will not hear their cry; and when they offer
burnt offering and an oblation, i will not accept them: but i will
consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

14:13 then said i, ah, lord god! behold, the prophets say unto them,
ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but i will
give you assured peace in this place.

14:14 then the lord said unto me, the prophets prophesy lies in my
name: i sent them not, neither have i commanded them, neither spake
unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a
thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart.

14:15 therefore thus saith the lord concerning the prophets that
prophesy in my name, and
 
 ___________________________
 
no healing for us? we looked for
peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold
trouble!  14:20 we acknowledge, o lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

14:21 do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne
of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

14:22 are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that can cause
rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, o lord our
god?  therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these
things.

15:1 then said the lord unto me, though moses and samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth.

15:2 and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, whither shall
we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, thus saith the lord; such as
are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to th
 
 ___________________________
 
 borders.

15:14 and i will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land
which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which
shall burn upon you.

15:15 o lord, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me
of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that
for thy sake i have suffered rebuke.

15:16 thy words were found, and i did eat them; and thy word was unto
me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for i am called by thy name, o
lord god of hosts.

15:17 i sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; i sat
alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation.

15:18 why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth
to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters
that fail?  15:19 therefore thus saith the lord, if thou return, then
will i bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou
take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my m
 
 ___________________________
 
e great and the small shall die in this land: they shall
not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves,
nor make themselves bald for them: 16:7 neither shall men tear
themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither
shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father
or for their mother.

16:8 thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with
them to eat and to drink.

16:9 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, i
will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days,
the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.

16:10 and it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all
these words, and they shall say unto thee, wherefore hath the lord
pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or
what is our sin that we have committed against the lord our god?
16:11 then shalt thou
 
 ___________________________
 
 say unto them, because your fathers have
forsaken me, saith the lord, and have walked after other gods, and
have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and
have not kept my law; 16:12 and ye have done worse than your fathers;
for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil
heart, that they may not hearken unto me: 16:13 therefore will i cast
you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your
fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where i
will not shew you favour.

16:14 therefore, behold, the days come, sai
 
 ___________________________
 
om mine eyes.

16:18 and first i will recompense their iniquity and their sin double;
because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance
with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things.

16:19 o lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day
of affliction, the gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
earth, and shall say, surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity,
and things wherein there is no profit.

16:20 shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?  16:21
therefore, behold, i will this once cause them to know, i will cause
them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name
is the lord.

17:1 the sin of judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the
point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and
upon the horns of your altars; 17:2 whilst their children remember
their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.

17:3 o my mountain i
 
 ___________________________
 
be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the
time of thine anger.

19:1 thus saith the lord, go and get a potter's earthen bottle, and
take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the
priests; 19:2 and go forth unto the valley of the son of hinnom, which
is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that i
shall tell thee, 19:3 and say, hear ye the word of the lord, o kings
of judah, and inhabitants of jerusalem; thus saith the lord of hosts,
the god of israel; behold, i will bring evil upon this place, the
which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.

19:4 because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and
have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their
fathers have known, nor the kings of judah, and have filled this place
with the blood of innocents; 19:5 they have built also the high places
of baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto baal,
which i commanded not, nor spak
 
 ___________________________
 
's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall
bury them in tophet, till there be no place to bury.

19:12 thus will i do unto this place, saith the lord, and to the
inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as tophet: 19:13 and the
houses of jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of judah, shall be
defiled as the place of tophet, because of all the houses upon whose
roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and have
poured out drink offerings unto other gods.

19:14 then came jeremiah from tophet, whither the lord had sent him to
prophesy; and he stood in the court of the lord's house; and said to
all the people, 19:15 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, i will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the
evil that i have pronounced against it, because they have hardened
their necks, that they might not hear my words.

20:1 now pashur the son of immer the priest, who was also chief
governor in the house of the
 
 ___________________________
 
nsumed with shame?  21:1 the word which came
unto jeremiah from the lord, when king zedekiah sent unto him pashur
the son of melchiah, and zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest,
saying, 21:2 enquire, i pray thee, of the lord for us; for
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon maketh war against us; if so be that
the lord will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that
he may go up from us.

21:3 then said jeremiah unto them, thus shall ye say to zedekiah: 21:4
thus saith the lord god of israel; behold, i will turn back the
weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the
king of babylon, and against the chaldeans, which besiege you without
the walls, and i will assemble them into the midst of this city.

21:5 and i myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and
with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

21:6 and i will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and
beast: they shall die of a great pestile
 
 ___________________________
 
d the head of lebanon: yet surely i will make thee a
wilderness, and cities which are not inhabited.

22:7 and i will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his
weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into
the fire.

22:8 and many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say
every man to his neighbour, wherefore hath the lord done thus unto
this great city?  22:9 then they shall answer, because they have
forsaken the covenant of the lord their god, and worshipped other
gods, and served them.

22:10 weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for
him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native
country.

22:11 for thus saith the lord touching shallum the son of josiah king
of judah, which reigned instead of josiah his father, which went forth
out of this place; he shall not return thither any more: 22:12 but he
shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall
see this land 
 
 ___________________________
 
asure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed,
and are cast into a land which they know not?  22:29 o earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the lord.

22:30 thus saith the lord, write ye this man childless, a man that
shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper,
sitting upon the throne of david, and ruling any more in judah.

23:1 woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture! saith the lord.

23:2 therefore thus saith the lord god of israel against the pastors
that feed my people; ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away,
and have not visited them: behold, i will visit upon you the evil of
your doings, saith the lord.

23:3 and i will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
whither i have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds;
and they shall be fruitful and increase.

23:4 and i will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismaye
 
 ___________________________
 
ad of the
wicked.

23:20 the anger of the lord shall not return, until he have executed,
and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter
days ye shall consider it perfectly.

23:21 i have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: i have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied.

23:22 but if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to
hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way,
and from the evil of their doings.

23:23 am i a god at hand, saith the lord, and not a god afar off?
23:24 can any hide himself in secret places that i shall not see him?
saith the lord. do not i fill heaven and earth? saith the lord.

23:25 i have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my
name, saying, i have dreamed, i have dreamed.

23:26 how long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that
prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own
heart; 23:27 which think to cause my people to forget my name b
 
 ___________________________
 
at burden? i will even forsake you, saith the lord.

23:34 and as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that
shall say, the burden of the lord, i will even punish that man and his
house.

23:35 thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to
his brother, what hath the lord answered? and, what hath the lord
spoken?  23:36 and the burden of the lord shall ye mention no more:
for every man's word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the
words of the living god, of the lord of hosts our god.

23:37 thus shalt thou say to the prophet, what hath the lord answered
thee? and, what hath the lord spoken?  23:38 but since ye say, the
burden of the lord; therefore thus saith the lord; because ye say this
word, the burden of the lord, and i have sent unto you, saying, ye
shall not say, the burden of the lord; 23:39 therefore, behold, i,
even i, will utterly forget you, and i will forsake you, and the city
that i gave you and your fathers, and cast you 
 
 ___________________________
 
enters and smiths, from
jerusalem, and had brought them to babylon.

24:2 one basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first
ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be
eaten, they were so bad.

24:3 then said the lord unto me, what seest thou, jeremiah? and i
said, figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that
cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

24:4 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:5 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; like these good figs, so will i
acknowledge them that are carried away captive of judah, whom i have
sent out of this place into the land of the chaldeans for their good.

24:6 for i will set mine eyes upon them for good, and i will bring
them again to this land: and i will build them, and not pull them
down; and i will plant them, and not pluck them up.

24:7 and i will give them an heart to know me, that i am the lord: and
they shall be my people, and i will be their god: 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord hath come unto me, and
i have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not
hearkened.

25:4 and the lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets,
rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined
your ear to hear.

25:5 they said, turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and
from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the lord hath
given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever: 25:6 and go not
after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me
not to anger with the works of your hands; and i will do you no hurt.

25:7 yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the lord; that ye might
provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.

25:8 therefore thus saith the lord of hosts; because ye have not heard
my words, 25:9 behold, i will send and take all the families of the
north, saith the lord, and nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon, my
servant, and will bring 
 
 ___________________________
 

lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the chaldeans, and will make
it perpetual desolations.

25:13 and i will bring upon that land all my words which i have
pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which
jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.

25:14 for many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them
also: and i will recompense them according to their deeds, and
according to the works of their own hands.

25:15 for thus saith the lord god of israel unto me; take the wine cup
of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom i send
thee, to drink it.

25:16 and they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the
sword that i will send among them.

25:17 then took i the cup at the lord's hand, and made all the nations
to drink, unto whom the lord had sent me: 25:18 to wit, jerusalem, and
the cities of judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof,
to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 are in the utmost corners, 25:24 and all the kings of arabia,
and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert,
25:25 and all the kings of zimri, and all the kings of elam, and all
the kings of the medes, 25:26 and all the kings of the north, far and
near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are
upon the face of the earth: and the king of sheshach shall drink after
them.

25:27 therefore thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the lord of
hosts, the god of israel; drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and
fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which i will send among
you.

25:28 and it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to
drink, then shalt thou say unto them, thus saith the lord of hosts; ye
shall certainly drink.

25:29 for, lo, i begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my
name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished:
for i will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord's house.

26:11 then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to
all the people, saying, this man is worthy to die; for he hath
prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.

26:12 then spake jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people,
saying, the lord sent me to prophesy against this house and against
this city all the words that ye have heard.

26:13 therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the
voice of the lord your god; and the lord will repent him of the evil
that he hath pronounced against you.

26:14 as for me, behold, i am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good
and meet unto you.

26:15 but know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall
surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and
upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the lord hath sent me
unto you to speak all these words in your ears.

26:16 then said the princes and all the people unto the priests 
 
 ___________________________
 
and to
the prophets; this man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us
in the name of the lord our god.

26:17 then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all
the assembly of the people, saying, 26:18 micah the morasthite
prophesied in the days of hezekiah king of judah, and spake to all the
people of judah, saying, thus saith the lord of hosts; zion shall be
plowed like a field, and jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.

26:19 did hezekiah king of judah and all judah put him at all to
death?  did he not fear the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
akim the son of josiah king
of judah came this word unto jeremiah from the lord, saying, 27:2 thus
saith the lord to me; make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy
neck, 27:3 and send them to the king of edom, and to the king of moab,
and to the king of the ammonites, and to the king of tyrus, and to the
king of zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to jerusalem
unto zedekiah king of judah; 27:4 and command them to say unto their
masters, thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; thus shall
ye say unto your masters; 27:5 i have made the earth, the man and the
beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my
outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.

27:6 and now have i given all these lands into the hand of
nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the
field have i given him also to serve him.

27:7 and all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son,
until the very time of h
 
 ___________________________
 
 house of the king of judah, and at
jerusalem, go not to babylon.

27:19 for thus saith the lord of hosts concerning the pillars, and
concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the
residue of the vessels that remain in this city.

27:20 which nebuchadnezzar king of babylon took not, when he carried
away captive jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah from
jerusalem to babylon, and all the nobles of judah and jerusalem; 27:21
yea, thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, concerning the
vessels that remain in the house of the lord, and in the house of the
king of judah and of jerusalem; 27:22 they shall be carried to
babylon, and there shall they be until the day that i visit them,
saith the lord; then will i bring them up, and restore them to this
place.

28:1 and it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign
of zedekiah king of judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month,
that hananiah the son of azur the prophet, which
 
 ___________________________
 
 was of gibeon, spake
unto me in the house of the lord, in the presence of the priests and
of all the people, saying, 28:2 thus speaketh the lord of hosts, the
god of israel, saying, i have broken the yoke of the king of babylon.

28:3 within two full years will i bring again into this place all the
vessels of the lord's house, that nebuchadnezzar king of babylon took
away from this place, and carried them to babylon: 28:4 and i will
bring again to this place jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah,
with all the captives of judah, that went into babylon, saith the
lord: for i will break the yoke of the king of babylon.

28:5 then the prophet 
 
 ___________________________
 
e of nebuchadnezzar
king of babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two
full years. and the prophet jeremiah went his way.

28:12 then the word of the lord came unto jeremiah the prophet, after
that hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the
prophet jeremiah, saying, 28:13 go and tell hananiah, saying, thus
saith the lord; thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt
make for them yokes of iron.

28:14 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; i have put
a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon; and they shall serve him: and i have
given him the beasts of the field also.

28:15 then said the prophet jeremiah unto hananiah the prophet, hear
now, hananiah; the lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this
people to trust in a lie.

28:16 therefore thus saith the lord; behold, i will cast thee from off
the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, becau
 
 ___________________________
 
d to the prophets, and to all the
people whom nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from jerusalem to
babylon; 29:2 (after that jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the
eunuchs, the princes of judah and jerusalem, and the carpenters, and
the smiths, were departed from jerusalem;) 29:3 by the hand of elasah
the son of shaphan, and gemariah the son of hilkiah, (whom zedekiah
king of judah sent unto babylon to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon)
saying, 29:4 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, unto all
that are carried away captives, whom i have caused to be carried away
from jerusalem unto babylon; 29:5 build ye houses, and dwell in them;
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; 29:6 take ye wives, and
beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your
daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye
may be increased there, and not diminished.

29:7 and seek the peace of the city whither i have caused you to be
carried
 
 ___________________________
 
 away captives, and pray unto the lord for it: for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace.

29:8 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; let not your
prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you,
neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.

29:9 for they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: i have not sent
them, saith the lord.

29:10 for thus saith the lord, that after seventy years be
accomplished at babylon i will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, in causing you to return to this place.

29:11 for i know the thoughts that i think toward you, saith t
 
 ___________________________
 
e
kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an
hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither i have driven
them: 29:19 because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the
lord, which i sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up
early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the lord.

29:20 hear ye therefore the word of the lord, all ye of the captivity,
whom i have sent from jerusalem to babylon: 29:21 thus saith the lord
of hosts, the god of israel, of ahab the son of kolaiah, and of
zedekiah the son of maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my
name; behold, i will deliver them into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king
of babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes; 29:22 and of them
shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of judah which are in
babylon, saying, the lord make thee like zedekiah and like ahab, whom
the king of babylon roasted in the fire; 29:23 because they have
committed villany in israel, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
ave committed adultery with their
neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which i
have not commanded them; even i know, and am a witness, saith the
lord.

29:24 thus shalt thou also speak to shemaiah the nehelamite, saying,
29:25 thus speaketh the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saying,
because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that
are at jerusalem, and to zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest, and
to all the priests, saying, 29:26 the lord hath made thee priest in
the stead of jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the
house of the lord, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a
prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.

29:27 now therefore why hast thou not reproved jeremiah of ana
 
 ___________________________
 
ah the nehelamite; because that shemaiah hath prophesied unto
you, and i sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie: 29:32
therefore thus saith the lord; behold, i will punish shemaiah the
nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this
people; neither shall he behold the good that i will do for my people,
saith the lord; because he hath taught rebellion against the lord.

30:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord, saying, 30:2 thus
speaketh the lord god of israel, saying, write thee all the words that
i have spoken unto thee in a book.

30:3 for, lo, the days come, saith the lord, that i will bring again
the captivity of my people israel and judah, saith the lord: and i
will cause them to return to the land that i gave to their fathers,
and they shall possess it.

30:4 and these are the words that the lord spake concerning israel and
concerning judah.

30:5 for thus saith the lord; we have heard a voice of trembling, of
fear, and n
 
 ___________________________
 

wherefore do i see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman
in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?  30:7 alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of
jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

30:8 for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord of hosts,
that i will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy
bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him: 30:9 but
they shall serve the lord their god, and david their king, whom i will
raise up unto them.

30:10 therefore fear thou not, o my servant jacob, saith the lord;
neither be dismayed, o israel: for, lo, i will save thee from afar,
and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and jacob shall return,
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

30:11 for i am with thee, saith the lord, to save thee: though i make
a full end of all nations whither i have scattered thee, yet i will
not make a full end 
 
 ___________________________
 
glorify them, and they shall not be small.

30:20 their children also shall be as aforetime, and their
congregation shall be established before me, and i will punish all
that oppress them.

30:21 and their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor
shall proceed from the midst of them; and i will cause him to draw
near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his
heart to approach unto me? saith the lord.

30:22 and ye shall be my people, and i will be your god.

30:23 behold, the whirlwind of the lord goeth forth with fury, a
continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the
wicked.

30:24 the fierce anger of the lord shall not return, until he hath
done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the
latter days ye shall consider it.

31:1 at the same time, saith the lord, will i be the god of all the
families of israel, and they shall be my people.

31:2 thus saith the lord, the people which were left 
 
 ___________________________
 
fore with lovingkindness have i
drawn thee.

31:4 again i will build thee, and thou shalt be built, o virgin of
israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go
forth in the dances of them that make merry.

31:5 thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of samaria: the
planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

31:6 for there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount
ephraim shall cry, arise ye, and let us go up to zion unto the lord
our god.

31:7 for thus saith the lord; sing with gladness for jacob, and shout
among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, o
lord, save thy people, the remnant of israel.

31:8 behold, i will bring them from the north country, and gather them
from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame,
the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a
great company shall return thither.

31:9 they shall come with weeping, and with supplications w
 
 ___________________________
 
th the lord; refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine
eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the lord; and
they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

31:17 and there is hope in thine end, saith the lord, that thy
children shall come again to their own border.

31:18 i have surely heard ephraim bemoaning himself thus; thou hast
chastised me, and i was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke: turn thou me, and i shall be turned; for thou art the lord my
god.

31:19 surely after that i was turned, i repented; and after that i was
instructed, i smote upon my thigh: i was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because i did bear the reproach of my youth.

31:20 is ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since i
spake against him, i do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him; i will surely have mercy upon him, saith
the lord.

31:21 set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart
toward the highw
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, o
virgin of israel, turn again to these thy cities.

31:22 how long wilt thou go about, o thou backsliding daughter? for
the lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass
a man.

31:23 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; as yet they
shall use this speech in the land of judah and in the cities thereof,
when i shall bring again their captivity; the lord bless thee, o
habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness.

31:24 and there shall dwell in judah itself, and in all the cities
thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

31:25 for i have satiated the weary soul, and i have replenished every
sorrowful soul.

31:26 upon this i awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was swe
 
 ___________________________
 
nant with the house of israel, and with the house of judah: 31:32
not according to the covenant that i made with their fathers in the
day that i took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
egypt; which my covenant they brake, although i was an husband unto
them, saith the lord: 31:33 but this shall be the covenant that i will
make with the house of israel; after those days, saith the lord, i
will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts;
and will be their god, and they shall be my people.

31:34 and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
man his brother, saying, know the lord: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the lord: for
i will forgive their iniquity, and i will remember their sin no more.

31:35 thus saith the lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day,
and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night,
which divideth the sea when the waves ther
 
 ___________________________
 
 so i took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was
sealed according to the law and custom, and that which was open: 32:12
and i gave the evidence of the purchase unto baruch the son of neriah,
the son of maaseiah, in the sight of hanameel mine uncle's son, and in
the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the
purchase, before all the jews that sat in the court of the prison.

32:13 and i charged baruch before them, saying, 32:14 thus saith the
lord of hosts, the god of israel; take these evidences, this evidence
of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is
open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many
days.

32:15 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; houses and
fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.

32:16 now when i had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto
baruch the son of neriah, i prayed unto the lord, saying, 32:17 ah
lord god! behold, thou hast made the 
 
 ___________________________
 
heaven and the earth by thy great
power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee:
32:18 thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the
iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them:
the great, the mighty god, the lord of hosts, is his name, 32:19 great
in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings: 32:20 which hast set signs and
wonders in the land of egypt, even unto this day, and in israel, and
among other men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day; 32:21 and
hast brought forth thy people israel out of the land of egypt with
signs, and with wonders, and with
 
 ___________________________
 
obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done
nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them: 32:24 behold the mounts, they
are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand
of the chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of
the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come
to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.

32:25 and thou hast said unto me, o lord god, buy thee the field for
money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the
chaldeans.

32:26 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, 32:27
behold, i am the lord, the god of all flesh: is there any thing too
hard for me?  32:28 therefore thus saith the lord; behold, i will give
this city into the hand of the chaldeans, and into the hand of
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and he shall take it: 32:29 and the
chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall c
 
 ___________________________
 
ome and set fire on
this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they have
offered incense unto baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other
gods, to provoke me to anger.

32:30 for the children of israel and the children of judah have only
done evil before me from their youth: for the children of israel have
only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the
lord.

32:31 for this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger and
of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that i
should remove it from before my face, 32:32 because of all the evil of
the children of israel and of the chil
 
 ___________________________
 
 yet they have not
hearkened to receive instruction.

32:34 but they set their abominations in the house, which is called by
my name, to defile it.

32:35 and they built the high places of baal, which are in the valley
of the son of hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass
through the fire unto molech; which i commanded them not, neither came
it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause judah
to sin.

32:36 and now therefore thus saith the lord, the god of israel,
concerning this city, whereof ye say, it shall be delivered into the
hand of the king of babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by
the pestilence; 32:37 behold, i will gather them out of all countries,
whither i have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great
wrath; and i will bring them again unto this place, and i will cause
them to dwell safely: 32:38 and they shall be my people, and i will be
their god: 32:39 and i will give them one heart, and one way, 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the valley, and in the cities
of the south: for i will cause their captivity to return, saith the
lord.

33:1 moreover the word of the lord came unto jeremiah the second time,
while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 33:2 thus
saith the lord the maker thereof, the lord that formed it, to
establish it; the lord is his name; 33:3 call unto me, and i will
answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest
not.

33:4 for thus saith the lord, the god of israel, concerning the houses
of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of judah, which
are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword; 33:5 they come to
fight with the chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies
of men, whom i have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all
whose wickedness i have hid my face from this city.

33:6 behold, i will bring it health and cure, and i will cure them,
and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.


 
 ___________________________
 
away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for i will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; go and speak to zedekiah king of judah,
and tell him, thus saith the lord; behold, i will give this city into
the hand of the king of babylon, and he shall burn it with fire: 34:3
and thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken,
and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of
the king of babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and
thou shalt go to babylon.

34:4 yet hear the word of the lord, o zedekiah king of judah; th
 
 ___________________________
 
ntered
into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and
every one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves
of them any more, then they obeyed, and let them go.

34:11 but afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the
handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into
subjection for servants and for handmaids.

34:12 therefore the word of the lord came to jeremiah from the lord,
saying, 34:13 thus saith the lord, the god of israel; i made a
covenant with your fathers in the day that i brought them forth out of
the land of egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying, 34:14 at the
end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an hebrew, which
hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou
shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto
me, neither inclined their ear.

34:15 and ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in
proclaiming liberty ever
 
 ___________________________
 
he days of
jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah, saying, 35:2 go unto the
house of the rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the
house of the lord, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to
drink.

35:3 then i took jaazaniah the son of jeremiah, the son of habaziniah,
and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the
rechabites; 35:4 and i brought them into the house of the lord, into
the chamber of the sons of hanan, the son of igdaliah, a man of god,
which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber
of maaseiah the son of shallum, the keeper of the door: 35:5 and i set
before the sons of the house of the rechabites pots full of wine, and
cups, and i said unto them, drink ye wine.

35:6 but they said, we will drink no wine: for jonadab the son of
rechab our father commanded us, saying, ye shall drink no wine,
neither ye, nor your sons for ever: 35:7 neither shall ye build house,
nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, 
 
 ___________________________
 
we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:
35:10 but we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according
to all that jonadab our father commanded us.

35:11 but it came to pass, when nebuchadrezzar king of babylon came up
into the land, that we said, come, and let us go to jerusalem for fear
of the army of the chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the syrians:
so we dwell at jerusalem.

35:12 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, 35:13 thus
saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; go and tell the men of
judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem, will ye not receive
instruction to hearken to my words? saith the lord.

35:14 the words of jonadab the son of rechab, that he commanded his
sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink
none, but obey their father's commandment: notwithstanding i have
spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto
me.

35:15 i have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, ris
 
 ___________________________
 
ing
up early and sending them, saying, return ye now every man from his
evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve
them, and ye shall dwell in the land which i have given to you and to
your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto
me.

35:16 because the sons of jonadab the son of rechab have performed the
commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people
hath not hearkened unto me: 35:17 therefore thus saith the lord god of
hosts, the god of israel; behold, i will bring upon judah and upon all
the inhabitants of jerusalem all the evil that i have pronounced
against them: because i have spoken unto them, but they have not
heard; and i have called unto them, but they have not answered.

35:18 and jeremiah said unto the house of the rechabites, thus saith
the lord of hosts, the god of israel; because ye have obeyed the
commandment of jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and
done according unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
all that he hath commanded you: 35:19 therefore
thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; jonadab the son of
rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

36:1 and it came to pass in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of
josiah king of judah, that this word came unto jeremiah from the lord,
saying, 36:2 take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the
words that i have spoken unto thee against israel, and against judah,
and against all the nations, from the day i spake unto thee, from the
days of josiah, even unto this day.

36:3 it may be tha
 
 ___________________________
 
y like
words.

37:1 and king zedekiah the son of josiah reigned instead of coniah the
son of jehoiakim, whom nebuchadrezzar king of babylon made king in the
land of judah.

37:2 but neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did
hearken unto the words of the lord, which he spake by the prophet
jeremiah.

37:3 and zedekiah the king sent jehucal the son of shelemiah and
zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest to the prophet jeremiah,
saying, pray now unto the lord our god for us.

37:4 now jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had
not put him into prison.

37:5 then pharaoh's army was come forth out of egypt: and when the
chaldeans that besieged jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed
from jerusalem.

37:6 then came the word of the lord unto the prophet jeremiah saying,
37:7 thus saith the lord, the god of israel; thus shall ye say to the
king of judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; behold,
pharaoh's army, which is
 
 ___________________________
 
i will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from
me.

38:15 then jeremiah said unto zedekiah, if i declare it unto thee,
wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if i give thee counsel, wilt
thou not hearken unto me?  38:16 so zedekiah the king sware secretly
unto jeremiah, saying, as the lord liveth, that made us this soul, i
will not put thee to death, neither will i give thee into the hand of
these men that seek thy life.

38:17 then said jeremiah unto zedekiah, thus saith the lord, the god
of hosts, the god of israel; if thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the
king of babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city
shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:
38:18 but if thou wilt not go forth to the king of babylon's princes,
then shall this city be given into the hand of the chaldeans, and they
shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.

38:19 and zedekiah the king said unto jeremiah, i am afraid of the
jews 
 
 ___________________________
 
bushasban,
rabsaris, and nergalsharezer, rabmag, and all the king of babylon's
princes; 39:14 even they sent, and took jeremiah out of the court of
the prison, and committed him unto gedaliah the son of ahikam the son
of shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the
people.

39:15 now the word of the lord came unto jeremiah, while he was shut
up in the court of the prison, saying, 39:16 go and speak to
ebedmelech the ethiopian, saying, thus saith the lord of hosts, the
god of israel; behold, i will bring my words upon this city for evil,
and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in that day before
thee.

39:17 but i will deliver thee in that day, saith the lord: and thou
shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.

39:18 for i will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the
sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast
put thy trust in me, saith the lord.

40:1 the word that came to jeremi
 
 ___________________________
 
ah from the lord, after that
nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from ramah, when
he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried
away captive of jerusalem and judah, which were carried away captive
unto babylon.

40:2 and the captain of the guard took jeremiah, and said unto him,
the lord thy god hath pronounced this evil upon this place.

40:3 now the lord hath brought it, and done according as he hath said:
because ye have sinned against the lord, and have not obeyed his
voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

40:4 and now, behold, i loose thee this day from the chains which were
upon thine hand. if it seem good unto thee to come with me into
babylon, come; and i will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto
thee to come with me into babylon, forbear: behold, all t
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the chaldeans: for they were afraid of them,
because ishmael the son of nethaniah had slain gedaliah the son of
ahikam, whom the king of babylon made governor in the land.

42:1 then all the captains of the forces, and johanan the son of
kareah, and jezaniah the son of hoshaiah, and all the people from the
least even unto the greatest, came near, 42:2 and said unto jeremiah
the prophet, let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before
thee, and pray for us unto the lord thy god, even for all this
remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold
us:) 42:3 that the lord thy god may shew us the way wherein we may
walk, and the thing that we may do.

42:4 then jeremiah the prophet said unto them, i have heard you;
behold, i will pray unto the lord your god according to your words;
and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the lord shall answer
you, i will declare it unto you; i will keep nothing back from you.

42:5 then they said to j
 
 ___________________________
 
eremiah, the lord be a true and faithful
witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the
which the lord thy god shall send thee to us.

42:6 whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice
of the lord our god, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with
us, when we obey the voice of the lord our god.

42:7 and it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the lord
came unto jeremiah.

42:8 then called he johanan the son of kareah, and all the captains of
the forces which were with him, and all the people from the least even
to the greatest, 42:9 and said unto them, thus saith the lord, the god
of israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before
him; 42:10 if ye will still abide in this land, then will i build you,
and not pull you down, and i will plant you, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d not pluck you up: for
i repent me of the evil that i have done unto you.

42:11 be not afraid of the king of babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be
not afraid of him, saith the lord: for i am with you to save you, and
to deliver you from his hand.

42:12 and i will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon
you, and cause you to return to your own land.

42:13 but if ye say, we will not dwell in this land, neither obey the
voice of the lord your god, 42:14 saying, no; but we will go into the
land of egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell: 42:15 and
now therefore hear the word of the lord, ye remnant of judah; thus
saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; if ye wholly set your
faces to enter into egypt, and go to sojourn there; 42:16 then it
shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake
you there in the land of egypt, and the fami
 
 ___________________________
 
ne, whereof ye were
afraid, shall follow close after you there in egypt; and there ye
shall die.

42:17 so shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into
egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine,
and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from
the evil that i will bring upon them.

42:18 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; as mine
anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of
jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall
enter into egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment,
and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.

42:19 the lord hath said concerning you, o ye remnant of judah; go ye
not into egypt: know certainly that i have admonished you this day.

42:20 for ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto t
 
 ___________________________
 
he lord
your god, saying, pray for us unto the lord our god; and according
unto all that the lord our god shall say, so declare unto us, and we
will do it.

42:21 and now i have this day declared it to you; but ye have not
obeyed the voice of the lord your god, nor any thing for the which he
hath sent me unto you.

42:22 now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by
the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to
go and to sojourn.

43:1 and it came to pass, that when jeremiah had made an end of
speaking unto all the people all the words of the lord their god, for
which the lord their god had sent him to them, even all these words,
43:2 then spake azariah the son of hoshaiah, and johanan the son of
ka
 
 ___________________________
 
reah, and all the proud men, saying unto jeremiah, thou speakest
falsely: the lord our god hath not sent thee to say, go not into egypt
to sojourn there: 43:3 but baruch the son of neriah setteth thee on
against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the chaldeans, that
they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into babylon.

43:4 so johanan the son of kareah, and all the captains of the forces,
and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the lord, to dwell in the
land of judah.

43:5 but johanan the son of kareah, and all the captains of the
forces, took all t
 
 ___________________________
 
f shaphan, and jeremiah the
prophet, and baruch the son of neriah.

43:7 so they came into the land of egypt: for they obeyed not the
voice of the lord: thus came they even to tahpanhes.

43:8 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah in tahpanhes,
saying, 43:9 take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the
clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entry of pharaoh's house in
tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of judah; 43:10 and say unto them,
thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, i will send
and take nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon, my servant, and will set
his throne upon these stones that i have hid; and he shall spread his
royal pavilion over them.

43:11 and when he cometh, he shall smite the land of egypt, and
deliver such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity
to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

43:12 and i will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of egypt; and
he shall burn them, and car
 
 ___________________________
 
ry them away captives: and he shall array
himself with the land of egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment;
and he shall go forth from thence in peace.

43:13 he shall break also the images of bethshemesh, that is in the
land of egypt; and the houses of the gods of the egyptians shall he
burn with fire.

44:1 the word that came to jeremiah concerning all the jews which
dwell in the land of egypt, which dwell at migdol, and at tahpanhes,
and at noph, and in the country of pathros, saying, 44:2 thus saith
the lord of hosts, the god of israel; ye have seen all the evil that i
have brought upon jerusalem, and upon all the cities of judah; and,
behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,
44:3 because of their wickedness wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich they have committed to provoke
me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other
gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.

44:4 howbeit i sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising
early and sending them, saying, oh, do not this abominable thing that
i hate.

44:5 but they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their
wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.

44:6 wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was
kindled in the cities of judah and in the streets of jerusalem; and
they are wasted and desolate, as at this day.

44:7 therefore now thus saith the lord, the god of hosts, the god of
israel; wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut
off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of judah, to leave
you none to remain; 44:8 in that ye provoke me unto wrath with the
works of your hands, burning 
 
 ___________________________
 
incense unto other gods in the land of
egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off,
and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of
the earth?  44:9 have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and
the wickedness of the kings of judah, and the wickedness of their
wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives,
which they have committed in the land of judah, and in the streets of
jerusalem?  44:10 they are not humbled even unto this day, neith
 
 ___________________________
 
er
have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that i set
before you and before your fathers.

44:11 therefore thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, i will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all
judah.

44:12 and i will take the remnant of judah, that have set their faces
to go into the land of egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be
consumed, and fall in the land of egypt; they shall even be consumed
by the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even
unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be
an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a rep
 
 ___________________________
 
ill punish them that dwell in the land of egypt, as i
have punished jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence: 44:14 so that none of the remnant of judah, which are gone
into the land of egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that
they should return into the land of judah, to the which they have a
desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as
shall escape.

44:15 then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense
unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude,
even all the people that dwelt in the land of egypt, in pathros,
answered jeremiah, saying, 44:16 as for the word that thou hast spoken
unto us in the name of the lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

44:17 but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our
kings, and our princes, in t
 
 ___________________________
 
ent, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

44:23 because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned
against the lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the lord, nor
walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies;
therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day.

44:24 moreover jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the
women, hear the word of the lord, all judah that are in the land of
egypt: 44:25 thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saying;
ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled
with your hand, saying, we will surely perform our vows that we have
vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely
perform your vows.

44:26 therefore hear ye the word of the lord, all judah that dwell in
the land of egypt; behold, i have sworn by my great name, saith the
lord, that my name shall no more be name
 
 ___________________________
 
d in the mouth of any man of
judah in all the land of egypt, saying, the lord god liveth.

44:27 behold, i will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and
all the men of judah that are in the land of egypt shall be consumed
by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.

44:28 yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the
land of egypt into the land of judah, and all the remnant of judah,
that are gone into the land of egypt to sojourn there, shall know
whose words shall stand, mine, or their's.

44:29 and this shall be a si
 
 ___________________________
 
ehold, i will
give pharaohhophra king of egypt into the hand of his enemies, and
into the hand of them that seek his life; as i gave zedekiah king of
judah into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, his enemy, and
that sought his life.

45:1 the word that jeremiah the prophet spake unto baruch the son of
neriah, when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of
jeremiah, in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of
judah, saying, 45:2 thus saith the lord, the god of israel, unto thee,
o baruch: 45:3 thou didst say, woe is me now! for the lord hath added
grief to my sorrow; i fainted in my sighing, and i find no rest.

45:4 thus shalt thou say unto him, the lord saith thus; behold, that
which i have built will i break down, and that which i have planted i
will pluck up, even this whole land.

45:5 and seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for,
behold, i will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the lord: but thy life
will i give unt
 
 ___________________________
 
:7 who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as
the rivers?  46:8 egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters are
moved like the rivers; and he saith, i will go up, and will cover the
earth; i will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.

46:9 come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men
come forth; the ethiopians and the libyans, that handle the shield;
and the lydians, that handle and bend the bow.

46:10 for this is the day of the lord god of hosts, a day of
vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword
shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood:
for the lord god of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the
river euphrates.

46:11 go up into gilead, and take balm, o virgin, the daughter of
egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be
cured.

46:12 the nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the
land: for the mighty man hat
 
 ___________________________
 
 was come upon them, and
the time of their visitation.

46:22 the voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march
with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.

46:23 they shall cut down her forest, saith the lord, though it cannot
be searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and are
innumerable.

46:24 the daughter of egypt shall be confounded; she shall be
delivered into the hand of the people of the north.

46:25 the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saith; behold, i will
punish the multitude of no, and pharaoh, and egypt, with their gods,
and their kings; even pharaoh, and all them that trust in him: 46:26
and i will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives,
and into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and into the hand
of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days
of old, saith the lord.

46:27 but fear not thou, o my servant jacob, and be not dismayed, o
israel: for, beh
 
 ___________________________
 
hilistines, the remnant of the country of
caphtor.

47:5 baldness is come upon gaza; ashkelon is cut off with the remnant
of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?  47:6 o thou sword of
the lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into
thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

47:7 how can it be quiet, seeing the lord hath given it a charge
against ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed
it.

48:1 against moab thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; woe
unto nebo! for it is spoiled: kiriathaim is confounded and taken:
misgab is confounded and dismayed.

48:2 there shall be no more praise of moab: in heshbon they have
devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a
nation. also thou shalt be cut down, o madmen; the sword shall pursue
thee.

48:3 a voice of crying shall be from horonaim, spoiling and great
destruction.

48:4 moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.

48:5 for
 
 ___________________________
 
the land of moab, and i have caused wine to fail from the winepresses:
none shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no shouting.

48:34 from the cry of heshbon even unto elealeh, and even unto jahaz,
have they uttered their voice, from zoar even unto horonaim, as an
heifer of three years old: for the waters also of nimrim shall be
desolate.

48:35 moreover i will cause to cease in moab, saith the lord, him that
offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.

48:36 therefore mine heart shall sound for moab like pipes, and mine
heart shall sound like pipes for the men of kirheres: because the
riches that he hath gotten are perished.

48:37 for every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all
the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.

48:38 there shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of
moab, and in the streets thereof: for i have broken moab like a vessel
wherein is no pleasure, saith the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 be heir unto
them that were his heirs, saith the lord.

49:3 howl, o heshbon, for ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of rabbah,
gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for
their king shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes
together.

49:4 wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, o
backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, who shall
come unto me?  49:5 behold, i will bring a fear upon thee, saith the
lord god of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be
driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him that
wandereth.

49:6 and afterward i will bring again the captivity of the children of
ammon, saith the lord.

49:7 concerning edom, thus saith the lord of hosts; is wisdom no more
in teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom
vanished?  49:8 flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, o inhabitants of
dedan; for i will bring the calamity of esau upon him,
 
 ___________________________
 
en, bel is confounded,
merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are
broken in pieces.

50:3 for out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which
shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall
remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

50:4 in those days, and in that time, saith the lord, the children of
israel shall come, they and the children of judah together, going and
weeping: they shall go, and seek the lord their god.

50:5 they shall ask the way to zion with their faces thitherward,
saying, come, and let us join ourselves to the lord in a perpetual
covenant that shall not be forgotten.

50:6 my people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them
to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have
gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.

50:7 all that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries
said, we offend not, because they have 
 
 ___________________________
 
on her; as she hath done, do
unto her.

50:16 cut off the sower from babylon, and him that handleth the sickle
in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall
turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own
land.

50:17 israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away:
first the king of assyria hath devoured him; and last this
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon hath broken his bones.

50:18 therefore thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, i will punish the king of babylon and his land, as i have
punished the king of assyria.

50:19 and i will bring israel again to his habitation, and he shall
feed on carmel and bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount
ephraim and gilead.

50:20 in those days, and in that time, saith the lord, the iniquity of
israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of
judah, and they shall not be found: for i will pardon them whom i
reserve.

50:
 
 ___________________________
 
0:22 a sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.

50:23 how is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how
is babylon become a desolation among the nations!  50:24 i have laid a
snare for thee, and thou art also taken, o babylon, and thou wast not
aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven
against the lord.

50:25 the lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the
weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the lord god of
hosts in the land of the chaldeans.

50:26 come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses:
cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be
left.

50:27 slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe
unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

50:28 the voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of
babylon, to declare in zion the vengeance of the lord our god, the
vengeance of his temple.

50:29 call
 
 ___________________________
 
 together the archers against babylon: all ye that bend the
bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense
her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do
unto her: for she hath been proud against the lord, against the holy
one of israel.

50:30 therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her
men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the lord.

50:31 behold, i am against thee, o thou most proud, saith the lord god
of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that i will visit thee.

50:32 and the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise
him up: and i will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour
all round about him.

50:33 thus saith the lord of hosts; the children of israel and the
children of judah were oppressed together: and all that took them
captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.

50:34 their redeemer is strong; the lord of hosts is his name: he
shall th
 
 ___________________________
 
dst of her; and they shall
become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be
robbed.

50:38 a drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it
is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

50:39 therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of
the islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and
it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation.

50:40 as god overthrew sodom and gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof, saith the lord; so shall no man abide there, neither shall
any son of man dwell therein.

50:41 behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation,
and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

50:42 they shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will
not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall
ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the batt
 
 ___________________________
 
nd unto babylon fanners, that shall
fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they
shall be against her round about.

51:3 against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against
him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her
young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

51:4 thus the slain shall fall in the land of the chaldeans, and they
that are thrust through in her streets.

51:5 for israel hath not been forsaken, nor judah of his god, of the
lord of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the holy
one of israel.

51:6 flee out of the midst of babylon, and deliver every man his soul:
be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the lord's
vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

51:7 babylon hath been a golden cup in the lord's hand, that made all
the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the
nations are mad.

51:8 babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed:
 
 ___________________________
 
 howl for her; take balm
for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

51:9 we would have healed babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her,
and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

51:10 the lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
declare in zion the work of the lord our god.

51:11 make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the lord hath raised
up the spirit of the kings of the medes: for his device is against
babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the lord, the
vengeance of his temple.

51:12 set up the standard upon the walls of babylon, make the watch
strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the lord hath
both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of
babylon.

51:13 o thou that dwellest upon many
 
 ___________________________
 
e mighty men of babylon have forborn to fight, they have
remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as
women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.

51:31 one post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another, to shew the king of babylon that his city is taken at one
end, 51:32 and that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have
burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

51:33 for thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; the
daughter of babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh
her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

51:34 nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon hath devoured me, he hath
crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up
like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath
cast me out.

51:35 the violence done to me and to my flesh be upon babylon, shall
the inhabitant of zion say; and my blood upon the inhab
 
 ___________________________
 
 the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come
unto her, saith the lord.

51:54 a sound of a cry cometh from babylon, and great destruction from
the land of the chaldeans: 51:55 because the lord hath spoiled
babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do
roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered: 51:56
because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon babylon, and her
mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the lord
god of recompences shall surely requite.

51:57 and i will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her
captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the king, whose name is the lord
of hosts.

51:58 thus saith the lord of hosts; the broad walls of babylon shall
be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and
the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they
shall be weary.

51:59 the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
h.

3:35 to turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most
high, 3:36 to subvert a man in his cause, the lord approveth not.

3:37 who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the lord
commandeth it not?  3:38 out of the mouth of the most high proceedeth
not evil and good?  3:39 wherefore doth a living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sins?  3:40 let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the lord.

3:41 let us lift up our heart with our hands unto god in the heavens.

3:42 we have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

3:43 thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain,
thou hast not pitied.

3:44 thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should
not pass through.

3:45 thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of
the people.

3:46 all our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

3:47 fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

3:48 
 
 ___________________________
 
ration.

5:20 wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long
time?  5:21 turn thou us unto thee, o lord, and we shall be turned;
renew our days as of old.

5:22 but thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.




the book of the prophet ezekiel


1:1 now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month,
in the fifth day of the month, as i was among the captives by the river
of chebar, that the heavens were opened, and i saw visions of god.

1:2 in the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
jehoiachin's captivity, 1:3 the word of the lord came expressly unto
ezekiel the priest, the son of buzi, in the land of the chaldeans by
the river chebar; and the hand of the lord was there upon him.

1:4 and i looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 and i will
speak unto thee.

2:2 and the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me
upon my feet, that i heard him that spake unto me.

2:3 and he said unto me, son of man, i send thee to the children of
israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and
their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.

2:4 for they are impudent children and stiffhearted. i do send thee
unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the lord god.

2:5 and they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
(for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been
a prophet among them.

2:6 and thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost
dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed
at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

2:7 and thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear
 
 ___________________________
 
st their faces, and thy
forehead strong against their foreheads.

3:9 as an adamant harder than flint have i made thy forehead: fear
them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house.

3:10 moreover he said unto me, son of man, all my words that i shall
speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

3:11 and go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of
thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, thus saith the lord
god; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

3:12 then the spirit took me up, and i heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing, saying, blessed be the glory of the lord from his
place.

3:13 i heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that
touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them,
and a noise of a great rushing.

3:14 so the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and i went in
bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of t
 
 ___________________________
 
 my feet, and
spake with me, and said unto me, go, shut thyself within thine house.

3:25 but thou, o son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee,
and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:
3:26 and i will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that
thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are
a rebellious house.

3:27 but when i speak with thee, i will open thy mouth, and thou shalt
say unto them, thus saith the lord god; he that heareth, let him hear;
and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious
house.

4:1 thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee,
and pourtray upon it the city, even jerusalem: 4:2 and lay siege
against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it;
set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round
about.

4:3 moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of
iron between thee and the ci
 
 ___________________________
 
which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty
shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

4:11 thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin:
from time to time shalt thou drink.

4:12 and thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it
with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.

4:13 and the lord said, even thus shall the children of israel eat
their defiled bread among the gentiles, whither i will drive them.

4:14 then said i, ah lord god! behold, my soul hath not been polluted:
for from my youth up even till now have i not eaten of that which
dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable
flesh into my mouth.

4:15 then he said unto me, lo, i have given thee cow's dung for man's
dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.

4:16 moreover he said unto me, son of man, behold, i will break the
staff of bread in jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and
with care; and they shall drink w
 
 ___________________________
 
 midst of the city,
when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third
part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt
scatter in the wind; and i will draw out a sword after them.

5:3 thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy
skirts.

5:4 then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire,
and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into
all the house of israel.

5:5 thus saith the lord god; this is jerusalem: i have set it in the
midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.

5:6 and she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the
nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about
her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not
walked in them.

5:7 therefore thus saith the lord god; because ye multiplied more than
the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my
statutes, neither have ke
 
 ___________________________
 
pt my judgments, neither have done according
to the judgments of the nations that are round about you; 5:8
therefore thus saith the lord god; behold, i, even i, am against thee,
and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the
nations.

5:9 and i will do in thee that which i have not done, and whereunto i
will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.

5:10 therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee,
and the sons shall eat their fathers; and i will execute judgments in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will i scatter into all the winds.

5:11 wherefore, as i live,
 
 ___________________________
 
 saith the lord god; surely, because thou
hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all
thine abominations, therefore will i also diminish thee; neither shall
mine eye spare, neither will i have any pity.

5:12 a third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with
famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part
shall fall by the sword round about thee; and i will scatter a third
part into all the winds, and i will draw out a sword after them.

5:13 thu
 
 ___________________________
 
o destroy you:
and i will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of
bread: 5:17 so will i send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they
shall bereave thee: and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee;
and i will bring the sword upon thee. i the lord have spoken it.

6:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 6:2 son of man, set
thy face toward the mountains of israel, and prophesy against them,
6:3 and say, ye mountains of israel, hear the word of the lord god;
thus saith the lord god to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
rivers, and to the valleys; behold, i, even i, will bring a sword upon
you, and i will destroy your high places.

6:4 and your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be
broken: and i will cast down your slain men before your idols.

6:5 and i will lay the dead carcases of the children of israel before
their idols; and i will scatter your bones round about your altars.

6:6 in all your dwellingplaces the citi
 
 ___________________________
 
ies.

6:9 and they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations
whither they shall be carried captives, because i am broken with their
whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which
go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.

6:10 and they shall know that i am the lord, and that i have not said
in vain that i would do this evil unto them.

6:11 thus saith the lord god; smite with thine hand, and stamp with
thy foot, and say, alas for all the evil abominations of the house of
israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence.

6:12 he that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is
near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged
shall die by the famine: thus will i accomplish my fury upon them.

6:13 then shall ye know that i am the lord, when their slain men shall
be among their idols rou
 
 ___________________________
 
 their altars, upon every high hill,
in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and
under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to
all their idols.

6:14 so will i stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land
desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward diblath, in
all their habitations: and they shall know that i am the lord.

7:1 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 7:2 also, thou
son of man, thus saith the lord god unto the land of israel; an end,
the end is come upon the four corners of the land.

7:3 now is the end come upon thee, and i will send mine anger upon
thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense
upon thee all thine abominations.

7:4 and mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will i have pity: but i
will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in
the midst of thee: and ye shall know that i am the lord.

7:5 thus saith the lord god; an 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the priest, and counsel from the ancients.

7:27 the king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with
desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled:
i will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts
will i judge them; and they shall know that i am the lord.

8:1 and it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the
fifth day of the month, as i sat in mine house, and the elders of
judah sat before me, that the hand of the lord god fell there upon me.

8:2 then i beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from
the appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins
even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber.

8:3 and he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of
mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the
heaven, and brought me in the visions of god to jerusalem, to the door
of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was
 
 ___________________________
 
 the seat of
the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

8:4 and, behold, the glory of the god of israel was there, according
to the vision that i saw in the plain.

8:5 then said he unto me, son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way
toward the north. so i lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north,
and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy
in the entry.

8:6 he said furthermore unto me, son of man, seest thou what they do?
even the great abominations that the house of israel committeth here,
that i should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn the
 
 ___________________________
 
 not hear them.

9:1 he cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, cause them
that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his
destroying weapon in his hand.

9:2 and, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which
lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand;
and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn
by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.

9:3 and the glory of the god of israel was gone up from the cherub,
whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. and he called to the
man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side;
9:4 and the lord said unto him, go through the midst of the city,
through the midst of jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of
the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done
in the midst thereof.

9:5 and to the others he said in mine hearing, go ye after him through
the city, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
ye pity: 9:6
slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and
women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at
my sanctuary. then they began at the ancient men which were before the
house.

9:7 and he said unto them, defile the house, and fill the courts with
the slain: go ye forth. and they went forth, and slew in the city.

9:8 and it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and i was left,
that i fell upon my face, and cried, and said, ah lord god! wilt thou
destroy all the residue of israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon
jerusalem?  9:9 then said he unto me, the iniquity of the house of
israel and judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood,
and the city full of perverseness: for they say, the lord hath
forsaken the earth, and the lord seeth not.

9:10 and as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will i have
pity, but i will recompense their way upon their head.

9:11 and, behold, the man clothed with
 
 ___________________________
 
catter them over the
city. and he went in in my sight.

10:3 now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the
man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.

10:4 then the glory of the lord went up from the cherub, and stood
over the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the
cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the lord's glory.

10:5 and the sound of the cherubims' wings was heard even to the outer
court, as the voice of the almighty god when he speaketh.

10:6 and it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed
with linen, saying, take fire from between the wheels, from between
the cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels.

10:7 and one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the
cherubims unto the fire that was between the cherubims, and took
thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen:
who took it, and went out.

10:8 and there appeared in the cherubims the
 
 ___________________________
 
when they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up,
these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature
was in them.

10:18 then the glory of the lord departed from off the threshold of
the house, and stood over the cherubims.

10:19 and the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the
earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside
them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the lord's
house; and the glory of the god of israel was over them above.

10:20 this is the living creature that i saw under the god of israel
by the river of chebar; and i knew that they were the cherubims.

10:21 every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and
the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.

10:22 and the likeness of their faces was the same faces which i saw
by the river of chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went
every one straight forward.

11:1 moreover the spirit l
 
 ___________________________
 
 it is
not near; let us build houses: this city is the caldron, and we be the
flesh.

11:4 therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, o son of man.

11:5 and the spirit of the lord fell upon me, and said unto me, speak;
thus saith the lord; thus have ye said, o house of israel: for i know
the things that come into your mind, every one of them.

11:6 ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled
the streets thereof with the slain.

11:7 therefore thus saith the lord god; your slain whom ye have laid
in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron:
but i will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

11:8 ye have feared the sword; and i will bring a sword upon you,
saith the lord god.

11:9 and i will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you
into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.

11:10 ye shall fall by the sword; i will judge you in the border of
israel; and ye shall know that i am the lord.
 
 ___________________________
 
11:11 this city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the
flesh in the midst thereof; but i will judge you in the border of
israel: 11:12 and ye shall know that i am the lord: for ye have not
walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done
after the manners of the heathen that are round about you.

11:13 and it came to pass, when i prophesied, that pelatiah the son of
benaiah died. then fell i down upon my face, and cried with a loud
voice, and said, ah lord god! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant
of israel?  11:14 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying,
11:15 son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy
kindred, and all the house of israel wholly, are they unto whom the
inhabitants of jerusalem have said, get you far from the lord: unto us
is this land given in possession.

11:16 therefore say, thus saith the lord god; although i have cast
them far off among the heathen, and although i have scattered them
among t
 
 ___________________________
 
he countries, yet will i be to them as a little sanctuary in
the countries where they shall come.

11:17 therefore say, thus saith the lord god; i will even gather you
from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have
been scattered, and i will give you the land of israel.

11:18 and they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the
detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from
thence.

11:19 and i will give them one heart, and i will put a new spirit
within you; and i will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and
will give them an heart of flesh: 11:20 that they may walk in my
 
 ___________________________
 

statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my
people, and i will be their god.

11:21 but as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their
detestable things and their abominations, i will recompense their way
upon their own heads, saith the lord god.

11:22 then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels
beside them; and the glory of the god of israel was over them above.

11:23 and the glory of the lord went up from the midst of the city,
and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.

11:24 afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by
the spirit of god into chaldea, to them of the captivity. so the
vision that i had seen went up from me.

11:25 then i spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the
lord had shewed me.

12:1 the word of the lord also came unto me, saying,
 
 ___________________________
 
or a sign unto the house of israel.

12:7 and i did so as i was commanded: i brought forth my stuff by day,
as stuff for captivity, and in the even i digged through the wall with
mine hand; i brought it forth in the twilight, and i bare it upon my
shoulder in their sight.

12:8 and in the morning came the word of the lord unto me, saying,
12:9 son of man, hath not the house of israel, the rebellious house,
said unto thee, what doest thou?  12:10 say thou unto them, thus saith
the lord god; this burden concerneth the prince in jerusalem, and all
the house of israel that are among them.

12:11 say, i am your sign: like as i have done, so shall it be done
unto them: they shall remove and go into captivity.

12:12 and the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder
in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall
to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the
ground with his eyes.

12:13 my net also will i spread upon him
 
 ___________________________
 
nations, and disperse them in the countries.

12:16 but i will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the
famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their
abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know
that i am the lord.

12:17 moreover the word of the lord came to me, saying, 12:18 son of
man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling
and with carefulness; 12:19 and say unto the people of the land, thus
saith the lord god of the inhabitants of jerusalem, and of the land of
israel; they shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their
water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that
is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.

12:20 and the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the
land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that i am the lord.

12:21 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 12:22 son of man,
what is that proverb that ye
 
 ___________________________
 
 have in the land of israel, saying, the
days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?  12:23 tell them
therefore, thus saith the lord god; i will make this proverb to cease,
and they shall no more use it as a proverb in israel; but say unto
them, the days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.

12:24 for there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering
divination within the house of israel.

12:25 for i am the lord: i will speak, and the word that i shall speak
shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, o
rebellious house, will i say the word, and will perform it, saith the
lord god.
 
 ___________________________
 


12:26 again the word of the lord came to me, saying.

12:27 son of man, behold, they of the house of israel say, the vision
that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the
times that are far off.

12:28 therefore say unto them, thus saith the lord god; there shall
none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which i have
spoken shall be done, saith the lord god.

13:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 13:2 son of man,
prophesy against the prophets of israel that prophesy, and say thou
unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, hear ye the word of
the lord; 13:3 thus saith the lord god; woe unto the foolish prophets,
that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!  13:4 o israel,
thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.

13:5 ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for
the house of israel to
 
 ___________________________
 
 stand in the battle in the day of the lord.

13:6 they have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, the lord
saith: and the lord hath not sent them: and they have made others to
hope that they would confirm the word.

13:7 have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying
divination, whereas ye say, the lord saith it; albeit i have not
spoken?  13:8 therefore thus saith the lord god; because ye have
spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, i am against you,
saith the lord god.

13:9 and mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and
that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of israel,
neither shall they enter into the land of israel; and ye shall know
that i am the lord god.

13:10 because, even because they have seduced my people, saying,
peace; and there was no
 
 ___________________________
 
 peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo,
others daubed it with untempered morter: 13:11 say unto them which
daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an
overflowing shower; and ye, o great hailstones, shall fall; and a
stormy wind shall rend it.

13:12 lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you,
where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?  13:13 therefore
thus saith the lord god; i will even rend it with a stormy wind in my
fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and
great hailstones in my fury to consume it.

13:14 so will i break down the wall that ye have daubed with
untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the
foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye
shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that i am
the lord.

13:15 thus will i accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon t
 
 ___________________________
 
hem
that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, the
wall is no more, neither they that daubed it; 13:16 to wit, the
prophets of israel which prophesy concerning jerusalem, and which see
visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the lord god.

13:17 likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of
thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou
against them, 13:18 and say, thus saith the lord god; woe to the women
that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of
every stature to hunt souls! will ye hunt the souls of my people, and
will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?  13:19 and will ye
pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of
bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls
alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your
lies?  13:20 wherefore thus saith the lord god; behold, i am
 
 ___________________________
 
vanity, nor divine divinations:
for i will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that
i am the lord.

14:1 then came certain of the elders of israel unto me, and sat before
me.

14:2 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 14:3 son of man,
these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the
stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should i be
enquired of at all by them?  14:4 therefore speak unto them, and say
unto them, thus saith the lord god; every man of the house of israel
that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock
of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; i the lord
will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;
14:5 that i may take the house of israel in their own heart, because
they are all estranged from me through their idols.

14:6 therefore say unto the house of israel, thus saith the lord god;
repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn 
 
 ___________________________
 
when he hath spoken a thing, i the
lord have deceived that prophet, and i will stretch out my hand upon
him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people israel.

14:10 and they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the
punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that
seeketh unto him; 14:11 that the house of israel may go no more astray
from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions;
but that they may be my people, and i may be their god, saith the lord
god.

14:12 the word of the lord came again to me, saying, 14:13 son of man,
when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will
i stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast
from it: 14:14 though these three men, noah, daniel, and job, were in
it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith the lord god.

14:15 if i cause noisome 
 
 ___________________________
 
beasts to pass through the land, and they
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because
of the beasts: 14:16 though these three men were in it, as i live,
saith the lord god, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters;
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

14:17 or if i bring a sword upon that land, and say, sword, go through
the land; so that i cut off man and beast from it: 14:18 though these
three men were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered
themselves.

14:19 or if i send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to c
 
 ___________________________
 
ut off from it man and beast: 14:20 though noah,
daniel, and job were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.

14:21 for thus saith the lord god; how much more when i send my four
sore judgments upon jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
14:22 yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth
unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be
comforted concerning the evil that i have brought upon jerusalem, even
concerning all that i have brought upon it.

 
 ___________________________
 

14:23 and they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their
doings: and ye shall know that i have not done without cause all that
i have done in it, saith the lord god.

15:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 15:2 son of man,
what is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is
among the trees of the forest?  15:3 shall wood be taken thereof to do
any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
15:4 behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth
both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. is it meet for any
work?  15:5 behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how
much le
 
 ___________________________
 
ss shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath
devoured it, and it is burned?  15:6 therefore thus saith the lord
god; as the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which i have
given to the fire for fuel, so will i give the inhabitants of
jerusalem.

15:7 and i will set my face against them; they shall go out from one
fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that i am
the lord, when i set my face against them.

15:8 and i will make the land desolate, because they have committed a
trespass, saith the lord god.

16:1 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 16:2 son of ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n,
cause jerusalem to know her abominations, 16:3 and say, thus saith the
lord god unto jerusalem; thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of
canaan; thy father was an amorite, and thy mother an hittite.

16:4 and as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was
not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast
not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

16:5 none eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast b
 
 ___________________________
 
u wast in thy blood, live.

16:7 i have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou
hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent
ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas
thou wast naked and bare.

16:8 now when i passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time
was the time of love; and i spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: yea, i sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with
thee, saith the lord god, and thou becamest mine.

16:9 then washed i thee with water; yea, i throughly washed away thy
blood from thee, and i anointed thee with oil.

16:10 i clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with
badgers' skin, and i girded thee about with fine linen, and i covered
thee with silk.

16:11 i decked thee also with ornaments, and i put bracelets upon thy
hands, and a chain on thy neck.

16:12 and i put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears,
and a beautiful cr
 
 ___________________________
 
own upon thine head.

16:13 thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was
of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine
flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou
didst prosper into a kingdom.

16:14 and thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for
it was perfect through my comeliness, which i had put upon thee, saith
the lord god.

16:15 but thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the
harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on
every one that passed by; his it was.

16:16 and of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high
places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the
like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.

16:17 thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my
silver, which i had given thee, and madest to thyself images of me
 
 ___________________________
 
n,
and didst commit whoredom with them, 16:18 and tookest thy broidered
garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine
incense before them.

16:19 my meat also which i gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey,
wherewith i fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet
savour: and thus it was, saith the lord god.

16:20 moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou
hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured. is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, 16:21 that thou
hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass
through the fire for them?  16:22 and in all thine abominations and
thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when
thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.

16:23 and it came to pass
 
 ___________________________
 
 after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto
thee!  saith the lord god;) 16:24 that thou hast also built unto thee
an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.

16:25 thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and
hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every
one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.

16:26 thou hast also committed fornication with the egyptians thy
neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to
provoke me to anger.

16:27 behold, therefore i have st
 
 ___________________________
 
 ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will
of them that hate thee, the daughters of the philistines, which are
ashamed of thy lewd way.

16:28 thou hast played the whore also with the assyrians, because thou
wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet
couldest not be satisfied.

16:29 thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of
canaan unto chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied therewith.

16:30 how weak is thine heart, saith the lord god, seeing thou doest
all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman; 16:31 in
that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and
makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an
harlot, in that thou scornest hire; 16:32 but as a wife that
committeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband!
16:33 they give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all
thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every
side 
 
 ___________________________
 
for thy whoredom.

16:34 and the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms,
whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou
givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art
contrary.

16:35 wherefore, o harlot, hear the word of the lord: 16:36 thus saith
the lord god; because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness
discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the
idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children, which
thou didst give unto them; 16:37 behold, therefore i will gather all
thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou
hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; i will even gather
them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto
them, that they may see a
 
 ___________________________
 
fire, and execute
judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and i will cause thee
to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any
more.

16:42 so will i make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shall depart from thee, and i will be quiet, and will be no more
angry.

16:43 because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast
fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore i also will
recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the lord god: and thou shalt
not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.

16:44 behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb
against thee, saying, as is the mother, so is her daughter.

16:45 thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her
children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their
husbands and their children: your mother was an hittite, and your
father an amorite.

16:46 and thine elder sister is samaria, she and her daughters
 
 ___________________________
 
 that
dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy
right hand, is sodom and her daughters.

16:47 yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their
abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast
corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

16:48 as i live, saith the lord god, sodom thy sister hath not done,
she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.

16:49 behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister sodom, pride,
fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her
daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

16:50 and they were haughty, and committed abomination before me:
therefore i took them away as i saw good.

16:51 neither hath samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast
multiplie
 
 ___________________________
 
eturn to their
former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former
estate.

16:56 for thy sister sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day
of thy pride, 16:57 before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the
time of thy reproach of the daughters of syria, and all that are round
about her, the daughters of the philistines, which despise thee round
about.

16:58 thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the
lord.

16:59 for thus saith the lord god; i will even deal with thee as thou
hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.

16:60 nevertheless i will remember my covenant with thee in the days
of thy youth, and i will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.

16:61 then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou
shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and i will
give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.

16:62 and i will establish my covenant with thee; a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd thou shalt know
that i am the lord: 16:63 that thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame,
when i am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the
lord god.

17:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 17:2 son of man,
put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of israel; 17:3
and say, thus saith the lord god; a great eagle with great wings,
longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto
lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar: 17:4 he cropped off
the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he
set it in a city of merchants.

17:5 he took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a
fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow
tree.

17:6 and it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose
branches
 
 ___________________________
 
 so
it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.

17:7 there was also another great eagle with great wings and many
feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and
shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the
furrows of her plantation.

17:8 it was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might
bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a
goodly vine.

17:9 say thou, thus saith the lord god; shall it prosper? shall he not
pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it
wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without
great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof.

17:10 yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? shall it not
utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the
furrows where it grew.

17:11 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 17:12 say
now to the rebellious house,
 
 ___________________________
 
and made a covenant
with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty
of the land: 17:14 that the kingdom might be base, that it might not
lift itself up, but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.

17:15 but he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into
egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. shall he
prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall he break the
covenant, and be delivered?  17:16 as i live, saith the lord god,
surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose
oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the
midst of babylon he shall die.

17:17 neither shall pharaoh with his mighty army and great company
make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to
cut off many persons: 17:18 seeing he despised the oath by breaking
the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these
things, he shall not escape.

17:19 there
 
 ___________________________
 
fore thus saith the lord god; as i live, surely mine oath
that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it
will i recompense upon his own head.

17:20 and i will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare, and i will bring him to babylon, and will plead with him there
for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.

17:21 and all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the
sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and
ye shall know that i the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd have spoken it.

17:22 thus saith the lord god; i will also take of the highest branch
of the high cedar, and will set it; i will crop off from the top of
his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain
and eminent: 17:23 in the mountain of the height of israel will i
plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a
goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the
shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

17:24 and all the trees of the field shall know that i the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord have
brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up
the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: i the lord
have spoken and have done it.

18:1 the word of the lord came unto me again, saying, 18:2 what mean
ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of israel, saying,
the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set
on edge?  18:3 as i live, saith the lord god, ye shall not have
occasion any more to use this proverb in israel.

18:4 behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also
the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.

18:5 but if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, 18:6
and hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes
to the idols of the house of israel, neither hath defiled his
neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman, 18:7
and hath not
 
 ___________________________
 
 oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his
pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the
hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment; 18:8 he that hath
not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, that hath
withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between
man and man, 18:9 hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my
judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the
lord god.

18:10 if he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that
doeth the like to any one of these things, 18:11 and that doeth not
any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and
defiled his neighbour's wife, 18:12 hath oppressed the poor and needy,
hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath
lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination, 18:13
hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then
live? he shal
 
 ___________________________
 
e righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

18:21 but if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

18:22 all his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall
live.

18:23 have i any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the
lord god: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?
18:24 but when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that
the wicked man doeth, shall he live? all his righteousness that he
hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath
trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.

18:25 yet ye say, the way of the lord is not equal. hear now, o house
of israel; is not my way
 
 ___________________________
 
wickedness that
he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall
save his soul alive.

18:28 because he considereth, and turneth away from all his
transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall
not die.

18:29 yet saith the house of israel, the way of the lord is not equal.
o house of israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?
18:30 therefore i will judge you, o house of israel, every one
according to his ways, saith the lord god. repent, and turn yourselves
from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

18:31 cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will
ye die, o house of israel?  18:32 for i have no pleasure in the death
of him that dieth, saith the lord god: wherefore turn yourselves, and
live ye.

19:1 moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of israel,
19:2 and say, what is thy mother? a lio
 
 ___________________________
 
f a rod of her branches, which hath
devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to
rule. this is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

20:1 and it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the
tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of israel came to
enquire of the lord, and sat before me.

20:2 then came the word of the lord unto me, saying, 20:3 son of man,
speak unto the elders of israel, and say unto them, thus saith the
lord god; are ye come to enquire of me? as i live, saith the lord god,
i will not be enquired of by you.

20:4 wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause
them to know the abominations of their fathers: 20:5 and say unto
them, thus saith the lord god; in the day when i chose israel, and
lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of jacob, and made
myself known unto them in the land of egypt, when i lifted up mine
hand unto them, saying, i am the lord your god; 20:6 in the d
 
 ___________________________
 
ay that i
lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of
egypt into a land that i had espied for them, flowing with milk and
honey, which is the glory of all lands: 20:7 then said i unto them,
cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not
yourselves with the idols of egypt: i am the lord your god.

20:8 but they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they
did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither
did they forsake the idols of egypt: then i said, i will pour out my
fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of
the land of egypt.

20:9 but i wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted
before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight i made myself
known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the
 
 ___________________________
 
y, which is the glory of all lands; 20:16 because
they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but
polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.

20:17 nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither
did i make an end of them in the wilderness.

20:18 but i said unto their children in the wilderness, walk ye not in
the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor
defile yourselves with their idols: 20:19 i am the lord your god; walk
in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; 20:20 and hallow
my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may
know that i am the lord your god.

20:21 notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked
not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a
man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then i
said, i would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the wilderness.

20:
 
 ___________________________
 
 and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes
were after their fathers' idols.

20:25 wherefore i gave them also statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not live; 20:26 and i polluted them in
their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that
openeth the womb, that i might make them desolate, to the end that
they might know that i am the lord.

20:27 therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of israel, and say
unto them, thus saith the lord god; yet in this your fathers have
blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.

20:28 for when i had brought them into the land, for the which i
lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill,
and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and
there they presented the provocation of their offering: there also
they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink
offerings.

20:29 then i said unto them, what is the hi
 
 ___________________________
 
gh place whereunto ye go?
and the name whereof is called bamah unto this day.

20:30 wherefore say unto the house of israel, thus saith the lord god;
are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye
whoredom after their abominations?  20:31 for when ye offer your
gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute
yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall i be
enquired of by you, o house of israel? as i live, saith the lord god,
i will not be enquired of by you.

20:32 and that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that
ye say, we will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries,
to serve wood and stone.

20:33 as i live, saith the lord god, surely with a mighty hand, and
with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will i rule over
you: 20:34 and i will bring you out from the people, and will gather
you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand,
and with a 
 
 ___________________________
 
stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.

20:35 and i will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and
there will i plead with you face to face.

20:36 like as i pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the
land of egypt, so will i plead with you, saith the lord god.

20:37 and i will cause you to pass under the rod, and i will bring you
into the bond of the covenant: 20:38 and i will purge out from among
you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: i will bring them
forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter
into the land of israel: and ye shall know that i am the lord.

20:39 as for you, o house of israel, thus saith the lord god; go ye,
serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not
hearken 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts,
and with your idols.

20:40 for in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of
israel, saith the lord god, there shall all the house of israel, all
of them in the land, serve me: there will i accept them, and there
will i require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations,
with all your holy things.

20:41 i will accept you with your sweet savour, when i bring you out
from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have
been scattered; and i will be sanctified in you before the heathen.

20:42 and ye shall know that i am the lord, when i shall bring you
into the
 
 ___________________________
 
 land of israel, into the country for the which i lifted up
mine hand to give it to your fathers.

20:43 and there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings,
wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your
own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.

20:44 and ye shall know that i am the lord when i have wrought with
you for my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor
according to your corrupt doings, o ye house of israel, saith the lord
god.

20:45 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 20:46 son of
man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the
south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field; 20:47 and
say to the forest of the south, hear the word of the lord; thus saith
the lord god; behold, i will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall
devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame
shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall
be bur
 
 ___________________________
 
ned therein.

20:48 and all flesh shall see that i the lord have kindled it: it
shall not be quenched.

20:49 then said i, ah lord god! they say of me, doth he not speak
parables?  21:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 21:2
son of man, set thy face toward jerusalem, and drop thy word toward
the holy places, and prophesy against the land of israel, 21:3 and say
to the land of israel, thus saith the lord; behold, i am against thee,
and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from
thee the righteous and the wicked.

21:4 seeing then that i will cut off from thee the righteous and the
wi
 
 ___________________________
 
rd out of his sheath: it shall
not return any more.

21:6 sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins;
and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

21:7 and it shall be, when they say unto thee, wherefore sighest thou?
that thou shalt answer, for the tidings; because it cometh: and every
heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit
shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh,
and shall be brought to pass, saith the lord god.

21:8 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 21:9 son of man,
prophesy, and say, thus saith the lord; say, a sword, a sword is
sharpened, and also furbished: 21:10 it is sharpened to make a sore
slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make
mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.

21:11 and he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled:
this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand
of the slayer.

21
 
 ___________________________
 
:12 cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it
shall be upon all the princes of israel: terrors by reason of the
sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh.

21:13 because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the
rod?  it shall be no more, saith the lord god.

21:14 thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands
together. and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of
the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which
entereth into their privy chambers.

21:15 i have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that
their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made
bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.

21:16 go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on t
 
 ___________________________
 
nsulted with images, he looked in the liver.

21:22 at his right hand was the divination for jerusalem, to appoint
captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice
with shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a
mount, and to build a fort.

21:23 and it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight,
to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the
iniquity, that they may be taken.

21:24 therefore thus saith the lord god; because ye have made your
iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered,
so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, i say, that
ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

21:25 and thou, profane wicked prince of israel, whose day is come,
when iniquity shall have an end, 21:26 thus saith the lord god; remove
the diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt
him that is low, and abase him that is high.

21:27
 
 ___________________________
 
 i will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no
more, until he come whose right it is; and i will give it him.

21:28 and thou, son of man, prophesy and say, thus saith the lord god
concerning the ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say
thou, the sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is
furbished, to consume because of the glittering: 21:29 whiles they see
vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee
upon the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is
come, when their iniquity shall have an end.

21:30 shall i cause it to return into his sheath? i will judge thee in
the place where thou wast created, in th
 
 ___________________________
 
ow
against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand
of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.

21:32 thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the
midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for i the lord
have spoken it.

22:1 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 22:2 now,
thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city?
yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.

22:3 then say thou, thus saith the lord god, the city sheddeth blood
in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against
herself to defile herself.

22:4 thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast
defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast
caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years:
therefore have i made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking
to all countries.

22:5 those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock
thee, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e have they discovered their fathers' nakedness: in thee
have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.

22:11 and one hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife;
and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in
thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.

22:12 in thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken
usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by
extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the lord god.

22:13 behold, therefore i have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain
which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of
thee.

22:14 can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the
days that i shall deal with thee? i the lord have spoken it, and will
do it.

22:15 and i will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in
the countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.

22:16 and thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he sight of
the heathen, and thou shalt know that i am the lord.

22:17 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 22:18 son of man,
the house of israel is to me become dross: all they are brass, and
tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even
the dross of silver.

22:19 therefore thus saith the lord god; because ye are all become
dross, behold, therefore i will gather you into the midst of
jerusalem.

22:20 as they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin,
into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it;
so will i gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and i will leave
you there, and melt you.

22:21 yea, i will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my
wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst therof.

22:22 as silver is melted in the mids
 
 ___________________________
 
ine holy
things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean,
and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and i am profaned among
them.

22:27 her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the
prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.

22:28 and her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing
vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, thus saith the lord god,
when the lord hath not spoken.

22:29 the people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed
the stranger wrongfully.

22:30 and i sought for a man among them, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that i should not
destroy it: but i found none.

22:31 therefore have i poured out mine indignation upon them; i have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have
 
 ___________________________
 
 i
recompensed upon their heads, saith the lord god.

23:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 23:2 son of man,
there were two women, the daughters of one mother: 23:3 and they
committed whoredoms in egypt; they committed whoredoms in their youth:
there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of
their virginity.

23:4 and the names of them were aholah the elder, and aholibah her
sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. thus
were their names; samaria is aholah, and jerusalem aholiba
 
 ___________________________
 
was alienated
from her sister.

23:19 yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the
days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of
egypt.

23:20 for she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh
of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.

23:21 thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in
bruising thy teats by the egyptians for the paps of thy youth.

23:22 therefore, o aholibah, thus saith the lord god; behold, i will
raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and
i will bring them against thee on every side; 23:23 the babylonians,
and all the chaldeans, pekod, and shoa, and koa, and all the assyrians
with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great
lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.

23:24 and they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and
wheels, and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee
buck
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and
thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy
daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.

23:26 they shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy
fair jewels.

23:27 thus will i make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy
whoredom brought from the land of egypt: so that thou shalt not lift
up thine eyes unto them, nor remember egypt any more.

23:28 for thus saith the lord god; behold, i will deliver thee into
the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy
mind is alienated: 23:29 and they shall deal with thee hatefully, and
shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare:
and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms.

23:30 i will do these things unto thee, because thou hast gone a
whoring after the heathen, and because thou art polluted with their
idols.

23:31 tho
 
 ___________________________
 
u hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will i give
her cup into thine hand.

23:32 thus saith the lord god; thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup
deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it
containeth much.

23:33 thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup
of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister samaria.

23:34 thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break
the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for i have spoken
it, saith the lord god.

23:35 therefore thus saith the lord god; because thou hast
 
 ___________________________
 


23:43 then said i unto her that was old in adulteries, will they now
commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?  23:44 yet they went in
unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went
they in unto aholah and unto aholibah, the lewd women.

23:45 and the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of
adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because
they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

23:46 for thus saith the lord god; i will bring up a company upon
them, and will give them to be removed and spoiled.

23:47 and the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them
with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and
burn up their houses with fire.

23:48 thus will i cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all
women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

23:49 and they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall
bear the sins of your idols: and ye shal
 
 ___________________________
 
l know that i am the lord god.

24:1 again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of
the month, the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:2 son of man,
write thee the name of the day, even of this same day: the king of
babylon set himself against jerusalem this same day.

24:3 and utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them,
thus saith the lord god; set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water
into it: 24:4 gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good
piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

24:5 take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it,
and make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.

24:6 wherefore thus saith the lord god; woe to the bloody city, to the
pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring
it out piece by piece; let no l
 
 ___________________________
 
ot fall upon it.

24:7 for her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of
a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 24:8
that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; i have set her
blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

24:9 therefore thus saith the lord god; woe to the bloody city! i will
even make the pile for fire great.

24:10 heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it
well, and let the bones be burned.

24:11 then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it
may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten
in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

24:12 she hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not
forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

24:13 in 
 
 ___________________________
 
thy filthiness is lewdness: because i have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any
more, till i have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

24:14 i the lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and i will do
it; i will not go back, neither will i spare, neither will i repent;
according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge
thee, saith the lord god.

24:15 also the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:16 son of
man, behold, i take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a
stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears
run down.

24:17 forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of
thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover
not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

24:18 so i spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife
died; and i did i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the morning as i was commanded.

24:19 and the people said unto me, wilt thou not tell us what these
things are to us, that thou doest so?  24:20 then i answered them, the
word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:21 speak unto the house of
israel, thus saith the lord god; behold, i will profane my sanctuary,
the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that
which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have
left shall fall by the sword.

24:22 and ye shall do as i have done: ye shall not cover your lips,
nor eat the bread of men.

24:23 and your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon
your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for
your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

24:
 
 ___________________________
 
24 thus ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath
done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that i am the
lord god.

24:25 also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when i take
from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their
eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their
daughters, 24:26 that he that escapeth in that day shall come unto
thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?  24:27 in that day
shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt
speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and
they shall kno
 
 ___________________________
 
w that i am the lord.

25:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 25:2 son of man,
set thy face against the ammonites, and prophesy against them; 25:3
and say unto the ammonites, hear the word of the lord god; thus saith
the lord god; because thou saidst, aha, against my sanctuary, when it
was profaned; and against the land of israel, when it was desolate;
and against the house of judah, when they went into captivity; 25:4
behold, therefore i will deliver thee to the men of the east for a
possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their
dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy
milk.

25:5 and i will make rabbah a stable for camels, and the ammonites a
couching place 
 
 ___________________________
 
for flocks: and ye shall know that i am the lord.

25:6 for thus saith the lord god; because thou hast clapped thine
hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy
despite against the land of israel; 25:7 behold, therefore i will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to
the heathen; and i will cut thee off from the people, and i will cause
thee to perish out of the countries: i will destroy thee; and thou
shalt know that i am the lord.

25:8 thus saith the lord god; because that moab and seir do say,
behold, the house
 
 ___________________________
 
 of judah is like unto all the heathen; 25:9
therefore, behold, i will open the side of moab from the cities, from
his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country,
bethjeshimoth, baalmeon, and kiriathaim, 25:10 unto the men of the
east with the ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the
ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.

25:11 and i will execute judgments upon moab; and they shall know that
i am the lord.

25:12 thus saith the lord god; because that edom hath dealt against
the house of judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and
revenged himself upon them; 25:13 therefore thus saith the lord god; i
will also stretch out mine hand upon edom, and will cut off man and
beast from it; and i will make it desolate from teman; and they of
dedan shall fall by the sword.

25:14 and i will lay my vengeance upon edom by the hand of my people
israel: and they shall do in edom according to mine anger and
according to
 
 ___________________________
 
 my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the lord
god.

25:15 thus saith the lord god; because the philistines have dealt by
revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy
it for the old hatred; 25:16 therefore thus saith the lord god;
behold, i will stretch out mine hand upon the philistines, and i will
cut off the cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

25:17 and i will execute great vengeance upon them with furious
rebukes; and they shall know that i am the lord, when i shall lay my
vengeance upon them.

26:1 and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 26:2 son of
man, because that tyrus hath said against jerusalem, aha, 
 
 ___________________________
 
she is
broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: i
shall be replenished, now she is laid waste: 26:3 therefore thus saith
the lord god; behold, i am against thee, o tyrus, and will cause many
nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come
up.

26:4 and they shall destroy the walls of tyrus, and break down her
towers: i will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the
top of a rock.

26:5 it shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the
sea: for i have spoken it, saith the lord god: and it shall become a
spoil to the nations.

26:6 and her daughters which are in the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ield shall be slain by the
sword; and they shall know that i am the lord.

26:7 for thus saith the lord god; behold, i will bring upon tyrus
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
people.

26:8 he shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he
shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and
lift up the buckler against thee.

26:9 and he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his
axes he shall break down thy towers.

26:10 by reason of the abun
 
 ___________________________
 
spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of
thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy
pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy
dust in the midst of the water.

26:13 and i will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound
of thy harps shall be no more heard.

26:14 and i will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a
place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for i the lord
have spoken it, saith the lord god.

26:15 thus saith the lord god to tyrus; shall not the isles shake at
the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is
made in the midst of thee?  26:16 then all the princes of the sea
shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put
off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with
trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every
moment, and be astonished at thee.

26:17 and they shall take up a lamentation fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r thee, and say to thee,
how art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the
renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants,
which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!  26:18 now shall
the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in
the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.

26:19 for thus saith the lord god; when i shall make thee a desolate
city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when i shall bring up
the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee; 26:20 when i
shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the
people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth,
in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that
thou be not inhabited; and i shall set glory in the land of the
living; 26:21 i will make thee a terror, and thou sh
 
 ___________________________
 
alt be no more:
though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith
the lord god.

27:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 27:2 now, thou
son of man, take up a lamentation for tyrus; 27:3 and say unto tyrus,
o thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant
of the people for many isles, thus saith the lord god; o tyrus, thou
hast said, i am of perfect beauty.

27:4 thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have
perfected thy beauty.

27:5 they have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of senir: they
have taken cedars from lebanon to make masts for thee.

27:6 of the oaks of bashan have they made thine oars; the company of
the ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles
of chittim.

27:7 fine linen with broidered work from egypt was that which thou
sp
 
 ___________________________
 
 seas in the depths
of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee
shall fall.

27:35 all the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee,
and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their
countenance.

27:36 the merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be
a terror, and never shalt be any more.

28:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 28:2 son of man,
say unto the prince of tyrus, thus saith the lord god; because thine
heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, i am a god, i sit in the seat
of god, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not god,
though thou set thine heart as the heart of god: 28:3 behold, thou art
wiser than daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:
28:4 with thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten
thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures: 28:5
by thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy
 
 ___________________________
 

riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: 28:6
therefore thus saith the lord god; because thou hast set thine heart
as the heart of god; 28:7 behold, therefore i will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their
swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy
brightness.

28:8 they shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the
deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

28:9 wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, i am god? but
thou shalt be a man, and no god, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

28:10 thou shalt die the deaths 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the uncircumcised by the hand of
strangers: for i have spoken it, saith the lord god.

28:11 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 28:12 son of
man, take up a lamentation upon the king of tyrus, and say unto him,
thus saith the lord god; thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty.

28:13 thou hast been in eden the garden of god; every precious stone
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle,
and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared
in thee in the day that thou wast created.

28:14 thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and i have set thee
so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of god; thou hast walked up and
down in the midst of the stones of fire.

28:15 thou wast perfect in thy wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ys from the day that thou wast
created, till iniquity was found in thee.

28:16 by the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst
of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore i will cast
thee as profane out of the mountain of god: and i will destroy thee, o
covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

28:17 thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: i will cast thee to
the ground, i will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.

28:18 thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will i bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that
behold thee.

28:19 all they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at
thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.

28:20 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 28:21 son of
man, set thy face against zidon, and prophesy against it, 28:22 and
say, thus saith the lord god; behold, i am against thee, o zidon; and
i will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that i
am the lord, when i shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be
sanctified in her.

28:23 for i will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets;
and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon
her on every side; and they shall know that i am the lord.

28:24 and there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
israel, nor any gri
 
 ___________________________
 
eving thorn of all that are round about them, that
despised them; and they shall know that i am the lord god.

28:25 thus saith the lord god; when i shall have gathered the house of
israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be
sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
in their land that i have given to my servant jacob.

28:26 and they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when i have
executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them;
and they shall know that i am the lord their god.
 
 ___________________________
 


29:1 in the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 29:2 son of man, set
thy face against pharaoh king of egypt, and prophesy against him, and
against all egypt: 29:3 speak, and say, thus saith the lord god;
behold, i am against thee, pharaoh king of egypt, the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, my river is
mine own, and i have made it for myself.

29:4 but i will put hooks in thy jaws, and i will cause the fish of
thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and i will bring thee up out of
the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick
unto thy scales.

29:5 and i will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all
the fish of thy riv
 
 ___________________________
 
hou
shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: i have given thee for
meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.

29:6 and all the inhabitants of egypt shall know that i am the lord,
because they have been a staff of reed to the house of israel.

29:7 when they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and
rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest,
and madest all their loins to be at a stand.

29:8 therefore thus saith the lord god; behold, i will bring a sword
upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

29:9 and the land of egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall
know that i am the lord: because he hath said, the river is mine, and
i have made it.

29:10 behold, therefore i am against thee, and against thy rivers, and
i will make the land of egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the
tower of syene even unto the border of ethiopia.

29:11 no foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall
pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.

29:12 and i will make the land of egypt desolate in the midst of the
countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are
laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and i will scatter the
egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the
countries.

29:13 yet thus saith the lord god; at the end of forty years will i
gather the egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:
29:14 and i will bring again the captivity of egypt, and will cause
them to return into the land of pathros, into the land of their
habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

29:15 it shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt
itself any more above the nations: for i will diminish them, that they
shall no more rule over the nations.

29:16 and it shall be no m
 
 ___________________________
 
ore the confidence of the house of israel,
which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look
after them: but they shall know that i am the lord god.

29:17 and it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the
first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the lord came
unto me, saying, 29:18 son of man, nebuchadrezzar king of babylon
caused his army to serve a great service against tyrus: every head was
made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his
army, for tyrus, for the service that he had served against it: 29:19
therefore thus saith the lord god; behold, i will give the land of
egypt u
 
 ___________________________
 
nto nebuchadrezzar king of babylon; and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the
wages for his army.

29:20 i have given him the land of egypt for his labour wherewith he
served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the lord god.

29:21 in that day will i cause the horn of the house of israel to bud
forth, and i will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of
them; and they shall know that i am the lord.

30:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 30:2 son of man,
prophesy and say, thus saith the lord god; howl ye, woe worth the day!
30:3 for the day is near, even the day of the lord is near, a cloudy
day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

30:4 and the sword shall come upon egypt, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
reat pain shall be in
ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in egypt, and they shall take away
her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

30:5 ethiopia, and libya, and lydia, and all the mingled people, and
chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them
by the sword.

30:6 thus saith the lord; they also that uphold egypt shall fall; and
the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of syene shall
they fall in it by the sword, saith the lord god.

30:7 and they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are
wasted.

30:8 and they shall know that i am the lord, when i have set a fire in
egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

30:9 in that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make
the careless ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them,
as in the day of egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

30:10 thus saith the lord go
 
 ___________________________
 
ke the multitude of egypt
to cease by the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon.

30:11 he and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall
be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords
against egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

30:12 and i will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand
of the wicked: and i will make the land waste, and all that is
therein, by the hand of strangers: i the lord have spoken it.

30:13 thus saith the lord god; i will also destroy the idols, and i
will cause their images to cease out of noph; and there shall be no
more a prince of the land of egypt: and i will put a fear in the land
of egypt.

30:14 and i will make pathros desolate, and will set fire in zoan, and
will execute judgments in no.

30:15 and i will pour my fury upon sin, the strength of egypt; and i
will cut off the multitude of no.

30:16 and i will set fire in egypt: sin shall have great pain, and no
shall be rent asunder, a
 
 ___________________________
 
daughters
shall go into captivity.

30:19 thus will i execute judgments in egypt: and they shall know that
i am the lord.

30:20 and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in
the seventh day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me,
saying, 30:21 son of man, i have broken the arm of pharaoh king of
egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller
to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

30:22 therefore thus saith the lord god; behold, i am against pharaoh
king of egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was
broken; and i will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.

30:23 and i will scatter the egyptians among the nations, and will
disperse them through the countries.

30:24 and i will strengthen the arms of the king of babylon, and put
my sword in his hand: but i will break pharaoh's arms, and he shall
groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.

30:25 but i will stren
 
 ___________________________
 
s exalted above all the trees of the
field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long
because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

31:6 all the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under
his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young,
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.

31:7 thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches:
for his root was by great waters.

31:8 the cedars in the garden of god could not hide him: the fir trees
were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees were not like his
branches; nor any tree in the garden of god was like unto him in his
beauty.

31:9 i have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that
all the trees of eden, that were in the garden of god, envied him.

31:10 therefore thus saith the lord god; because thou hast lifted up
thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs,
and his heart is lifted up in his 
 
 ___________________________
 
 ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all
the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches: 31:14 to the end
that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their
height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither
their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they
are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the
midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

31:15 thus saith the lord god; in the day when he went down to the
grave i caused a mourning: i covered the deep for him, and i
restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and i
caused lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

31:16 i made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when i
cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the
trees of eden, the choice and best of lebanon, all that drink water,
shall be comforted in the nether
 
 ___________________________
 
h.

31:17 they also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain
with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen.

31:18 to whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the
trees of eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of eden
unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the
uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. this is pharaoh
and all his multitude, saith the lord god.

32:1 and it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in
the first day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me,
saying, 32:2 son of man, take up a lamentation for pharaoh king of
egypt, and say unto him, thou art like a young lion of the nations,
and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy
rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their
rivers.

32:3 thus saith the lord god; i will therefore spread out my net ove
 
 ___________________________
 
ll lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
with thy height.

32:6 i will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest,
even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.

32:7 and when i shall put thee out, i will cover the heaven, and make
the stars thereof dark; i will cover the sun with a cloud, and the
moon shall not give her light.

32:8 all the bright lights of heaven will i make dark over thee, and
set darkness upon thy land, saith the lord god.

32:9 i will also vex the hearts of many people, when i shall bring thy
destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not
known.

32:10 yea, i will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings
shall be horribly afraid for thee, when i shall brandish my sword
before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his
own life, in the day of thy fall.

32:11 for thus saith the lord god; the sword of the king of babylon
shall come upon thee.

32:1
 
 ___________________________
 
2 by the swords of the mighty will i cause thy multitude to fall,
the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the
pomp of egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

32:13 i will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great
waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the
hoofs of beasts trouble them.

32:14 then will i make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to
run like oil, saith the lord god.

32:15 when i shall make the land of egypt desolate, and the country
shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when i shall smite all
them that dwell therein, then shall they know that i am the lord.

32:16 this is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the
daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her,
even for egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the lord god.

32:17 it came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day
of the mon
 
 ___________________________
 
th the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

32:30 there be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the
zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they
are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that
be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to
the pit.

32:31 pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his
multitude, even pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the
lord god.

32:32 for i have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he
shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are
slain with the sword, even pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the
lord god.

33:1 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 33:2 son of man,
speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, when i bring
the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their
coasts, and set him for their watchman: 33:3 if when he seeth th
 
 ___________________________
 
 wicked
man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will i require at thine
hand.

33:9 nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it;
if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
hast delivered thy soul.

33:10 therefore, o thou son of man, speak unto the house of israel;
thus ye speak, saying, if our transgressions and our sins be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how should we then live?  33:11 say unto
them, as i live, saith the lord god, i have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, o house of
israel?  33:12 therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of
thy people, the righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him
in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked,
he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his
wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live f
 
 ___________________________
 
:22 now the hand of the lord was upon me in the evening, afore he
that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in
the morning; and my mouth was opened, and i was no more dumb.

33:23 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 33:24 son of
man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of israel speak,
saying, abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many;
the land is given us for inheritance.

33:25 wherefore say unto them, thus saith the lord god; ye eat with
the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood:
and shall ye possess the land?  33:26 ye stand upon your sword, ye
work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and
shall ye possess the land?  33:27 say thou thus unto them, thus saith
the lord god; as i live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall
by the sword, and him that is in the open field will i give to the
beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the cave
 
 ___________________________
 
eart
goeth after their covetousness.

33:32 and, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they
hear thy words, but they do them not.

33:33 and when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall
they know that a prophet hath been among them.

34:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 34:2 son of man,
prophesy against the shepherds of israel, prophesy, and say unto them,
thus saith the lord god unto the shepherds; woe be to the shepherds of
israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the
flocks?  34:3 ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill
them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

34:4 the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed
that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought that which was lost; but with force and wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h cruelty have ye
ruled them.

34:5 and they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they
became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

34:6 my sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high
hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and
none did search or seek after them.

34:7 therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the lord; 34:8 as i
live, saith the lord god, surely because my flock became a prey, and
my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no
shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the
shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock; 34:9 therefore, o ye
shepherds, hear the word of the lord; 34:10 thus saith the lord god;
behold, i am against the shepherds; and i will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither
shall the shepherds feed themselves any 
 
 ___________________________
 
more; for i will deliver my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

34:11 for thus saith the lord god; behold, i, even i, will both search
my sheep, and seek them out.

34:12 as a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among
his sheep that are scattered; so will i seek out my sheep, and will
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the
cloudy and dark day.

34:13 and i will bring them out from the people, and gather them from
the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountains of israel by the rivers, and in all 
 
 ___________________________
 
the inhabited
places of the country.

34:14 i will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains
of israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of israel.

34:15 i will feed my flock, and i will cause them to lie down, saith
the lord god.

34:16 i will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick: but i will destroy the fat and the
strong; i will feed them with judgment.

34:17 and as for you, o my flock, thus saith the lord god; behold, i
judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.

34:18 seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good
pasture, but ye must tread down with your 
 
 ___________________________
 
feet the residue of your
pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the
residue with your feet?  34:19 and as for my flock, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
have fouled with your feet.

34:20 therefore thus saith the lord god unto them; behold, i, even i,
will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

34:21 because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
34:22 therefore will i save my flock, and they shall no more be a
prey; and i will judge between cattle and cattle.

34:23 and i will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant david; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
sh
 
 ___________________________
 
epherd.

34:24 and i the lord will be their god, and my servant david a prince
among them; i the lord have spoken it.

34:25 and i will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause
the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely
in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

34:26 and i will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing; and i will cause the shower to come down in his season;
there shall be showers of blessing.

34:27 and the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth
 
 ___________________________
 
broken the bands of their
yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served
themselves of them.

34:28 and they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall
the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and
none shall make them afraid.

34:29 and i will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall
be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of
the heathen any more.

34:30 thus shall they know that i the lord their god am with them, and
that they, even the house of israel, are my people, saith the lord
god.

34:31 and ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and i am your
god, saith the lord god.

35:1 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 35:2 son of
man, set thy face against mount seir, and prophesy against it, 35:3
and say unto it, thus saith the lord god; behold, o mount seir, i am
against thee, and i will stretch out mine hand against thee, and i
will make thee most desolat
 
 ___________________________
 
e.

35:4 i will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou
shalt know that i am the lord.

35:5 because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood
of the children of israel by the force of the sword in the time of
their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end: 35:6
therefore, as i live, saith the lord god, i will prepare thee unto
blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood,
even blood shall pursue thee.

35:7 thus will i make mount seir most desolate, and cut off from it
him that passeth out and him that returneth.

35:8 and i will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills,
and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are
slain with the sword.

35:9 i will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not
return: and ye sha
 
 ___________________________
 
ll know that i am the lord.

35:10 because thou hast said, these two nations and these two
countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the lord was
there: 35:11 therefore, as i live, saith the lord god, i will even do
according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast
used out of thy hatred against them; and i will make myself known
among them, when i have judged thee.

35:12 and thou shalt know that i am the lord, and that i have heard
all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of
israel, saying, they are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

35:13 thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have
multiplied your words agains
 
 ___________________________
 
t me: i have heard them.

35:14 thus saith the lord god; when the whole earth rejoiceth, i will
make thee desolate.

35:15 as thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of israel,
because it was desolate, so will i do unto thee: thou shalt be
desolate, o mount seir, and all idumea, even all of it: and they shall
know that i am the lord.

36:1 also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of israel, and
say, ye mountains of israel, hear the word of the lord: 36:2 thus
saith the lord god; because the enemy hath said against you,
 
 ___________________________
 
 aha, even
the ancient high places are ours in possession: 36:3 therefore
prophesy and say, thus saith the lord god; because they have made you
desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a
possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the
lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people: 36:4 therefore, ye
mountains of israel, hear the word of the lord god; thus saith the
lord god to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken,
which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that
are round about; 36:5 therefore thus saith the lord god; surely in the
fire of my jealousy have i spoken against the residue of the heathen,
and against all idumea, which have appointed my land into their
possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to
cast it out for a
 
 ___________________________
 
 prey.

36:6 prophesy therefore concerning the land of israel, and say unto
the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys,
thus saith the lord god; behold, i have spoken in my jealousy and in
my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen: 36:7
therefore thus saith the lord god; i have lifted up mine hand, surely
the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

36:8 but ye, o mountains of israel, ye shall shoot forth your
branches, and yield your fruit to my people of israel; for they are at
hand to come.

36:9 for, behold, i am for you, and i will turn unto you, and ye shall
be tilled and sown: 36:10 and i will multiply men upon you, all the
house of israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be builded: 36:
 
 ___________________________
 
11 and i will multiply upon you
man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and i will
settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at
your beginnings: and ye shall know that i am the lord.

36:12 yea, i will cause men to walk upon you, even my people israel;
and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and
thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.

36:13 thus saith the lord god; because they say unto you, thou land
devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations: 36:14 therefore thou
shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith
the lord god.

36:15 neither will i cause men to hear in thee the shame of the
heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people
any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith
the lord god.

36:16 moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 36:17 son of
man, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and they were
dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according
to their doings i judged them.

36:20 and when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they
profaned my holy name, when they said to them, these are the people of
the lord, and are gone forth out of his land.

36:21 but i had pity for mine holy name, which the house of israel had
profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

36:22 therefore say unto the house of israel, thus saith the lord god;
i do not this for your sakes, o house of israel, but for mine holy
name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye
went.

36:23 and i will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the
heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen
shall know that i am the lord, saith the lord god, when i shall be
sanctified in you before their eyes.

36:24 for i will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out
of all countries, and will bring 
 
 ___________________________
 
: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will i
cleanse you.

36:26 a new heart also will i give you, and a new spirit will i put
within you: and i will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and i will give you an heart of flesh.

36:27 and i will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

36:28 and ye shall dwell in the land that i gave to your fathers; and
ye shall be my people, and i will be your god.

36:29 i will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and i will
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

36:30 and i will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the
heathen.

36:31 then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your
iniquities and for your abominations.

36:32 not for your s
 
 ___________________________
 
akes do i this, saith the lord god, be it known
unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, o house of
israel.

36:33 thus saith the lord god; in the day that i shall have cleansed
you from all your iniquities i will also cause you to dwell in the
cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

36:34 and the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate
in the sight of all that passed by.

36:35 and they shall say, this land that was desolate is become like
the garden of eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are
become fenced, and are inhabited.

36:36 then the heathen that are left round about you shall kn
 
 ___________________________
 
ow that i
the lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: i
the lord have spoken it, and i will do it.

36:37 thus saith the lord god; i will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of israel, to do it for them; i will increase them with men
like a flock.

36:38 as the holy flock, as the flock of jerusalem in her solemn
feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and
they shall know that i am the lord.

37:1 the hand of the lord was upon me, and carried me out in the
spirit of the lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which
was full of bones, 37:2 and caused me to pass by them round a
 
 ___________________________
 
bout:
and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they
were very dry.

37:3 and he said unto me, son of man, can these bones live? and i
answered, o lord god, thou knowest.

37:4 again he said unto me, prophesy upon these bones, and say unto
them, o ye dry bones, hear the word of the lord.

37:5 thus saith the lord god unto these bones; behold, i will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live: 37:6 and i will lay
sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that
i am the lord.

37:7 so i prophesied as i was commanded: and as i prophesied, there
was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone
to his bone.

37:8 and when i beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in
them.

37:9 then said he unto me, prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of
man, and say to the wind, thus saith the lord god; come from the four
winds, o breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

37:10 so i prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great
army.

37:11 then he said unto me, son of man, these bones are the whole
house of israel: behold, they say, our bones are dried, and our hope
is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

37:12 therefore prophesy and say unto them, thus saith the lord god;
behold, o 
 
 ___________________________
 
on of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for judah,
and for the children of israel his companions: then take another
stick, and write upon it, for joseph, the stick of ephraim and for all
the house of israel his companions: 37:17 and join them one to another
into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

37:18 and when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?  37:19 say
unto them, thus saith the lord god; behold, i will take the stick of
joseph, which is in the hand of ephraim, and the tribes of israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of judah, and
make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

37:20 and the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand
before their eyes.

37:21 and say unto them, thus saith the lord god; behold, i will take
the children of israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone,
and will gather them on every si
 
 ___________________________
 
one nation in the land upon the
mountains of israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two
kingdoms any more at all.

37:23 neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions: but i will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and i will be their god.

37:24 and david my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
my statutes, and do them.

37:25 and they shall dwell in the land that i have given unto jacob my
servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children
for ever: and my servant david shall be their prince for ever.

37:26 moreover i will make a covenant of peace with
 
 ___________________________
 
 them; it shall be
an everlasting covenant with them: and i will place them, and multiply
them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

37:27 my tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, i will be their god,
and they shall be my people.

37:28 and the heathen shall know that i the lord do sanctify israel,
when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

38:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 38:2 son of man,
set thy face against gog, the land of magog, the chief prince of
meshech and tubal, and prophesy against him, 38:3 and say, thus saith
the lord god; behold, i am against thee, o gog, the chief prince of
meshech and tubal: 38:4 and i will turn thee back, and
 
 ___________________________
 


38:8 after many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou
shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is
gathered out of many people, against the mountains of israel, which
have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations,
and they shall dwell safely all of them.

38:9 thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a
cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with
thee.

38:10 thus saith the lord god; it shall also come to pass, that at the
same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an
evil thought: 38:11 and thou shalt say, i will go up to the land of
unwalled villages; i will go to them that are at rest, that dwell
safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars
nor gates, 38:12 to take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine
hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the
people that are gathered out of the nations, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich have gotten cattle
and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

38:13 sheba, and dedan, and the merchants of tarshish, with all the
young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, art thou come to take a
spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away
silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?
38:14 therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto gog, thus saith the
lord god; in that day when my people of israel dwelleth safely, shalt
thou not know it?  38:15 and thou shalt come from thy place out of the
north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon
horses, a great company, and a mighty army: 38:16 and thou shalt come
up against my people of israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall
be in the latter days, and i will bring thee against my land, that the
heathen may know me, when i shall be sanctified in thee, o gog, before
their e
 
 ___________________________
 
yes.

38:17 thus saith the lord god; art thou he of whom i have spoken in
old time by my servants the prophets of israel, which prophesied in
those days many years that i would bring thee against them?  38:18 and
it shall come to pass at the same time when gog shall come against the
land of israel, saith the lord god, that my fury shall come up in my
face.

38:19 for in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have i spoken,
surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of
israel; 38:20 so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the
heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the
earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and ever
 
 ___________________________
 
y wall shall fall to
the ground.

38:21 and i will call for a sword against him throughout all my
mountains, saith the lord god: every man's sword shall be against his
brother.

38:22 and i will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and
i will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people
that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire,
and brimstone.

38:23 thus will i magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and i will be
known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that i am the
lord.

39:1 therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against gog, and say, thus

 
 ___________________________
 
saith the lord god; behold, i am against thee, o gog, the chief prince
of meshech and tubal: 39:2 and i will turn thee back, and leave but
the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north
parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of israel: 39:3 and i
will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows
to fall out of thy right hand.

39:4 thou shalt fall upon the mountains of israel, thou, and all thy
bands, and the people that is with thee: i will give thee unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be
devoured.

39:5 thou shalt fall upon the open field: for i have spoken it, saith
the lord god.

39:6 and i will send a fire on magog, and among them that dwell
carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that i am the lord.

39:7 so will i make my holy name known in the midst of my people
israel; and i will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the
heathen shall know that i am the lord, the holy one in israel.

39:8 behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the lord god; this is
the day whereof i have spoken.

39:9 and they that dwell in the cities of israel shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 go forth, and
shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the
bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears,
and they shall burn them with fire seven years: 39:10 so that they
shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the
forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall
spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith
the lord god.

39:11 and it shall come to pass in that day, that i will give unto gog
a place there of graves in israel, the valley of the passengers on the
east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and
there shall they bury gog and all his multitude: and they shall call
it the valley of hamongog.

39:12 and seven months shall the house of israel be burying of them,
that they may cleanse the land.

39:13 yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be
to th
 
 ___________________________
 
em a renown the day that i shall be glorified, saith the lord
god.

39:14 and they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing
through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon
the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months
shall they search.

39:15 and the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a
man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have
buried it in the valley of hamongog.

39:16 and also the name of the city shall be hamonah. thus shall they
cleanse the la
 
 ___________________________
 
nd.

39:17 and, thou son of man, thus saith the lord god; speak unto every
feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, assemble yourselves,
and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that i do
sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of
israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

39:18 ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks,
all of them fatlings of bashan.

39:19 and ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
drink blood till ye be
drunken, of my sacrifice which i have sacrificed for you.

39:20 thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots,
with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the lord god.

39:21 and i will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen
shall see my judgment that i have executed, and my hand that i have
laid upon them.

39:22 so the house of israel shall know that i am the lord their god
from that day and forward.

39:23 and the heathen shall know that the house of israel went into
captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me,
therefore hid i my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

39:24 according to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions have i done unto them, and hid my face from them.

39:25 therefore thus saith the lord god; now will i bring again the
captivity of jacob
 
 ___________________________
 
, and have mercy upon the whole house of israel, and
will be jealous for my holy name; 39:26 after that they have borne
their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed
against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them
afraid.

39:27 when i have brought them again from the people, and gathered
them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the
sight of many nations; 39:28 then shall they know that i am the lord
their god, which caused them to be led into captivity among the
heathen: but i have gathered them unto their own land, and have left
none of them any more there.

39:29 neither will i hide my face any more from them: for i have
poured out my spirit upon the house of israel, saith the lord god.

40:1 in the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning
of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year
after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
lord was upon me, and brought me thither.

40:2 in the visions of god brought he me into the land of israel, and
set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city
on the south.

40:3 and he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose
appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in
his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.

40:4 and the man said unto me, son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that i shall shew
thee; for to the intent th
 
 ___________________________
 
ut.

42:18 he measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed.

42:19 he turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred
reeds with the measuring reed.

42:20 he measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about,
five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation
between the sanctuary and the profane place.

43:1 afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh
toward the east: 43:2 and, behold, the glory of the god of israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many
waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

43:3 and it was according to the appearance of the vision which i saw,
even according to the vision that i saw when i came to destroy the
city: and the visions were like the vision that i saw by the river
chebar; and i fell upon my face.

43:4 and the glory of the lord came into the house by the way of the
gate whose prospect is toward the east.

43:5 so the 
 
 ___________________________
 
43:15 so the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
shall be four horns.

43:16 and the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square
in the four squares thereof.

43:17 and the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad
in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs
shall look toward the east.

43:18 and he said unto me, son of man, thus saith the lord god; these
are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

43:19 and thou shalt give to the priests the levites that be of the
seed of zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the
lord god, a young bullock for a sin offering.

43:20 and thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the
border round about: thus sh
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord.

43:25 seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin
offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of
the flock, without blemish.

43:26 seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they
shall consecrate themselves.

43:27 and when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the
eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt
offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and i will accept
you, saith the lord god.

44:1 then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.

44:2 then said the lord unto me; this gate shall be shut, it shall not
be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the lord, the god
of israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

44:3 it is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
before the lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
and shall go out b
 
 ___________________________
 
oked, and, behold, the glory of the lord filled the house of
the lord: and i fell upon my face.

44:5 and the lord said unto me, son of man, mark well, and behold with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that i say unto thee
concerning all the ordinances of the house of the lord, and all the
laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every
going forth of the sanctuary.

44:6 and thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of
israel, thus saith the lord god; o ye house of israel, let it suffice
you of all your abominations, 44:7 in that ye have brought into my
sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye
offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my
covenant because of all your abominations.

44:8 and ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have
set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.

44:9 thus saith
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord god; no stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger
that is among the children of israel.

44:10 and the levites that are gone away far from me, when israel went
astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall
even bear their iniquity.

44:11 yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at
the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay
the burnt offering and the sacri
 
 ___________________________
 
fice for the people, and they shall
stand before them to minister unto them.

44:12 because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused
the house of israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have i lifted up
mine hand against them, saith the lord god, and they shall bear their
iniquity.

44:13 and they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a
priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most
holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations
which they have committed.

44:14 but i will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all
the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

44:15 but the priests the levites, the sons of zadok, that kept the
charge of my sa
 
 ___________________________
 
nctuary when the children of israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the lord
god: 44:16 they shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come
near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

44:17 and it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates
of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no
wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the
inner court, and within.

44:18 they shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have
linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird 
 
 ___________________________
 
l mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

44:25 and they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but
for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother,
or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.

44:26 and after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

44:27 and in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner
court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering,
saith the lord god.

44:28 and it shall be unto them for an inheritance: i am their
inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in israel: i am
their possession.

44:29 they shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the
trespass offering: and every dedicated thing in israel shall be
theirs.

44:30 and the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every
oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the
priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the possession
of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the
possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east
side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the
portions, from the west border unto the east border.

45:8 in the land shall be his possession in israel: and my princes
shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they
give to the house of israel according to their tribes.

45:9 thus saith the lord god; let it suffice you, o princes of israel:
remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away
your exactions from my people, saith the lord god.

45:10 ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.

45:11 the ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath
may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part
of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.

45:12 and the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shek
 
 ___________________________
 
 part of an
ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of barley: 45:14 concerning the ordinance of oil,
the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the
cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer: 45:15
and one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat
pastures of israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and
for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the lord
god.

45:16 all the people of the land shall give this oblation for the
prince in israel.

45:17 and it shall be the prince's part to give burnt offerings, and
meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new
moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of israel:
he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the
burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for
the house of israel.

45:18 thus saith the lord god; in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 rams without blemish daily the
seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.

45:24 and he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock,
and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

45:25 in the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall
he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin
offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat
offering, and according to the oil.

46:1 thus saith the lord god; the gate of the inner court that looketh
toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath
it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

46:2 and the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests
shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall
worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the
gate shall not be shut until t
 
 ___________________________
 
 offering unto the lord of a
lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every
morning.

46:14 and thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the
sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper
with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual
ordinance unto the lord.

46:15 thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the
oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.

46:16 thus saith the lord god; if the prince give a gift unto any of
his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be
their possession by inheritance.

46:17 but if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants,
then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to
the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.

46:18 moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance
by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall
give his s
 
 ___________________________
 
miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not
be healed; they shall be given to salt.

47:12 and by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that
side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade,
neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
thereof for medicine.

47:13 thus saith the lord god; this shall be the border, whereby ye
shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of israel:
joseph shall have two portions.

47:14 and ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the
which i lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this
land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

47:15 and this shall be the border of the land toward the north side,
from the great sea, the way of hethlon, as men go to zedad; 47:16
hamath, berothah, sibraim, which is b
 
 ___________________________
 
cording to the tribes of
israel.

47:22 and it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an
inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you,
which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as
born in the country among the children of israel; they shall have
inheritance with you among the tribes of israel.

47:23 and it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger
sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the lord
god.

48:1 now these are the names of the tribes. from the north end to the
coast of the way of hethlon, as one goeth to hamath, hazarenan, the
border of damascus northward, to the coast of hamath; for these are
his sides east and west; a portion for dan.

48:2 and by the border of dan, from the east side unto the west side,
a portion for asher.

48:3 and by the border of asher, from the east side even unto the west
side, a portion for naphtali.

48:4 and by the border of naphtali, fro
 
 ___________________________
 
the border of issachar, from the east side unto the west
side, zebulun a portion.

48:27 and by the border of zebulun, from the east side unto the west
side, gad a portion.

48:28 and by the border of gad, at the south side southward, the
border shall be even from tamar unto the waters of strife in kadesh,
and to the river toward the great sea.

48:29 this is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of
israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the lord
god.

48:30 and these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four
thousand and five hundred measures.

48:31 and the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes
of israel: three gates northward; one gate of reuben, one gate of
judah, one gate of levi.

48:32 and at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
gates; and one gate of joseph, one gate of benjamin, one gate of dan.

48:33 and at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures:
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd and five hundred, with their
three gates; one gate of gad, one gate of asher, one gate of naphtali.

48:35 it was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of
the city from that day shall be, the lord is there.




the book of daniel


1:1 in the third year of the reign of jehoiakim king of judah came
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon unto jerusalem, and besieged it.

1:2 and the lord gave jehoiakim king of judah into his hand, with part
of the vessels of the house of god: which he carried into the land of
shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the
treasure house of his god.

1:3 and the king spake unto ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that
he should bring certain of the children of israel, and of the king's
seed, and of the princes; 1:4 children in whom was no blemish, but
well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge,
and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in
the king's pala
 
 ___________________________
 
the children of judah, daniel, hananiah,
mishael, and azariah: 1:7 unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave
names: for he gave unto daniel the name of belteshazzar; and to
hananiah, of shadrach; and to mishael, of meshach; and to azariah, of
abednego.

1:8 but daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
defile himself.

1:9 now god had brought daniel into favour and tender love with the
prince of the eunuchs.

1:10 and the prince of the eunuchs said unto daniel, i fear my lord
the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should
he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your
sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

1:11 then said daniel to melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had
set over daniel, hananiah, mishael, and azariah, 1:12 prove thy
servants, i b
 
 ___________________________
 
untenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's
meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

1:14 so he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.

1:15 and at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and
fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the
king's meat.

1:16 thus melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine
that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

1:17 as for these four children, god gave them knowledge and skill in
all learning and wisdom: and daniel had understanding in all visions
and dreams.

1:18 now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring
them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
nebuchadnezzar.

1:19 and the king communed with them; and among them all was found
none like daniel, hananiah, mishael, and azariah: therefore stood they
before the king.

1:20 and in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the kin
 
 ___________________________
 

before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and
i shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

2:10 the chaldeans answered before the king, and said, there is not a
man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is
no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or
astrologer, or chaldean.

2:11 and it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none
other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose
dwelling is not with flesh.

2:12 for this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded
to destroy all the wise men of babylon.

2:13 and the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and
they sought daniel and his fellows to be slain.

2:14 then daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to arioch the
captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men
of babylon: 2:15 he answered and said to arioch the king's captain,
why is the decre
 
 ___________________________
 
e so hasty from the king? then arioch made the thing
known to daniel.

2:16 then daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give
him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

2:17 then daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to
hananiah, mishael, and azariah, his companions: 2:18 that they would
desire mercies of the god of heaven concerning this secret; that
daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise men
of babylon.

2:19 then was the secret revealed unto daniel in a night vision. then
daniel blessed the god of heaven.

2:20 daniel answered and said, blessed be the name of god for ever and
ever: for wisdom and might are his: 2:21 and he changeth the times and
the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom
unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know u
 
 ___________________________
 
nderstanding: 2:22 he
revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the
darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

2:23 i thank thee, and praise thee, o thou god of my fathers, who hast
given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we
desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's
matter.

2:24 therefore daniel went in unto arioch, whom the king had ordained
to destroy the wise men of babylon: he went and said thus unto him;
destroy not the wise men of babylon: bring me in before the king, and
i will shew unto the king the interpretation.

2:25 then arioch brought in daniel before the king in haste, and said
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto him, i have found a man of the captives of judah, that will
make known unto the king the interpretation.

2:26 the king answered and said to daniel, whose name was
belteshazzar, art thou able to make known unto me the dream which i
have seen, and the interpretation thereof?  2:27 daniel answered in
the presence of the king, and said, the secret which the king hath
demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the
soothsayers, shew unto the king; 2:28 but there is a god in heaven
that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king nebuchadnezzar
what shall be in the latter days. thy dream, and the visions of thy
head upon thy bed, are these; 2:29 as for thee, o king, thy thoughts
came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter:
and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to
pass.

2:30 but as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom
that i have more than any living, but for their sakes that s
 
 ___________________________
 
f iron and clay, and brake
them to pieces.

2:35 then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was
found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth.

2:36 this is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the king.

2:37 thou, o king, art a king of kings: for the god of heaven hath
given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

2:38 and wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and
hath made thee ruler over them all. thou art this head of gold.

2:39 and after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and
another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
earth.

2:40 and the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron
b
 
 ___________________________
 
all be divided; but there shall be in
it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron
mixed with miry clay.

2:42 and as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay,
so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

2:43 and whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall
mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one
to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

2:44 and in the days of these kings shall the god of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all
these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

2:45 forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great god hath made
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is
certain, and the inte
 
 ___________________________
 
rpretation thereof sure.

2:46 then the king nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped
daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet
odours unto him.

2:47 the king answered unto daniel, and said, of a truth it is, that
your god is a god of gods, and a lord of kings, and a revealer of
secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.

2:48 then the king made daniel a great man, and gave him many great
gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of babylon, and
chief of the governors over all the wise men of babylon.

2:49 then daniel requested of the king, and he set shadrach, meshach,
and abednego, over the affairs of the province of babylon: but daniel
sat in the gate of the king.

3:1 nebuchadnezzar the king made a
 
 ___________________________
 
 made a decree, that every man that shall hear
the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer,
and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:
3:11 and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be
cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

3:12 there are certain jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
province of babylon, shadrach, meshach, and abednego; these men, o
king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the
golden image which thou hast set up.

3:13 then nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring
shadrach, meshach, and abednego. then they brought these men before
the king.

3:14 nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, is it true, o shadrach,
meshach, and abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden
image which i have set up?  3:15 now if ye be ready that at what time
ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer
 
 ___________________________
 
, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image
which i have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that
god that shall deliver you out of my hands?  3:16 shadrach, meshach,
and abednego, answered and said to the king, o nebuchadnezzar, we are
not careful to answer thee in this matter.

3:17 if it be so, our god whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, o
king.

3:18 but if not, be it known unto thee, o king, that we will not serve
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

3:19 then was nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage
was changed against shadrach, meshach, and abednego: therefore he
spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times
more than it was wont to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
se three men, shadrach, meshach, and abednego, fell down
bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

3:24 then nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste,
and spake, and said unto his counsellors, did not we cast three men
bound into the midst of the fire? they answered and said unto the
king, true, o king.

3:25 he answered and said, lo, i see four men loose, walking in the
midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth
is like the son of god.

3:26 then nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery
furnace, and spake, and said, shadrach, meshach, and abednego, ye
servants of the most high god, come forth, and come hither. then
shadrach, meshach, and abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

3:27 and the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither
were their coa
 
 ___________________________
 
ts changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

3:28 then nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, blessed be the god of
shadrach, meshach, and abednego, who hath sent his angel, and
delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the
king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor
worship any god, except their own god.

3:29 therefore i make a decree, that every people, nation, and
language, which speak any thing amiss against the god of shadrach,
meshach, and abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall
be made a dunghill: because there is no other god that can deliver
after this sort.

3:30 then the king promoted shadrach, meshach, and abednego, in the
province of babylon.

4:1 nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth; peace be multiplied unto you.

4:2 i thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high god
hath wrought toward me.

4:
 
 ___________________________
 
on
my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.

4:6 therefore made i a decree to bring in all the wise men of babylon
before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of
the dream.

4:7 then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the chaldeans, and
the soothsayers: and i told the dream before them; but they did not
make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

4:8 but at the last daniel came in before me, whose name was
belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the
spirit of the holy gods: and before him i told the dream, saying, 4:9
o belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because i know that the
spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell
me the visions of my dream that i have seen, and the interpretation
thereof.

4:10 thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; i saw, and behold a
tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.

4:11 the tree grew, and was strong, and the hei
 
 ___________________________
 
ecree of the watchers, and the demand by
the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that
the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

4:18 this dream i king nebuchadnezzar have seen. now thou, o
belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the
wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the
interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is
in thee.

4:19 then daniel, whose name was belteshazzar, was astonied for one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him. the king spake, and said,
belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof,
trouble thee. belteshazzar answered and said, my lord, the dream be to
them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

4:20 the tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose
height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the
earth;
 
 ___________________________
 
 pride he is able to abase.

5:1 belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords,
and drank wine before the thousand.

5:2 belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the
golden and silver vessels which his father nebuchadnezzar had taken
out of the temple which was in jerusalem; that the king, and his
princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.

5:3 then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the
temple of the house of god which was at jerusalem; and the king, and
his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

5:4 they drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

5:5 in the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote
over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the
king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

5:6 then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
him, so
 
 ___________________________
 
uld not read the
writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.

5:9 then was king belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was
changed in him, and his lords were astonied.

5:10 now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his lords
came into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, o king,
live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy
countenance be changed: 5:11 there is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and
understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in
him; whom the king nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, i say, thy
father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, chaldeans, and
soothsayers; 5:12 forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and
understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences,
and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same daniel, whom the king
named belteshazzar: now let daniel be
 
 ___________________________
 
 called, and he will shew the
interpretation.

5:13 then was daniel brought in before the king. and the king spake
and said unto daniel, art thou that daniel, which art of the children
of the captivity of judah, whom the king my father brought out of
jewry?  5:14 i have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is
in thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is
found in thee.

5:15 and now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in
before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me
the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation
of the thing: 5:16 and i have heard of thee, that thou canst make
interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the
writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shal
 
 ___________________________
 
t
be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

5:17 then daniel answered and said before the king, let thy gifts be
to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet i will read the
writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

5:18 o thou king, the most high god gave nebuchadnezzar thy father a
kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour: 5:19 and for the majesty
that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and
feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept
alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.

5:20 but when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride,
he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from
him: 5:21 and he was driven from the sons of m
 
 ___________________________
 
en; and his heart was
made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they
fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven; till he knew that the most high god ruled in the kingdom of
men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

5:22 and thou his son, o belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart,
though thou knewest all this; 5:23 but hast lifted up thyself against
the lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house
before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines,
have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and
gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, no
 
 ___________________________
 
r
know: and the god in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, hast thou not glorified: 5:24 then was the part of the hand sent
from him; and this writing was written.

5:25 and this is the writing that was written, mene, mene, tekel,
upharsin.

5:26 this is the interpretation of the thing: mene; god hath numbered
thy kingdom, and finished it.

5:27 tekel; thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.

5:28 peres; thy kingdom is divided, and given to the medes and
persians.

5:29 then commanded belshazzar, and they clothed daniel with scarlet,
and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation
concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

5:30 in that night was belshazzar the king of the chaldeans slain.

5:31 and darius the median 
 
 ___________________________
 
d above the presidents and princes,
because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set
him over the whole realm.

6:4 then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against
daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor
fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or
fault found in him.

6:5 then said these men, we shall not find any occasion against this
daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his god.

6:6 then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king,
and said thus unto him, king darius, live for ever.

6:7 all the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes,
the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to
establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever
shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, save of thee,
o king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.

6:8 now, o king, establish the decree, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 sign the writing, that it
be not changed, according to the law of the medes and persians, which
altereth not.

6:9 wherefore king darius signed the writing and the decree.

6:10 now when daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into
his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward jerusalem,
he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave
thanks before his god, as he did aforetime.

6:11 then these men assembled, and found daniel praying and making
supplication before his god.

6:12 then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the
king's decree; hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that
shall ask a petition of any god or man within thirty days, save of
thee, o king, shall be cast into the den of lions? the king answered
and said, the thing is true, according to the law of the medes and
persians, which altereth not.


 
 ___________________________
 
 these words, was sore displeased
with himself, and set his heart on daniel to deliver him: and he
laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.

6:15 then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king,
know, o king, that the law of the medes and persians is, that no
decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.

6:16 then the king commanded, and they brought daniel, and cast him
into the den of lions. now the king spake and said unto daniel, thy
god whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.

6:17 and a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and
the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his
lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning daniel.

6:18 then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting:
neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep
went from him.

6:19 then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste
unto the
 
 ___________________________
 
 den of lions.

6:20 and when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice
unto daniel: and the king spake and said to daniel, o daniel, servant
of the living god, is thy god, whom thou servest continually, able to
deliver thee from the lions?  6:21 then said daniel unto the king, o
king, live for ever.

6:22 my god hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that
they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in
me; and also before thee, o king, have i done no hurt.

6:23 then was the king exceedingly glad for him, and commanded that
they should take daniel up out of the den. so daniel was taken up out
of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he
believed in his god.

6:24 and the king commanded, and they brought those men which had
accused danie
 
 ___________________________
 
l, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their
children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and
brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the
den.

6:25 then king darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth; peace be multiplied unto you.

6:26 i make a decree, that in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble
and fear before the god of daniel: for he is the living god, and
stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
and his dominion shall be even unto the end.

6:27 he delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in
heaven and in earth, who hath delivered daniel from the power of the
lions.

6:28 so this daniel prospered in the reign of darius, and in the reign
of cyrus the persian.

7:1 in the first year of belshazzar king of babylon daniel had a dream
and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the
 
 ___________________________
 
rose
up, and did the king's business; and i was astonished at the vision,
but none understood it.

9:1 in the first year of darius the son of ahasuerus, of the seed of
the medes, which was made king over the realm of the chaldeans; 9:2 in
the first year of his reign i daniel understood by books the number of
the years, whereof the word of the lord came to jeremiah the prophet,
that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of
jerusalem.

9:3 and i set my face unto the lord god, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: 9:4 and i
prayed unto the lord my god, and made my confession, and said, o lord,
the great and dreadful god, keeping the covenant and mercy to them
that love him, and to them that keep his commandments; 9:5 we have
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments:
9:6 neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophet
 
 ___________________________
 

9:7 o lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion
of faces, as at this day; to the men of judah, and to the inhabitants
of jerusalem, and unto all israel, that are near, and that are far
off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because
of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.

9:8 o lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our
princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

9:9 to the lord our god belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we
have rebelled against him; 9:10 neither have we obeyed the voice of
the lord our god, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his
servants the prophets.

9:11 yea, all israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing,
that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon
us, and the oath that is written in the law of moses the servant of
god, because we have sinned against him.

9:12 and he hath confirmed his words
 
 ___________________________
 
, which he spake against us, and
against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil:
for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon
jerusalem.

9:13 as it is written in the law of moses, all this evil is come upon
us: yet made we not our prayer before the lord our god, that we might
turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.

9:14 therefore hath the lord watched upon the evil, and brought it
upon us: for the lord our god is righteous in all his works which he
doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.

9:15 and now, o lord our god, that hast brought thy people forth out
of the land of egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown,
as at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

9:16 o lord, according to all thy righteousness, i beseech thee, let
thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city jerusalem, thy
holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our
fathers, jeru
 
 ___________________________
 
salem and thy people are become a reproach to all that
are about us.

9:17 now therefore, o our god, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is
desolate, for the lord's sake.

9:18 o my god, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and
behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for
we do not present our supplications before thee for our
righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.

9:19 o lord, hear; o lord, forgive; o lord, hearken and do; defer not,
for thine own sake, o my god: for thy city and thy people are called
by thy name.

9:20 and whiles i was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and
the sin of my people israel, and presentin
 
 ___________________________
 
g my supplication before the
lord my god for the holy mountain of my god; 9:21 yea, whiles i was
speaking in prayer, even the man gabriel, whom i had seen in the
vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about
the time of the evening oblation.

9:22 and he informed me, and talked with me, and said, o daniel, i am
now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.

9:23 at the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth,
and i am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore
understand the matter, and cons
 
 ___________________________
 
 toward
the ground.

10:10 and, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and
upon the palms of my hands.

10:11 and he said unto me, o daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand
the words that i speak unto thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am
i now sent.

and when he had spoken this word unto me, i stood trembling.

10:12 then said he unto me, fear not, daniel: for from the first day
that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself
before thy god, thy words were heard, and i am come for thy words.

10:13 but the prince of the kingdom of persia withstood me one and
twenty days: but, lo, michael, one of the chief princes, came to help
me; and i remained there with the kings of persia.

10:14 now i am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy
people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days.

10:15 and when he had spoken such words unto me, i set my face toward
the ground, and i became dumb.

10:16 and, b
 
 ___________________________
 
o make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm;
neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and
they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened
her in these times.

11:7 but out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his
estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the
fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and
shall prevail: 11:8 and shall also carry captives into egypt their
gods, with their princes, and with their precious vessels of silver
and of gold; and he shall continue more years than the king of the
north.

11:9 so the king of the south shall come into his kingdom, and shall
return into his own land.

11:10 but his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude
of great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass
through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to his
fortress.

11:11 and the king of the south shall 
 
 ___________________________
 

shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy
covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence
with them that forsake the holy covenant.

11:31 and arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the
sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and
they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.

11:32 and such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by
flatteries: but the people that do know their god shall be strong, and
do exploits.

11:33 and they that understand among the people shall instruct many:
yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by
spoil, many days.

11:34 now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little
help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.

11:35 and some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and
to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because
it is yet for a time appointed.

 
 ___________________________
 

11:36 and the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt
himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak
marvellous things against the god of gods, and shall prosper till the
indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall be
done.

11:37 neither shall he regard the god of his fathers, nor the desire
of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.

11:38 but in his estate shall he honour the god of forces: and a god
whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and
with precious stones, and pleasant things.

11:39 thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god,
whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shall cause
them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain.

11:40 and at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, an
 
 ___________________________
 
om, departing from
the lord.

1:3 so he went and took gomer the daughter of diblaim; which
conceived, and bare him a son.

1:4 and the lord said unto him, call his name jezreel; for yet a
little while, and i will avenge the blood of jezreel upon the house of
jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of israel.

1:5 and it shall come to pass at that day, that i will break the bow
of israel, in the valley of jezreel.

1:6 and she conceived again, and bare a daughter. and god said unto
him, call her name loruhamah: for i will no more have mercy upon the
house of israel; but i will utterly take them away.

1:7 but i will have mercy upon the house of judah, and will save them
by the lord their god, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword,
nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

1:8 now when she had weaned loruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.

1:9 then said god, call his name loammi: for ye are not my people, and
i will not be your god.

1:10 
 
 ___________________________
 
yet the number of the children of israel shall be as the sand of
the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it shall come to
pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my
people, there it shall be said unto them, ye are the sons of the
living god.

1:11 then shall the children of judah and the children of israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall
come up out of the land: for great shall be the day of jezreel.

2:1 say ye unto your brethren, ammi; and to your sisters, ruhamah.

2:2 plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am
i her husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her
sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts; 2:3 lest i strip
her naked, a
 
 ___________________________
 
unto me in faithfulness: and thou shalt
know the lord.

2:21 and it shall come to pass in that day, i will hear, saith the
lord, i will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; 2:22 and
the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they
shall hear jezreel.

2:23 and i will sow her unto me in the earth; and i will have mercy
upon her that had not obtained mercy; and i will say to them which
were not my people, thou art my people; and they shall say, thou art
my god.

3:1 then said the lord unto me, go yet, love a woman beloved of her
friend, yet an adulteress, according to the love of the lord toward
the children of israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of
wine.

3:2 so i bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an
homer of barley, and an half homer of barley: 3:3 and i said unto her,
thou shalt abide for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and
thou shalt not be for another man: so will i also be for thee.

3
 
 ___________________________
 
:4 for the children of israel shall abide many days without a king,
and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image,
and without an ephod, and without teraphim: 3:5 afterward shall the
children of israel return, and seek the lord their god, and david
their king; and shall fear the lord and his goodness in the latter
days.

4:1 hear the word of the lord, ye children of israel: for the lord
hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is
no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of god in the land.

4:2 by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.

4:3 therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth
therein shall languish
 
 ___________________________
 
 heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.

4:4 yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: for thy people are as
they that strive with the priest.

4:5 therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also shall
fall with thee in the night, and i will destroy thy mother.

4:6 my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast
rejected knowledge, i will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no
priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy god, i will
also forget thy children.

4:7 as they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will
i change their glory into shame.

4:8 they eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on
their iniquity.

4:9 and there shall be, like people, like priest: and i will punish
them for their ways, and reward them their doings.

4:10 for they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit
whoredom, and shall not increase: because they have left off to take
heed to th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord.

4:11 whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.

4:12 my people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth
unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and
they have gone a whoring from under their god.

4:13 they sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense
upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow
thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and
your spouses shall commit adultery.

4:14 i will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor
your spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated
with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people
that doth not understand shall fall.

 
 ___________________________
 
ir sacrifices.

5:1 hear ye this, o priests; and hearken, ye house of israel; and give
ye ear, o house of the king; for judgment is toward you, because ye
have been a snare on mizpah, and a net spread upon tabor.

5:2 and the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though i have
been a rebuker of them all.

5:3 i know ephraim, and israel is not hid from me: for now, o ephraim,
thou committest whoredom, and israel is defiled.

5:4 they will not frame their doings to turn unto their god: for the
spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known
the lord.

5:5 and the pride of israel doth testify to his face: therefore shall
israel and ephraim fall in their iniquity: judah also shall fall with
them.

5:6 they shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
lord; but they shall not find him; he hath withdrawn himself from
them.

5:7 they have dealt treacherously against the lord: for they have
begotten strange children: now shall a mon
 
 ___________________________
 

forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the
rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

6:4 o ephraim, what shall i do unto thee? o judah, what shall i do
unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early
dew it goeth away.

6:5 therefore have i hewed them by the prophets; i have slain them by
the words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as the light that goeth
forth.

6:6 for i desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of god
more than burnt offerings.

6:7 but they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they
dealt treacherously against me.

6:8 gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.

6:9 and as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests
murder in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.

6:10 i have seen an horrible thing in the house of israel: there is
the whoredom of ephraim, israel is defiled.

6:11 also, o judah, he hath set an
 
 ___________________________
 
rning it burneth
as a flaming fire.

7:7 they are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; all
their kings are fallen: there is none among them that calleth unto me.

7:8 ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; ephraim is a cake
not turned.

7:9 strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea,
gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.

7:10 and the pride of israel testifieth to his face: and they do not
return to the lord their god, nor seek him for all this.

7:11 ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart: they call to
egypt, they go to assyria.

7:12 when they shall go, i will spread my net upon them; i will bring
them down as the fowls of the heaven; i will chastise them, as their
congregation hath heard.

7:13 woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto them!
because they have transgressed against me: though i have redeemed
them, yet they have spoken lies against me.

7:14 and they h
 
 ___________________________
 
15 though i have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they
imagine mischief against me.

7:16 they return, but not to the most high: they are like a deceitful
bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their
tongue: this shall be their derision in the land of egypt.

8:1 set the trumpet to thy mouth. he shall come as an eagle against
the house of the lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and
trespassed against my law.

8:2 israel shall cry unto me, my god, we know thee.

8:3 israel hath cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall
pursue him.

8:4 they have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and
i knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them
idols, that they may be cut off.

8:5 thy calf, o samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled
against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?  8:6
for from israel was it also: the workman made it; therefore it is not
god: but the cal
 
 ___________________________
 
range thing.

8:13 they sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and
eat it; but the lord accepteth them not; now will he remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to egypt.

8:14 for israel hath forgotten his maker, and buildeth temples; and
judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but i will send a fire upon his
cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

9:1 rejoice not, o israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast
gone a whoring from thy god, thou hast loved a reward upon every
cornfloor.

9:2 the floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine
shall fail in her.

9:3 they shall not dwell in the lord's land; but ephraim shall return
to egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in assyria.

9:4 they shall not offer wine offerings to the lord, neither shall
they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the
bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their
bread for their
 
 ___________________________
 
d in the day of the feast of
the lord?  9:6 for, lo, they are gone because of destruction: egypt
shall gather them up, memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for
their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns shall be in their
tabernacles.

9:7 the days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come;
israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad,
for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.

9:8 the watchman of ephraim was with my god: but the prophet is a
snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his god.

9:9 they have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of gibeah:
therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.

9:10 i found israel like grapes in the wilderness; i saw your fathers
as the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to
baalpeor, and separated themselves unto that shame; and their
abominations were according as they loved.

9:11 as fo
 
 ___________________________
 
is children to the
murderer.

9:14 give them, o lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying
womb and dry breasts.

9:15 all their wickedness is in gilgal: for there i hated them: for
the wickedness of their doings i will drive them out of mine house, i
will love them no more: all their princes are revolters.

9:16 ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no
fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will i slay even the beloved
fruit of their womb.

9:17 my god will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto
him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations.

10:1 israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself:
according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars;
according to the goodness of his land they have made goodly images.

10:2 their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall
break down their altars, he shall spoil their images.

10:3 for now they shall say, we have no king, bec
 
 ___________________________
 
nches, and devour them, because of their own counsels.

11:7 and my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called
them to the most high, none at all would exalt him.

11:8 how shall i give thee up, ephraim? how shall i deliver thee,
israel?  how shall i make thee as admah? how shall i set thee as
zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together.

11:9 i will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, i will not
return to destroy ephraim: for i am god, and not man; the holy one in
the midst of thee: and i will not enter into the city.

11:10 they shall walk after the lord: he shall roar like a lion: when
he shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west.

11:11 they shall tremble as a bird out of egypt, and as a dove out of
the land of assyria: and i will place them in their houses, saith the
lord.

11:12 ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of israel
with deceit: but judah yet ruleth with god, and is fa
 
 ___________________________
 
ithful with the
saints.

12:1 ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he
daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with
the assyrians, and oil is carried into egypt.

12:2 the lord hath also a controversy with judah, and will punish
jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he
recompense him.

12:3 he took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength
he had power with god: 12:4 yea, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in
bethel, and there he spake with us; 12:5 even the lord god of hosts;
the lord is his memorial.

12:6 therefore turn thou to thy god: keep mercy and judgment and wait
on thy god continually.

12:7 he is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he
loveth to oppress.

12:8 and ephraim said, yet i am become rich, i have found me out
substance: in all my labours they
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall find none iniquity in me that
were sin.

12:9 and i that am the lord thy god from the land of egypt will yet
make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.

12:10 i have also spoken by the prophets, and i have multiplied
visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets.

12:11 is there iniquity in gilead? surely they are vanity: they
sacrifice bullocks in gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the
furrows of the fields.

12:12 and jacob fled into the country of syria, and israel served for
a wife, and for a wife he kep
 
 ___________________________
 
en he offended in baal, he died.

13:2 and now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images
of their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all
of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, let the men that
sacrifice kiss the calves.

13:3 therefore they shall be as the morning cloud and as the early dew
that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out
of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

13:4 yet i am the lord thy god from the land of egypt, and thou shalt
know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me.

13:5 i did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.

13:6 according to their pasture, so were they filled; they were
filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.

13:7 therefore i will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way
will i observe them: 13:8 i will meet them as a bear that is bereaved
of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their 
 
 ___________________________
 
om the power of the grave; i will redeem
them from death: o death, i will be thy plagues; o grave, i will be
thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.

13:15 though he be fruitful among his brethren, an east wind shall
come, the wind of the lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his
spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall
spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.

13:16 samaria shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her
god: they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in
pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.

14:1 o israel, return unto the lord thy god; for thou hast fallen by
thine iniquity.

14:2 take with you words, and turn to the lord: say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the
calves of our lips.

14:3 asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither
will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
 
 ___________________________
 
 gods: for in
thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

14:4 i will heal their backsliding, i will love them freely: for mine
anger is turned away from him.

14:5 i will be as the dew unto israel: he shall grow as the lily, and
cast forth his roots as lebanon.

14:6 his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive
tree, and his smell as lebanon.

14:7 they that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive
as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be a
 
 ___________________________
 
1 be ye ashamed, o ye husbandmen; howl, o ye vinedressers, for the
wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is
perished.

1:12 the vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth; the
pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the
trees of the field, are withered: because joy is withered away from
the sons of men.

1:13 gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye ministers of
the altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my god:
for the meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the
house of your god.

1:14 sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and
all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the lord your god,
and cry unto the lord, 1:15 alas for the day! for the day of the lord
is at hand, and as a destruction from the almighty shall it come.

1:16 is not the meat cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness
from the house of our god?  1:17 the seed is rotten und
 
 ___________________________
 
e
sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining: 2:11 and the lord shall utter his voice before his army: for
his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for
the day of the lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?
2:12 therefore also now, saith the lord, turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
2:13 and rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the
lord your god: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.

2:14 who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him; even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the lord
your god?  2:15 blow the trumpet in zion, sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly: 2:16 gather the people, sanctify the congregation,
assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the
breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the bride out
of her closet.

2:17 let the priests, the ministers of the lord, weep between the
porch and the altar, and let them say, spare thy people, o lord, and
give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over
them: wherefore should they say among the people, where is their god?
2:18 then will the lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.

2:19 yea, the lord will answer and say unto his people, behold, i will
send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith:
and i will no more make you a reproach among the heathen: 2:20 but i
will remove far off from you the northern army, and will drive him
into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea,
and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come
up, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and his ill savour shall come up, because he hath done great
things.

2:21 fear not, o land; be glad and rejoice: for the lord will do great
things.

2:22 be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the
wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and
the vine do yield their strength.

2:23 be glad then, ye children of zion, and rejoice in the lord your
god: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will
cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter
rain in the first month.

2:24 and the floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall
overflow with wine and oil.

2:25 and i will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten,
the cankerworm, and the caterpiller, and the palmerworm, my great army
which i sent among you.

2:26 and ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name
o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the lord your god, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my
people shall never be ashamed.

2:27 and ye shall know that i am in the midst of israel, and that i am
the lord your god, and none else: and my people shall never be
ashamed.

2:28 and it shall come to pass afterward, that i will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see
visions: 2:29 and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in
those days will i pour out my spirit.

2:30 and i will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood,
and fire, and pillars of smoke.

2:31 the sun shall be turned
 
 ___________________________
 
 wickedness
is great.

3:14 multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of
the lord is near in the valley of decision.

3:15 the sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall
withdraw their shining.

3:16 the lord also shall roar out of zion, and utter his voice from
jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the lord
will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of
israel.

3:17 so shall ye know that i am the lord your god dwelling in zion, my
holy mountain: then shall jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
strangers pass through her any more.

3:18 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall
drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the
rivers of judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come
forth out of the house of the lord, and shall water the valley of
shittim.

3:19 egypt shall be a desolation, and edom shall be a desolate
wilderness, for the vio
 
 ___________________________
 
1:6 thus saith the lord; for three transgressions of gaza, and for
four, i will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
carried away captive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to edom:
1:7 but i will send a fire on the wall of gaza, which shall devour the
palaces thereof: 1:8 and i will cut off the inhabitant from ashdod,
and him that holdeth the sceptre from ashkelon, and i will turn mine
hand against ekron: and the remnant of the philistines shall perish,
saith the lord god.

1:9 thus saith the lord; for three transgressions of tyrus, and for
four, i will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
delivered up the whole captivity to edom, and remembered not the
brotherly covenant: 1:10 but i will send a fire on the wall of tyrus,
which shall devour the palaces thereof.

1:11 thus saith the lord; for three transgressions of edom, and for
four, i will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did
pursue his brother with the sword, and did ca
 
 ___________________________
 
three transgressions of israel, and for
four, i will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold
the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; 2:7 that
pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn
aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in unto
the same maid, to profane my holy name: 2:8 and they lay themselves
down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, and they drink the
wine of the condemned in the house of their god.

2:9 yet destroyed i the amorite before them, whose height was like the
height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet i destroyed
his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

2:10 also i brought you up from the land of egypt, and led you forty
years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the amorite.

2:11 and i raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men
for nazarites. is it not even thus, o ye children of israel? saith the
lord.

2:12 but 
 
 ___________________________
 
r iniquities.

3:3 can two walk together, except they be agreed?  3:4 will a lion
roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a young lion cry out of
his den, if he have taken nothing?  3:5 can a bird fall in a snare
upon the earth, where no gin is for him?  shall one take up a snare
from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?  3:6 shall a trumpet be
blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?  shall there be evil
in a city, and the lord hath not done it?  3:7 surely the lord god
will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the
prophets.

3:8 the lion hath roared, who will not fear? the lord god hath spoken,
who can but prophesy?  3:9 publish in the palaces at ashdod, and in
the palaces in the land of egypt, and say, assemble yourselves upon
the mountains of samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst
thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

3:10 for they know not to do right, saith the lord, who store up
violence and robbery
 
 ___________________________
 
 in their palaces.

3:11 therefore thus saith the lord god; an adversary there shall be
even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength from
thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

3:12 thus saith the lord; as the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of
the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of
israel be taken out that dwell in samaria in the corner of a bed, and
in damascus in a couch.

3:13 hear ye, and testify in the house of jacob, saith the lord god,
the god of hosts, 3:14 that in the day that i shall
 
 ___________________________
 
nsgressions of israel upon him i will also visit the altars of
bethel: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground.

3:15 and i will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the
houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end,
saith the lord.

4:1 hear this word, ye kine of bashan, that are in the mountain of
samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to
their masters, bring, and let us drink.

4:2 the lord god hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall
come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your
posterity with fishhooks.

4:3 and ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that which is
before her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the lord.

4:4 come to bethel, and transgress; at gilgal multiply transgression;
and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three
years: 4:5 and offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and
proc
 
 ___________________________
 
laim and publish the free offerings: for this liketh you, o ye
children of israel, saith the lord god.

4:6 and i also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities,
and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto
me, saith the lord.

4:7 and also i have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet
three months to the harvest: and i caused it to rain upon one city,
and caused it not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained
upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered.

4:8 so two or three cities wandered unto one city, to drink water; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
g and mildew: when your gardens and
your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees increased, the
palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the
lord.

4:10 i have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of egypt:
your young men have i slain with the sword, and have taken away your
horses; and i have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your
nostrils: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the lord.

4:11 i have overthrown some of you, as god overthrew sodom and
gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet
have ye not returned unto me, saith the lord.

4:12 therefore thus will i do unto thee, o israel: and because i will
do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy god, o israel.

4:13 for, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind,
and declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the morning
darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, the lord,
the god of hosts, is his
 
 ___________________________
 
 name.

5:1 hear ye this word which i take up against you, even a lamentation,
o house of israel.

5:2 the virgin of israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is
forsaken upon her land; there is none to raise her up.

5:3 for thus saith the lord god; the city that went out by a thousand
shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred shall
leave ten, to the house of israel.

5:4 for thus saith the lord unto the house of israel, seek ye me, and
ye shall live: 5:5 but seek not bethel, nor enter into gilgal, and
pass not to beersheba: for gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and
bethel shall come to nought.

5:6 seek the lord, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in
the house of joseph, and devour it, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone,
but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards,
but ye shall not drink wine of them.

5:12 for i know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins:
they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor
in the gate from their right.

5:13 therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is
an evil time.

5:14 seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the lord, the
god of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

5:15 hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
gate: it may be that the lord god of hosts will be gracious unto the
remnant of joseph.

5:16 therefore the lord, the god of hosts, the lord, saith thus;
wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the
highways, alas! alas!  and they shall call the husbandman to mourning,
and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.

5:17 and in all vineyards shal
 
 ___________________________
 
nd your meat offerings, i
will not accept them: neither will i regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts.

5:23 take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for i will not
hear the melody of thy viols.

5:24 but let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty stream.

5:25 have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the
wilderness forty years, o house of israel?  5:26 but ye have borne the
tabernacle of your moloch and chiun your images, the star of your god,
which ye made to yourselves.

5:27 therefore will i cause you to go into captivity beyond damascus,
saith the lord, whose name is the god of hosts.

6:1 woe to them that are at ease in zion, and trust in the mountain of
samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of
israel came!  6:2 pass ye unto calneh, and see; and from thence go ye
to hamath the great: then go down to gath of the philistines: be they
better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than you
 
 ___________________________
 
pon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves
out of the midst of the stall; 6:5 that chant to the sound of the
viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like david; 6:6
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of joseph.

6:7 therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed.

6:8 the lord god hath sworn by himself, saith the lord the god of
hosts, i abhor the excellency of jacob, and hate his palaces:
therefore will i deliver up the city with all that is therein.

6:9 and it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house,
that they shall die.

6:10 and a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to
bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is
by the sides of the house, is there yet any with thee? and he shall
say, no. then sh
 
 ___________________________
 
of the lord.

6:11 for, behold, the lord commandeth, and he will smite the great
house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.

6:12 shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen?
for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness
into hemlock: 6:13 ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say,
have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?  6:14 but, behold,
i will raise up against you a nation, o house of israel, saith the
lord the god of hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in
of hemath unto the river of the wilderness.

7:1 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth;
and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.

7:2 and it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the
grass of the land, then i said, o lord god, forgive, i beseech thee:
by whom shall jacob arise? for he is small.

7:3
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord repented for this: it shall not be, saith the lord.

7:4 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me: and, behold, the lord god
called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat
up a part.

7:5 then said i, o lord god, cease, i beseech thee: by whom shall
jacob arise? for he is small.

7:6 the lord repented for this: this also shall not be, saith the lord
god.

7:7 thus he shewed me: and, behold, the lord stood upon a wall made by
a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.

7:8 and the lord said unto me, amos, what seest thou? and i said, a
plumbline. then said the lord, behold, i will set a plumbline in the
midst of my people israel: i will not again pass by them any more: 7:9
and the high places of isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of
israel shall be laid waste; and i will rise against the house of
jeroboam with the sword.


 
 ___________________________
 
id unto me, go, prophesy unto my people israel.

7:16 now therefore hear thou the word of the lord: thou sayest,
prophesy not against israel, and drop not thy word against the house
of isaac.

7:17 therefore thus saith the lord; thy wife shall be an harlot in the
city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy
land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land:
and israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.

8:1 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me: and behold a basket of
summer fruit.

8:2 and he said, amos, what seest thou? and i said, a basket of summer
fruit. then said the lord unto me, the end is come upon my people of
israel; i will not again pass by them any more.

8:3 and the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, saith
the lord god: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they
shall cast them forth with silence.

8:4 hear this, o ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor
of
 
 ___________________________
 
g the balances by
deceit?  8:6 that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?  8:7 the lord
hath sworn by the excellency of jacob, surely i will never forget any
of their works.

8:8 shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall
be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of egypt.

8:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord god, that i
will cause the sun to go down at noon, and i will darken the earth in
the clear day: 8:10 and i will turn your feasts into mourning, and all
your songs into lamentation; and i will bring up sackcloth upon all
loins, and baldness upon every head; and i will make it as the
mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.

8:11 behold, the days come, saith the lord god, that i will send a
famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearin
 
 ___________________________
 
g the words of the lord: 8:12 and they shall wander from sea
to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the lord, and shall not find it.

8:13 in that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for
thirst.

8:14 they that swear by the sin of samaria, and say, thy god, o dan,
liveth; and, the manner of beersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and
never rise up again.

9:1 i saw the lord standing upon the altar: and he said, smite the
lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the
head, all of them; and i will slay the last of them with the sword: he
that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them
shall not be delivered.

9:2 though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them;
though they climb up to
 
 ___________________________
 
 heaven, thence will i bring them down: 9:3 and
though they hide themselves in the top of carmel, i will search and
take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the
bottom of the sea, thence will i command the serpent, and he shall
bite them: 9:4 and though they go into captivity before their enemies,
thence will i command the sword, and it shall slay them: and i will
set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.

9:5 and the lord god of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it
shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise
up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood of
egypt.

9:6 it is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath founded
his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth: the lord is his name.

9:7 are ye not as children of the ethiopians unto me, o children of
israel? saith the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
. have not i brought up israel out of the land
of egypt? and the philistines from caphtor, and the syrians from kir?
9:8 behold, the eyes of the lord god are upon the sinful kingdom, and
i will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that i will
not utterly destroy the house of jacob, saith the lord.

9:9 for, lo, i will command, and i will sift the house of israel among
all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.

9:10 all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say,
the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

9:11 in that day will i raise up the taberna
 
 ___________________________
 
er of grapes him that soweth seed;
and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.

9:14 and i will bring again the captivity of my people of israel, and
they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make
gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

9:15 and i will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be
pulled up out of their land which i have given them, saith the lord
thy god.




obadiah


1:1 the vision of obadiah. thus saith the lord god concerning edom;
we have heard a rumour from the lord, and an ambassador is sent among
the heathen, arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

1:2 behold, i have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised.

1:3 the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in
the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his
heart, who shall bring me down to the grou
 
 ___________________________
 
ir wickedness is come up before me.

1:3 but jonah rose up to flee unto tarshish from the presence of the
lord, and went down to joppa; and he found a ship going to tarshish:
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them
unto tarshish from the presence of the lord.

1:4 but the lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

1:5 then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god,
and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to
lighten it of them. but jonah was gone down into the sides of the
ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.

1:6 so the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, what meanest
thou, o sleeper? arise, call upon thy god, if so be that god will
think upon us, that we perish not.

1:7 and they said every one to his fellow, come, and let us cast lots,
that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. so they cast
lots, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lot fell upon jonah.

1:8 then said they unto him, tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause
this evil is upon us; what is thine occupation? and whence comest
thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou?  1:9 and he
said unto them, i am an hebrew; and i fear the lord, the god of
heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land.

1:10 then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him. why hast
thou done this? for the men knew that he fled from the presence of the
lord, because he had told them.

1:11 then said they unto him, what shall we do unto thee, that the sea
may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.

1:12 and he said unto them, take me up, and cast me forth into the
sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for i know that f
 
 ___________________________
 
perish for this man's life, and lay
not upon us innocent blood: for thou, o lord, hast done as it pleased
thee.

1:15 so they look up jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the
sea ceased from her raging.

1:16 then the men feared the lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the lord, and made vows.

1:17 now the lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up jonah. and
jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.

2:1 then jonah prayed unto the lord his god out of the fish's belly,
2:2 and said, i cried by reason of mine affliction unto the lord, and
he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried i, and thou heardest my
voice.

2:3 for thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas;
and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves
passed over me.

2:4 then i said, i am cast out of thy sight; yet i will look again
toward thy holy temple.

2:5 the waters compassed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed
me 
 
 ___________________________
 
round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.

2:6 i went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her
bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from
corruption, o lord my god.

2:7 when my soul fainted within me i remembered the lord: and my
prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple.

2:8 they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.

2:9 but i will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; i
will pay that that i have vowed. salvation is of the lord.

2:10 and the lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out jonah upon
the dry land.

3:1 and the word of the lord came unto jonah the second time, saying,
3:2 arise, go unto ni
 
 ___________________________
 
neveh, that great city, and preach unto it the
preaching that i bid thee.

3:3 so jonah arose, and went unto nineveh, according to the word of
the lord. now nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days'
journey.

3:4 and jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and he
cried, and said, yet forty days, and nineveh shall be overthrown.

3:5 so the people of nineveh believed god, and proclaimed a fast, and
put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

3:6 for word came unto the king of nineveh, and he arose from his
throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth,
and sat in ashes.

3:7 and he caused it to be proclaimed and published through nineveh by
the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, let neither man nor
beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink
water: 3:8 but let man and
 
 ___________________________
 
 beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry
mightily unto god: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands.

3:9 who can tell if god will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not?  3:10 and god saw their works, that
they turned from their evil way; and god repented of the evil, that he
had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not.

4:1 but it displeased jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

4:2 and he prayed unto the lord, and said, i pray thee, o lord, was
not this my saying, when i was yet in my country? therefore i fled
before unto tarshish: for i knew that thou art a gracious god, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of
the evil.

4:3 therefore now, o lord, take, i beseech thee, my l
 
 ___________________________
 
ife from me; for
it is better for me to die than to live.

4:4 then said the lord, doest thou well to be angry?  4:5 so jonah
went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there
made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see
what would become of the city.

4:6 and the lord god prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over
jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from
his grief. so jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.

4:7 but god prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it
smote the gourd that it withered.

4:8 and it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that god prepared a
vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of jonah, that he
fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, it is better for me
to die t
 
 ___________________________
 
han to live.

4:9 and god said to jonah, doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?
and he said, i do well to be angry, even unto death.

4:10 then said the lord, thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the
which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in
a night, and perished in a night: 4:11 and should not i spare nineveh,
that great city, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also
much cattle?




micah


 
 ___________________________
 

1:1 the word of the lord that came to micah the morasthite in the
days of jotham, ahaz, and hezekiah, kings of judah, which he saw
concerning samaria and jerusalem.

1:2 hear, all ye people; hearken, o earth, and all that therein is:
and let the lord god be witness against you, the lord from his holy
temple.

1:3 for, behold, the lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come
down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

1:4 and the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall
be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured
down a steep place.

1:5 for the transgression of jacob is all this, and for the sins of
the house of israel. what is the transgression of jacob? is it not
samaria? and 
 
 ___________________________
 
that make my people
err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, peace; and he that putteth
not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.

3:6 therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and
the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark
over them.

3:7 then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea,
they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of god.

3:8 but truly i am full of power by the spirit of the lord, and of
judgment, and of might, to declare unto jacob his transgression, and
to israel his sin.

3:9 hear this, i pray you, ye heads of the house of jacob, and princes
of the house of israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

3:10 they build up zion with blood, and jerusalem with iniquity.

3:11 the heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach
for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money
 
 ___________________________
 
2 therefore shall zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and
jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high places of the forest.

4:1 but in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of
the house of the lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall
flow unto it.

4:2 and many nations shall come, and say, come, and let us go up to
the mountain of the lord, and to the house of the god of jacob; and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law
shall go forth of zion, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

4:3 and he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations
afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

4:4 but they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig
tree; and none sh
 
 ___________________________
 
all make them afraid: for the mouth of the lord of
hosts hath spoken it.

4:5 for all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we
will walk in the name of the lord our god for ever and ever.

4:6 in that day, saith the lord, will i assemble her that halteth, and
i will gather her that is driven out, and her that i have afflicted;
4:7 and i will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast
far off a strong nation: and the lord shall reign over them in mount
zion from henceforth, even for ever.

4:8 and thou, o tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of
zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom
shall come to 
 
 ___________________________
 
hou, bethlehem ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that
is to be ruler in israel; whose goings forth have been from of old,
from everlasting.

5:3 therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which
travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall
return unto the children of israel.

5:4 and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the lord, in the
majesty of the name of the lord his god; and they shall abide: for now
shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.

5:5 and this man shall be the peace, when the assyrian shall come into
our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise
against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.

5:6 and they shall waste the land of assyria with the sword, and the
land of nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from
the assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth
within our
 
 ___________________________
 
 have i done unto thee? and wherein have i
wearied thee? testify against me.

6:4 for i brought thee up out of the land of egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants; and i sent before thee moses, aaron, and
miriam.

6:5 o my people, remember now what balak king of moab consulted, and
what balaam the son of beor answered him from shittim unto gilgal;
that ye may know the righteousness of the lord.

6:6 wherewith shall i come before the lord, and bow myself before the
high god? shall i come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of
a year old?  6:7 will the lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall i give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?  6:8 he
hath shewed thee, o man, what is good; and what doth the lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy god?  6:9 the lord's voice crieth unto the city, and the man of
wisdom shall se
 
 ___________________________
 
 upright is sharper than a
thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now
shall be their perplexity.

7:5 trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep
the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.

7:6 for the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up
against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a
man's enemies are the men of his own house.

7:7 therefore i will look unto the lord; i will wait for the god of my
salvation: my god will hear me.

7:8 rejoice not against me, o mine enemy: when i fall, i shall arise;
when i sit in darkness, the lord shall be a light unto me.

7:9 i will bear the indignation of the lord, because i have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he
will bring me forth to the light, and i shall behold his
righteousness.

7:10 then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover
her which said unto me, where is the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd thy god? mine eyes shall
behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

7:11 in the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the
decree be far removed.

7:12 in that day also he shall come even to thee from assyria, and
from the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river,
and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

7:13 notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that
dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.


 
 ___________________________
 
arily in the wood, in the midst of carmel: let them feed in
bashan and gilead, as in the days of old.

7:15 according to the days of thy coming out of the land of egypt will
i shew unto him marvellous things.

7:16 the nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they
shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.

7:17 they shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of
their holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the lord
our god, and shall fear because of thee.

7:18 who is a god like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not
his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.

7:19 he will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will
subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea.

7:20 thou wilt perform the truth to jacob, and the mercy to abraham,
which thou hast sworn unto our fathers 
 
 ___________________________
 
from the days of old.




nahum


1:1 the burden of nineveh. the book of the vision of nahum the elkoshite.

1:2 god is jealous, and the lord revengeth; the lord revengeth, and is
furious; the lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he
reserveth wrath for his enemies.

1:3 the lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked: the lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the
storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

1:4 he rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the
rivers: bashan languisheth, and carmel, and the flower of lebanon
langui
 
 ___________________________
 
1:11 there is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the
lord, a wicked counsellor.

1:12 thus saith the lord; though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet
thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. though i have
afflicted thee, i will afflict thee no more.

1:13 for now will i break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy
bonds in sunder.

1:14 and the lord hath given a commandment concerning thee, that no
more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will i cut off
the graven image and the molten image: i will make thy grave; for thou
art vile.

1:15 behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings, that publisheth peace! o judah, keep thy solemn feasts,
perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he
is utterly cut off.

2:1 he that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the
munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power
mightily.

2:2 for the lord hath t
 
 ___________________________
 
ves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as
the eagle that hasteth to eat.

1:9 they shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the
east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.

1:10 and they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a
scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall
heap dust, and take it.

1:11 then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imputing this his power unto his god.

1:12 art thou not from everlasting, o lord my god, mine holy one? we
shall not die. o lord, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, o
mighty god, thou hast established them for correction.

1:13 thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on
iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously,
and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he?  1:14 and makest men as the fishes of the sea, as
the creeping thi
 
 ___________________________
 
him that
saith to the wood, awake; to the dumb stone, arise, it shall teach!
behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath
at all in the midst of it.

2:20 but the lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep
silence before him.

3:1 a prayer of habakkuk the prophet upon shigionoth.

3:2 o lord, i have heard thy speech, and was afraid: o lord, revive
thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make
known; in wrath remember mercy.

3:3 god came from teman, and the holy one from mount paran. selah. his
glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.

3:4 and his brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of
his hand: and there was the hiding of his power.

3:5 before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at
his feet.

3:6 he stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the
nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual
hills did bow: his way
 
 ___________________________
 
quivered at the voice:
rottenness entered into my bones, and i trembled in myself, that i
might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people,
he will invade them with his troops.

3:17 although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no herd in the stalls: 3:18 yet i will rejoice in the lord, i
will joy in the god of my salvation.

3:19 the lord god is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds'
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. to the chief
singer on my stringed instruments.




zephaniah


1:1 the word of the lord which came unto zephaniah the son of cushi,
the son of gedaliah, the son of amariah, the son of hizkiah, in the
days of josiah the son of amon, king of judah.

1:2 i will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the
lord.

1:3 i will 
 
 ___________________________
 
ill also stretch out mine hand upon judah, and upon all the
inhabitants of jerusalem; and i will cut off the remnant of baal from
this place, and the name of the chemarims with the priests; 1:5 and
them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that
worship and that swear by the lord, and that swear by malcham; 1:6 and
them that are turned back from the lord; and those that have not
sought the lord, nor enquired for him.

1:7 hold thy peace at the presence of the lord god: for the day of the
lord is at hand: for the lord hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid
his guests.

1:8 and it shall come to pass in the day of the lord's sacrifice, that
i will punish the princes, and the king's children, and all such as
are clothed with strange apparel.

1:9 in the same day also will i punish all those that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit.

1:10 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord, that there
sha
 
 ___________________________
 
 up.

2:5 woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the
cherethites! the word of the lord is against you; o canaan, the land
of the philistines, i will even destroy thee, that there shall be no
inhabitant.

2:6 and the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds,
and folds for flocks.

2:7 and the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of judah; they
shall feed thereupon: in the houses of ashkelon shall they lie down in
the evening: for the lord their god shall visit them, and turn away
their captivity.

2:8 i have heard the reproach of moab, and the revilings of the
children of ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and
magnified themselves against their border.

2:9 therefore as i live, saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel,
surely moab shall be as sodom, and the children of ammon as gomorrah,
even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual
desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnan
 
 ___________________________
 
t
of my people shall possess them.

2:10 this shall they have for their pride, because they have
reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the lord of
hosts.

2:11 the lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the
gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his
place, even all the isles of the heathen.

2:12 ye ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.

2:13 and he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy
assyria; and will make nineveh a desolation, and dry like a
wilderness.

2:14 and flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of
the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the
upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in t
 
 ___________________________
 

shall be in the thresholds; for he shall uncover the cedar work.

2:15 this is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in
her heart, i am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a
desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth
by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.

3:1 woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!
3:2 she obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted
not in the lord; she drew not near to her god.

3:3 her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening
wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

3:4 her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have
polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.

3:5 the just lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity:
every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but
the unjust knoweth no shame.

3:6 i have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; i made

 
 ___________________________
 
ir mouth: for they
shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

3:14 sing, o daughter of zion; shout, o israel; be glad and rejoice
with all the heart, o daughter of jerusalem.

3:15 the lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine
enemy: the king of israel, even the lord, is in the midst of thee:
thou shalt not see evil any more.

3:16 in that day it shall be said to jerusalem, fear thou not: and to
zion, let not thine hands be slack.

3:17 the lord thy god in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy
over thee with singing.

3:18 i will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly,
who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.

3:19 behold, at that time i will undo all that afflict thee: and i
will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and i
will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put
to shame.

 
 ___________________________
 
e heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth
is stayed from her fruit.

1:11 and i called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon
that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle,
and upon all the labour of the hands.

1:12 then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
the voice of the lord their god, and the words of haggai the prophet,
as the lord their god had sent him, and the people did fear before the
lord.

1:13 then spake haggai the lord's messenger in the lord's message unto
the people, saying, i am with you, saith the lord.

1:14 and the lord stirred up the spirit of zerubbabel the son of
shealtiel, governor of judah, and the spirit of joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
people; and they came and did work in the house of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord of hosts,
their god, 1:15 in the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in
the second year of darius the king.

2:1 in the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month,
came the word of the lord by the prophet haggai, saying, 2:2 speak now
to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and to joshua
the son of josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the
people, saying, 2:3 who is left among you that saw this house in her
first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in y
 
 ___________________________
 
le upon his throne;
and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace
shall be between them both.

6:14 and the crowns shall be to helem, and to tobijah, and to jedaiah,
and to hen the son of zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the
lord.

6:15 and they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of
the lord, and ye shall know that the lord of hosts hath sent me unto
you. and this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice
of the lord your god.

7:1 and it came to pass in the fourth year of king darius, that the
word of the lord came unto zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth
month, even in chisleu; 7:2 when they had sent unto the house of god
sherezer and regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the lord, 7:3
and to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the lord of
hosts, and to the prophets, saying, should i weep in the fifth month,
separating myself, as i have done these so many years?  7:4 then came
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
e city shall be full of boys and girls
playing in the streets thereof.

8:6 thus saith the lord of hosts; if it be marvellous in the eyes of
the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous
in mine eyes? saith the lord of hosts.

8:7 thus saith the lord of hosts; behold, i will save my people from
the east country, and from the west country; 8:8 and i will bring
them, and they shall dwell in the midst of jerusalem: and they shall
be my people, and i will be their god, in truth and in righteousness.

8:9 thus saith the lord of hosts; let your hands be strong, ye that
hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which
were in the day that the foundation of the house of the lord of hosts
was laid, that the temple might be built.

8:10 for before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for
beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in
because of the affliction: for i set all men every one against his
nei
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall go to another, saying, let us go
speedily to pray before the lord, and to seek the lord of hosts: i
will go also.

8:22 yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the lord
of hosts in jerusalem, and to pray before the lord.

8:23 thus saith the lord of hosts; in those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the
nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a jew,
saying, we will go with you: for we have heard that god is with you.

9:1 the burden of the word of the lord in the land of hadrach, and
damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all
the tribes of israel, shall be toward the lord.

9:2 and hamath also shall border thereby; tyrus, and zidon, though it
be very wise.

9:3 and tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as
the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

9:4 behold, the lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in
the sea;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and she shall be devoured with fire.

9:5 ashkelon shall see it, and fear; gaza also shall see it, and be
very sorrowful, and ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and
the king shall perish from gaza, and ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

9:6 and a bastard shall dwell in ashdod, and i will cut off the pride
of the philistines.

9:7 and i will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his
abominations from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he,
shall be for our god, and he shall be as a governor in judah, and
ekron as a jebusite.

9:8 and i will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of
him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no
oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have i seen with
mine eyes.

9:9 rejoice greatly, o daughter of zion; shout, o daughter of
jerusalem: behold, thy king cometh unto thee: he is just, and having
salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of
an as
 
 ___________________________
 
 by the blood of thy covenant i have sent forth
thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.

9:12 turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do
i declare that i will render double unto thee; 9:13 when i have bent
judah for me, filled the bow with ephraim, and raised up thy sons, o
zion, against thy sons, o greece, and made thee as the sword of a
mighty man.

9:14 and the lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go
forth as the lightning: and the lord god shall blow the trumpet, and
shall go with whirlwinds of the south.

9:15 the lord of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and
subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as
through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners
of the altar.

9:16 and the lord their god shall save them in that day as the flock
of his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up
as an ensign upon his land.

9:17 for how great is his good
 
 ___________________________
 
tle bow, out of him every oppressor together.

10:5 and they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies
in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight,
because the lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be
confounded.

10:6 and i will strengthen the house of judah, and i will save the
house of joseph, and i will bring them again to place them; for i have
mercy upon them: and they shall be as though i had not cast them off:
for i am the lord their god, and will hear them.

10:7 and they of ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart
shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and
be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the lord.

10:8 i will hiss for them, and gather them; for i have redeemed them:
and they shall increase as they have increased.

10:9 and i will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me
in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn
again.

10:10 i will
 
 ___________________________
 
them in the lord; and they shall walk up
and down in his name, saith the lord.

11:1 open thy doors, o lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.

11:2 howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are
spoiled: howl, o ye oaks of bashan; for the forest of the vintage is
come down.

11:3 there is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory
is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of
jordan is spoiled.

11:4 thus saith the lord my god; feed the flock of the slaughter; 11:5
whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they
that sell them say, blessed be the lord; for i am rich: and their own
shepherds pity them not.

11:6 for i will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the
lord: but, lo, i will deliver the men every one into his neighbour's
hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land,
and out of their hand i will not deliver them.

11:7 and i will feed the flock o
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces,
though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

12:4 in that day, saith the lord, i will smite every horse with
astonishment, and his rider with madness: and i will open mine eyes
upon the house of judah, and will smite every horse of the people with
blindness.

12:5 and the governors of judah shall say in their heart, the
inhabitants of jerusalem shall be my strength in the lord of hosts
their god.

12:6 in that day will i make the governors of judah like an hearth of
fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they
shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the
left: and jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
jerusalem.

12:7 the lord also shall save the tents of judah first, that the glory
of the house of david and the glory of the inhabitants of jerusalem do
not magnify themselves against judah.

12:8 in that d
 
 ___________________________
 
ay shall the lord defend the inhabitants of jerusalem;
and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as david; and
the house of david shall be as god, as the angel of the lord before
them.

12:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, that i will seek to
destroy all the nations that come against jerusalem.

12:10 and i will pour upon the house of david, and upon the
inhabitants of jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications:
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.


 
 ___________________________
 
pherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered: and i will turn mine hand upon the little ones.

13:8 and it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the lord,
two parts therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall be
left therein.

13:9 and i will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they
shall call on my name, and i will hear them: i will say, it is my
people: and they shall say, the lord is my god.

14:1 behold, the day of the lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be
divided in the midst of thee.

14:2 for i will gather all nations against jerusalem to battle; and
the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women
ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the
residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.

14:3 then shall the lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as
when he fought in the day of battle.

14:4 and his feet sha
 
 ___________________________
 

which is before jerusalem on the east, and the mount of olives shall
cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and
there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall
remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.

14:5 and ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley
of the mountains shall reach unto azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye
fled from before the earthquake in the days of uzziah king of judah:
and the lord my god shall come, and all the saints with thee.

14:6 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not
be clear, nor dark: 14:7 but it shall be one day which shall be known
to the lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at
evening time it shall be light.

14:8 and it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward
the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.

14:9 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto you, o priests, that despise my
name. and ye say, wherein have we despised thy name?  1:7 ye offer
polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, wherein have we polluted
thee? in that ye say, the table of the lord is contemptible.

1:8 and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye
offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy
governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith
the lord of hosts.

1:9 and now, i pray you, beseech god that he will be gracious unto us:
this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the
lord of hosts.

1:10 who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought?
neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. i have no pleasure
in you, saith the lord of hosts, neither will i accept an offering at
your hand.

1:11 for from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the
same my name shall be great among the gentiles; and in every place
incense sh
 
 ___________________________
 

2:7 for the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the lord of hosts.

2:8 but ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble
at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of levi, saith the lord of
hosts.

2:9 therefore have i also made you contemptible and base before all
the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been
partial in the law.

2:10 have we not all one father? hath not one god created us? why do
we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the
covenant of our fathers?  2:11 judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in israel and in jerusalem; for judah hath
profaned the holiness of the lord which he loved, and hath married the
daughter of a strange god.

2:12 the lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the
scholar, out of the tabernacles of jacob, and him that offereth an
offering unto the lord of 
 
 ___________________________
 
covering the altar of the lord with
tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth
not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your
hand.

2:14 yet ye say, wherefore? because the lord hath been witness between
thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt
treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

2:15 and did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit.
and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed. therefore take
heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife
of his youth.

2:16 for the lord, the god of israel, saith that he hateth putting
away: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the lord of
hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not
treacherously.

2:17 ye have wearied the lord with your words. yet ye say, wherein
have we wearied him? when ye say, every one that doeth evil is good in
the sight of the lord, and he d
 
 ___________________________
 
elighteth in them; or, where is the god
of judgment?  3:1 behold, i will send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me: and the lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye
delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the lord of hosts.

3:2 but who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:
3:3 and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall
purify the sons of
 
 ___________________________
 
 against those that oppress the hireling in his
wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger
from his right, and fear not me, saith the lord of hosts.

3:6 for i am the lord, i change not; therefore ye sons of jacob are
not consumed.

3:7 even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. return unto me, and i will return
unto you, saith the lord of hosts. but ye said, wherein shall we
return?  3:8 will a man rob god? yet ye have robbed me. but ye say,
wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and offerings.

3:9 ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole
nation.

3:10 bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the lord of
hosts, if i will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out
a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

3:11 and i will rebuke the devourer for your sakes
 
 ___________________________
 
, and he shall not
destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her
fruit before the time in the field, saith the lord of hosts.

3:12 and all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a
delightsome land, saith the lord of hosts.

3:13 your words have been stout against me, saith the lord. yet ye
say, what have we spoken so much against thee?  3:14 ye have said, it
is vain to serve god: and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the lord of
hosts?  3:15 and now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt god are even delivered.

3:16 then they that feared the lord spake often one to another: and
the lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the lord, and that thought
upon his name.

3:17 and they shall be mine, 
 
 ___________________________
 
saith the lord of hosts, in that day when
i make up my jewels; and i will spare them, as a man spareth his own
son that serveth him.

3:18 then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serveth god and him that serveth him not.

4:1 for, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the lord of hosts, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch.

4:2 but unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as
calves of the stall.

4:3 and ye shall tread down the wicked; for they 