
17:1 and when abram was ninety years old and nine, the lord appeared
to abram, and said unto him, i am the almighty god; walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

17:2 and i will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3 and abram fell on his face: and god talked with him, saying, 17:4
as for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
father of many nations.

17:5 neither shall thy name any more be called abram, but thy name
shall be abraham; for a father of many nations have i made thee.

17:6 and i will make thee exceeding fruitful, and i will make nations
of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7 and i will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
god unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8 and i will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an
everlasting 
 
 ___________________________
 
possession; and i will be their god.

17:9 and god said unto abraham, thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10 this is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and
thy seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11 and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

17:12 and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, o
 
 ___________________________
 
r
bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

17:13 he that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting covenant.

17:14 and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath
broken my covenant.

17:15 and god said unto abraham, as for sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
call her name sarai, but sarah shall her name be.

17:16 and i will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people
shall be of her.

17:17 then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?  17:18 and abraham
said unto god, o that ishmael might liv
 
 ___________________________
 
ac: and i will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20 and as for ishmael, i have heard thee: behold, i have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and i will make him a great nation.

17:21 but my covenant will i establish with isaac, which sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

17:22 and he left off talking with him, and god went up from abraham.

17:23 and abraham took ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
men of abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the selfsame day, as god had said unto him.

17:24 and abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:25 and ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:26 in the selfsam
 
 ___________________________
 
e day was abraham circumcised, and ishmael his
son.

17:27 and all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.

18:1 and the lord appeared unto him in the plains of mamre: and he sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day; 18:2 and he lift up his eyes
and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he
ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the
ground, 18:3 and said, my lord, if now i have found fav
 
 ___________________________
 
our in thy
sight, pass not away, i pray thee, from thy servant: 18:4 let a little
water, i pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
under the tree: 18:5 and i will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort
ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come
to your servant. and they said, so do, as thou hast said.

18:6 and abraham hastened into the tent unto sarah, and said, make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes
upon the hearth.

18:7 and abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good,
and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

18:8 and he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they
did eat.

18:9 and they said unto him, where is sarah thy wife? and he said,
behol
 
 ___________________________
 
d, in the tent.

18:10 and he said, i will certainly return unto thee according to the
time of life; and, lo, sarah thy wife shall have a son. and sarah
heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

18:11 now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
ceased to be with sarah after the manner of women.

18:12 therefore sarah laughed within herself, saying, after i am waxed
old shall i have pleasure, my lord being old also?  18:13 and the lord
said unto abraham, wherefore did sarah laugh, saying, shall i of a
surety bear a child, which am old?  18:14 is any thing too hard for
the lord? at the time appointed i will return unto thee, according to
the time of life, and sarah shall have a son.

18:15 then sarah denied, saying, i laughed not; for she was afraid.
and he said, nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16 and the men rose up from thence, and looked toward sodom: and
abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

18:17 and the lord said, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
all i hide from abraham that thing which i
do; 18:18 seeing that abraham shall surely become a great and mighty
nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
18:19 for i know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord, to do
justice and judgment; that the lord may bring upon abraham that which
he hath spoken of him.

18:20 and the lord said, because the cry of sodom and gomorrah is
great, and because their sin is very grievous; 18:21 i will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of
it, which is come unto me; and if not, i will know.

18:22 and the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward
sodom: but abraham stood yet before the lord.

18:23 and abraham drew near, and said, wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with 
 
 ___________________________
 
radventure there be fifty
righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the
place for the fifty righteous that are therein?  18:25 that be far
from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right?  18:26 and
the lord said, if i find in sodom fifty righteous within the city,
then i will spare all the place for their sakes.

18:27 and abraham answered and said, behold now, i have taken upon me
to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes: 18:28
peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the city for lack of five? and he said, if i find there
forty and five, i will not destroy it.

18:29 and he spake unto him yet again, and said, peradventure there
shall be forty found there. and he said, i will not do it for forty's
sake.

18:30 and he said unto him, oh let not the lord be angry
 
 ___________________________
 
here. and he said, i
will not do it, if i find thirty there.

18:31 and he said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the
lord: peradventure there shall be twenty found there. and he said, i
will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

18:32 and he said, oh let not the lord be angry, and i will speak yet
but this once: peradventure ten shall be found there. and he said, i
will not destroy it for ten's sake.

18:33 and the lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with
abraham: and abraham returned unto his place.

19:1 and there came two angels to sodom at even; and lot sat in the
gate of sodom: and lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed
himself with his face toward the ground; 19:2 and he said, behold now,
my lords, turn in, i pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry
all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on
your ways. and they said, nay; but we will abide in the street all
night.

19:3 and he pressed upon them
 
 ___________________________
 
t do anything till thou
be come thither. therefore the name of the city was called zoar.

19:23 the sun was risen upon the earth when lot entered into zoar.

19:24 then the lord rained upon sodom and upon gomorrah brimstone and
fire from the lord out of heaven; 19:25 and he overthrew those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
which grew upon the ground.

19:26 but his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.

19:27 and abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the lord: 19:28 and he looked toward sodom and gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke
of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29 and it came to pass, when god destroyed the cities of the plain,
that god remembered abraham, and sent lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt.

19:30 and lot went up out of zoar, and dwelt in 
 
 ___________________________
 
hey made their father drink wine that night also: and the
younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay
down, nor when she arose.

19:36 thus were both the daughters of lot with child by their father.

19:37 and the first born bare a son, and called his name moab: the
same is the father of the moabites unto this day.

19:38 and the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name
benammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this
day.

20:1 and abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and
dwelled between kadesh and shur, and sojourned in gerar.

20:2 and abraham said of sarah his wife, she is my sister: and
abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah.

20:3 but god came to abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
for she is a man's wife.

20:4 but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou
slay also a righteous nation?  2
 
 ___________________________
 
for i also withheld thee from
sinning against me: therefore suffered i thee not to touch her.

20:7 now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and
he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her
not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are
thine.

20:8 therefore abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
sore afraid.

20:9 then abimelech called abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou
done unto us? and what have i offended thee, that thou hast brought on
me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that
ought not to be done.

20:10 and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou
hast done this thing?  20:11 and abraham said, because i thought,
surely the fear of god is not in this place; and they will slay me for
my wife's sake.

20:12 and yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
r, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

20:13 and it came to pass, when god caused me to wander from my
father's house, that i said unto her, this is thy kindness which thou
shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me,
he is my brother.

20:14 and abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave them unto abraham, and restored him sarah his
wife.

20:15 and abimelech said, behold, my land is before thee: dwell where
it pleaseth thee.

20:16 and unto sarah he said, behold, i have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the
eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was
reproved.

20:17 so abraham prayed unto god: and god healed abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 for the lord had fast c
 
 ___________________________
 
losed up all the wombs of the house of
abimelech, because of sarah abraham's wife.

21:1 and the lord visited sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto
sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which god had spoken to him.

21:3 and abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom sarah bare to him, isaac.

21:4 and abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old, as
god had commanded him.

21:5 and abraham was an hundred years old, when his son isaac was born
unto him.

21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
will laugh with me.

21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should
have given children suck? for i have born him a son in his old age.

21:8 and the child grew, and was weaned: and abraham made a great
feast the same day that isaac wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s weaned.

21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born
unto abraham, mocking.

21:10 wherefore she said unto abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her
son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with isaac.

21:11 and the thing was very grievous in abraham's sight because of
his son.

21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy
seed be called.

21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will i make a nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and gave it unto hagar, putting it on her shoulder,
and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 hand; for i will
make him a great nation.

21:19 and god opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20 and god was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer.

21:21 and he dwelt in the wilderness of paran: and his mother took him
a wife out of the land of egypt.

21:22 and it came to pass at that time, that abimelech and phichol the
chief captain of his host spake unto abraham, saying, god is with thee
in all that thou doest: 21:23 now therefore swear unto me here by god
that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son's son: but according to the kindness that i have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24 and abraham said, i will swear.

21:25 and abraham reproved abimelech because of a well of water, which
abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

21:26 and abimelech said, 
 
 ___________________________
 
i wot not who hath done this thing; neither
didst thou tell me, neither yet heard i of it, but to day.

21:27 and abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.

21:28 and abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

21:29 and abimelech said unto abraham, what mean these seven ewe lambs
which thou hast set by themselves?  21:30 and he said, for these seven
ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto
me, that i have digged this well.

21:31 wherefore he called that place beersheba; because there they
sware both of them.

21:32 thus they made a covenant at beersheba: then abimelech rose up,
and phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the
land of the philistines.

21:33 and abraham plante
 
 ___________________________
 
d a grove in beersheba, and called there on
the name of the lord, the everlasting god.

21:34 and abraham sojourned in the philistines' land many days.

22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt
abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here i am.

22:2 and he said, take now thy son, thine only son isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of.

22:3 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and isaac his son, and clave
the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which god had told him.

22:4 then 
 
 ___________________________
 
on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.

22:5 and abraham said unto his young men, abide ye here with the ass;
and i and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham his father, and said, my father: and
he said, here am i, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 and abraham said, my
son, god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 and abraham stretche
 
 ___________________________
 
d forth his hand, and took the knife to slay
his son.

22:11 and the angel of the lord called unto him out of heaven, and
said, abraham, abraham: and he said, here am i.

22:12 and he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
any thing unto him: for now i know that thou fearest god, seeing thou
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

22:13 and abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind
him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and abraham went and took
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his
son.

22:14 and abraham called the name of that place jehovahjireh: as it is
said to this day, in the mount of the lord it shall be seen.

22:15 and the angel of the lord called unto abraham out of heaven the
second time, 22:16 and said, by myself have i sworn, saith the lord,
for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,
thine only son: 22:17 that in blessing i will bless thee, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and in
multiplying i will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and
as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies; 22:18 and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

22:19 so abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and
went together to beersheba; and abraham dwelt at beersheba.

22:20 and it came to pass after these things, that it was told
abraham, saying, behold, milcah, she hath also born children unto thy
brother nahor; 22:21 huz his firstborn, and buz his brother, and
kemuel the father of aram, 22:22 and chesed, and hazo, and pildash,
and jidlaph, and bethuel.

22:23 and bethuel begat rebekah: these eight milcah did bear to nahor,
abraham's brother.

22:24 and his concubine, whose name was reumah, she bare also tebah,
and gaham, and thahash, and maachah.

23:1 and sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these
 
 ___________________________
 

were the years of the life of sarah.

23:2 and sarah died in kirjatharba; the same is hebron in the land of
canaan: and abraham came to mourn for sarah, and to weep for her.

23:3 and abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the
sons of heth, saying, 23:4 i am a stranger and a sojourner with you:
give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that i may bury my
dead out of my sight.

23:5 and the children of heth answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:6
hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of
our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his
sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

23:7 and abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the
land, even to the children of heth.

23:8 and he communed with them, saying, if it be your mind that i
should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to
ephron the son of zohar, 23:9 that he may
 
 ___________________________
 
 give me the cave of
machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as
much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a
buryingplace amongst you.

23:10 and ephron dwelt among the children of heth: and ephron the
hittite answered abraham in the audience of the children of heth, even
of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 23:11 nay, my
lord, hear me: the field give i thee, and the cave that is therein, i
give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give i it thee:
bury thy dead.

23:12 and abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

23:13 and he spake unto ephron in the audience of the people of the
land, saying, but if thou wilt give it, i pray thee, hear me: i will
give thee mon
 
 ___________________________
 
ey for the field; take it of me, and i will bury my dead
there.

23:14 and ephron answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:15 my lord,
hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver;
what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

23:16 and abraham hearkened unto ephron; and abraham weighed to ephron
the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of heth,
four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

23:17 and the field of ephron which was in machpelah, which was before
mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees
that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were
made sure 23:18 unto abraham for a possession in the presence of the
children of heth, before all that went in at the gate of his
 
 ___________________________
 
 city.

23:19 and after this, abraham buried sarah his wife in the cave of the
field of machpelah before mamre: the same is hebron in the land of
canaan.

23:20 and the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of heth.

24:1 and abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the lord had
blessed abraham in all things.

24:2 and abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
over all that he had, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3
and i will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
isaac.

24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be
willing to foll
 
 ___________________________
 
ow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again
unto the land from whence thou camest?  24:6 and abraham said unto
him, beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, unto thy seed will i give this land; he shall send
his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence.

24:8 and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither aga
 
 ___________________________
 
in.

24:9 and the servant put his hand under the thigh of abraham his
master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

24:10 and the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he
arose, and went to mesopotamia, unto the city of nahor.

24:11 and he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well
of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out
to draw water.

24:12 and he said o lord god of my master abraham, i pray thee, send
me good speed 
 
 ___________________________
 
this day, and shew kindness unto my master abraham.

24:13 behold, i stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom i shall say, let down thy pitcher, i
pray thee, that i may drink; and she shall say, drink, and i will give
thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant isaac; and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed
kindness unto my master.

24:15 and it came to pass, before he had done 
 
 ___________________________
 
speaking, that, behold,
rebekah came out, who was born to bethuel, son of milcah, the wife of
nahor, abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16 and the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had
any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her
pitcher, and came up.

24:17 and the servant ran to meet her, and said, let me, i pray thee,
drink a little water of thy pitcher.

24:18 and she said, drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

24:19 and when she had done giving him drink, she said, i w
 
 ___________________________
 

for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 24:23 and said, whose
daughter art thou? tell me, i pray thee: is there room in thy father's
house for us to lodge in?  24:24 and she said unto him, i am the
daughter of bethuel the son of milcah, which she bare unto nahor.

24:25 she said moreover unto him, we have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodge in.

24:26 and the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord.

24:27 and he said, blessed be the lord god of my master abraham, who
hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: i being
in the way, the lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.

24:28 and the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.

24:29 and rebekah had a brother, and his name was laban: and laban ran
out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30 and it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon
his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of rebekah his sister,
saying, thus spake the
 
 ___________________________
 
well.

24:31 and he said, come in, thou blessed of the lord; wherefore
standest thou without? for i have prepared the house, and room for the
camels.

24:32 and the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and
gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet,
and the men's feet that were with him.

24:33 and there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, i will
not eat, until i have told mine errand. and he said, speak on.

24:34 and he said, i am abraham's servant.

24:35 and the lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become
great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold,
and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

24:36 and sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was
old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

24:37 and my master made me swear, saying, thou shalt not take a wife
to my son of the daughters of the canaanites, in whose land i dwell:
24:38 but thou shal
 
 ___________________________
 

24:39 and i said unto my master, peradventure the woman will not
follow me.

24:40 and he said unto me, the lord, before whom i walk, will send his
angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for
my son of my kindred, and of my father's house: 24:41 then shalt thou
be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if
they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42 and i came this day unto the well, and said, o lord god of my
master abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which i go: 24:43
behold, i stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that
when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and i say to her, give me,
i pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink; 24:44 and she say
to me, both drink thou, and i will also draw for thy camels: let the
same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my master's
son.

24:45 and before i had done speaking in mine heart, behold, rebekah
came forth with her
 
 ___________________________
 
y
thee.

24:46 and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also: so i drank,
and she made the camels drink also.

24:47 and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she
said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor's son, whom milcah bare unto him:
and i put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

24:48 and i bowed down my head, and worshipped the lord, and blessed
the lord god of my master abraham, which had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

24:49 and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that i may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.

24:50 then laban and bethuel answered and said, the thing proceedeth
from the lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51 behold, rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be
thy master's son's wife, as the lord hath spoken.

24:52 
 
 ___________________________
 
and it came to pass, that, when abraham's servant heard their
words, he worshipped the lord, bowing himself to the earth.

24:53 and the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment, and gave them to rebekah: he gave also to her
brother and to her mother precious things.

24:54 and they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him,
and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said,
send me away unto my master.

24:55 and her brother and her mother said, let the damsel ab
 
 ___________________________
 
ide with
us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

24:56 and he said unto them, hinder me not, seeing the lord hath
prospered my way; send me away that i may go to my master.

24:57 and they said, we will call the damsel, and enquire at her
mouth.

24:58 and they called rebekah, and said unto her, wilt thou go with
this man? and she said, i will go.

24:59 and they sent away rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
abraham's servant, and his men.

24:60 and they blessed rebekah, and said unto her, thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed
possess the gate of those which hate them.

24:61 and rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the man: and the servant took rebekah, and went
his way.

24:62 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.

24:63 and isaac went out to meditate in the fie
 
 ___________________________
 
d when she saw isaac, she
lighted off the camel.

24:65 for she had said unto the servant, what man is this that walketh
in the field to meet us? and the servant had said, it is my master:
therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

24:66 and the servant told isaac all things that he had done.

24:67 and isaac brought her into his mother sarah's tent, and took
rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and isaac was
comforted after his mother's death.

25:1 then again abraham took a wife, and her name was keturah.

25:2 and she bare him zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and
ishbak, and shuah.

25:3 and jokshan begat sheba, and dedan. and the sons of dedan were
asshurim, and letushim, and leummim.

25:4 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abidah,
and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah.

25:5 and abraham gave all that he had unto isaac.

25:6 but unto the sons of the concubines, which abraham had, abraham
gave 
 
 ___________________________
 
gifts, and sent them away from isaac his son, while he yet lived,
eastward, unto the east country.

25:7 and these are the days of the years of abraham's life which he
lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

25:9 and his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of
machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which
is before mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchased of the sons
of heth: there was abraham buried, and sarah his wife.

25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed
his son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi
 
 ___________________________
 
.

25:12 now these are the generations of ishmael, abraham's son, whom
hagar the egyptian, sarah's handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 and
these are the names of the sons of ishmael, by their names, according
to their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebajoth; and kedar,
and adbeel, and mibsam, 25:14 and mishma, and dumah, and massa, 25:15
hadar, and tema, jetur, naphish, and kedemah: 25:16 these are the sons
of ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

25:17 and these are the years of the life of ishmael, an hundred and
thirty an
 
 ___________________________
 
d seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gathered unto his people.

25:18 and they dwelt from havilah unto shur, that is before egypt, as
thou goest toward assyria: and he died in the presence of all his
brethren.

25:19 and these are the generations of isaac, abraham's son: abraham
begat isaac: 25:20 and isaac was forty years old when he took rebekah
to wife, the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padanaram, the sister
to laban the syrian.

25:21 and isaac intreated the lord for his wife, because she was
barren: and the lord was intreated of him, and rebekah his wife
conceived.

25:22 and the children struggled together within her; and she said, if
it be so, why am i thus? and she went to enquire of the lord.

25:23 and the lord said unto her, two nations are i
 
 ___________________________
 
d, sell me this day thy birthright.

25:32 and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit
shall this birthright do to me?  25:33 and jacob said, swear to me
this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
jacob.

25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus esau despised his
birthright.

26:1 and there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that
was in the days of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the
philistines unto gerar.

26:2 and the lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into egypt;
dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this
land, and i will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and
unto thy seed, i will give all these countries, and i will perform the
oath which i sware unto abraham thy father; 26:4 and i will make thy
seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
all 
 
 ___________________________
 
these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; 26:5 because that abraham obeyed my voice, and kept
my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

26:6 and isaac dwelt in gerar: 26:7 and the men of the place asked him
of his wife; and he said, she is my sister: for he feared to say, she
is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for
rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.

26:8 and it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
abimelech king of the philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, isaac wa
 
 ___________________________
 
is people, saying, he that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

26:12 then isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
hundredfold: and the lord blessed him.

26:13 and the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he
became very great: 26:14 for he had possession of flocks, and
possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the philistines
envied him.

26:15 for all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the
days of abraham his father, the philistines had stopped them, and
filled them with earth.

26:16 and abimelech said unto isaac, go from us; for thou art much
mightier than we.

26:17 and isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of
gerar, and dwelt there.

26:18 and isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged
in the days of abraham his father; for the philistines had stopped
them after the death of abraham: and he called their names after the
names by which his fath
 
 ___________________________
 
l esek;
because they strove with him.

26:21 and they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it sitnah.

26:22 and he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove not: and he called the name of it rehoboth; and he
said, for now the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 and he went up from thence to beersheba.

26:24 and the lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, i am
the god of abraham thy father: fear not, for i am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant abraham's sake.

26:25 and he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
lord, and pitched his tent there: and there isaac's servants digged a
well.

26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his
friends, and phichol the chief captain of his army.

26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me away from 
 
 ___________________________
 
he
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac called jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee
the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him away to
padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
he gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughe
 
 ___________________________
 
rs of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau seeing that the
daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father; 28:9 then went esau
unto ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had mahalath the
daughter of ishmael abraham's son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his
wife.

28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran.

28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending
and descending on it.

28:1
 
 ___________________________
 
3 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord
god of abraham thy father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i
will not leave thee, unti
 
 ___________________________
 
which was torn of beasts i brought not unto thee; i bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 thus i was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 now therefore come thou, let us m
 
 ___________________________
 
one from
another.

31:50 if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which i have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him.

32
 
 ___________________________
 
t
i may find grace in thy sight.

32:6 and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy
brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred, and i will deal well with thee: 32:10 i am not worthy of
the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan;
and now i am become two bands.

32:11 deliver me, i pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of esau: for i fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the chi
 
 ___________________________
 
: and the name of it was called allonbachuth.

35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave
abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will i give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

35:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to ephrath
 
 ___________________________
 
w the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben,
jacob's firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
sons of bilhah, rachel's handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
sons of zilpah, leah's handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people, being old and full of days: and his sons esau and jacob buried
him.

36:1 now these are the generations of esau, who is edom.

36:2 esau took his wives of the daughters of canaan; adah the daughter
of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter
of zibeon the hivite; 36:3 and bashemath ishmael's d
 
 ___________________________
 
wed
himself with his face to the earth.

48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward
israel's left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from ephraim's head unto manasseh's head.

48:18 and j
 
 ___________________________
 

the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

49:28 all these are the twelve tribes of israel: and this is it that
their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to
his blessing he blessed them.

49:29 and he charged them, and said unto them, i am to be gathered
unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the
field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 in the cave that is in the field of
machpelah, which is before mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah.

49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 and joseph fell upo
 
 ___________________________
 
t and very sore lamentation:
and he made a mourning for his father seven days.

50:11 and when the inhabitants of the land, the canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of atad, they said, this is a grievous mourning
to the egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called abelmizraim,
which is beyond jordan.

50:12 and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them: 50:13
for his sons carried him into the land of canaan, and buried him in
the cave of the field of machpelah, which abraham bought with the
field for a possession of a buryingplace of ephron the hittite, before
mamre.

50:14 and joseph returned into egypt, he, and his brethren, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his
father.

50:15 and when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
said, joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
all the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 and they sent a messenger unto joseph, saying, thy father did
com
 
 ___________________________
 
nourish you, and your little
ones.

and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and j
 
 ___________________________
 
2:21 and moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and mose
 
 ___________________________
 
s said, i will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters; for i know their sorrows; 3:8 and i am come down to
deliver them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites,
 
 ___________________________
 

3:13 and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring
you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and t
 
 ___________________________
 
y will say, the lord hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into
thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe the
 
 ___________________________
 
re hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i
will bring you out from und
 
 ___________________________
 
er the burdens of the egyptians, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh 
 
 ___________________________
 
 make of thee a great nation.

32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
32:12 wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.

32:13 remember abraham, isaac, and israel, thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, i will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on t
 
 ___________________________
 

him will i blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i consume thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:
 
 ___________________________
 
y shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 and that i also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 then will i
remember my covenant with jacob, and also my covenant with isaac, and
also my covenant with abraham will i remember; and i will remember the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will i abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant
 
 ___________________________
 
n them?  32:8 thus
did your fathers, when i sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 surely none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholly followed the lord.

32:13 and the lord's anger was kindled against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, was consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet th
 
 ___________________________
 
he
lord our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, and jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and i spake unto you at that time, saying, i am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take yo
 
 ___________________________
 
teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thy god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 then beware lest thou forget the lord, which brought
thee forth out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thy god, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord thy god hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness the lord
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the lord doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the lord thy god doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thy fathers,
abraham, isaac, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thy god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thy god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angry with you
 
 ___________________________
 
d to his voice.

9:24 ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that i knew
you.

9:25 thus i fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights, as
i fell down at the first; because the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 i prayed therefore unto the lord, and said, o lord god, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 remember thy servants, abraham, isaac, and jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, because the
lord was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 at that time the lord sai
 
 ___________________________
 
ers, and your officers, with all the
men of israel, 29:11 your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy
god, and into his oath, which the lord thy god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you only do i make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us this day before the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among
 
 ___________________________
 
, whither thou passest over
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
tread upon their high places.

34:1 and moses went up from the plains of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shewed him all the land of gilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the city of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i will give it unto thy
seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 so moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural
 
 ___________________________
 
he lord be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 and joshua gathered all the tribes of israel to shechem, and
called for the elders of israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out
 
 ___________________________
 
laid him on the wood, and said, fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 and he said, do it the second time. and they did it the second
time.

and he said, do it the third time. and they did it the third time.

18:35 and the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the
trench also with water.

18:36 and it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, that elijah the prophet came near, and said, lord god of
abraham, isaac, and of israel, let it be known this day that thou art
god in israel, and that i am thy servant, and that i have done all
these things at thy word.

18:37 hear me, o lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou
art the lord god, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

18:38 then the fire of the lord fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up
the water that was in the trench.

18:39 and when all the people 
 
 ___________________________
 
 land at the coming in of the year.

13:21 and it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of
elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

13:22 but hazael king of syria oppressed israel all the days of
jehoahaz.

13:23 and the lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with abraham,
isaac, and jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from his presence as yet.

13:24 so hazael king of syria died; and benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.

13:25 and jehoash the son of jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
benhadad the son of hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of jehoahaz his father by war. three times did joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of israel.

14:1 in the second year of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel
reign
 
 ___________________________
 
t eber.

1:19 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of the one was peleg;
because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother's name was
joktan.

1:20 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 1:21 hadoram also, and uzal, and diklah, 1:22 and ebal, and
abimael, and sheba, 1:23 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab. all these
were the sons of joktan.

1:24 shem, arphaxad, shelah, 1:25 eber, peleg, reu, 1:26 serug, nahor,
terah, 1:27 abram; the same is abraham.

1:28 the sons of abraham; isaac, and ishmael.

1:29 these are their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebaioth;
then kedar, and adbeel, and mibsam, 1:30 mishma, and dumah, massa,
hadad, and tema, 1:31 jetur, naphish, and kedemah. these are the sons
of ishmael.

1:32 now the sons of keturah, abraham's concubine: she bare zimran,
and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and ishbak, and shuah. and the
sons of jokshan; sheba, and dedan.

1:33 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and henoch, and abida,
and eldaah. all these are the sons of keturah.

1:34 and abraham begat isaac. the sons of isaac; esau and israel.

1:35 the sons of esau; eliphaz, reuel, and jeush, and jaalam, and
korah.

1:36 the sons of eliphaz; teman, and omar, zephi, and gatam, kenaz,
and timna, and amalek.

1:37 the sons of reuel; nahath, zerah, shammah, and mizzah.

1:38 and the sons of seir; lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah,
and dishon, and ezar, and dishan.

1:39 and the sons of lotan; hori, and homam: and timna was lotan's
sister.

1:40 the sons of shobal; al
 
 ___________________________
 
 rejoice that
seek the lord.

16:11 seek the lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth; 16:13 o ye seed of israel his servant,
ye children of jacob, his chosen ones.

16:14 he is the lord our god; his judgments are in all the earth.

16:15 be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; 16:16 even of the covenant which
he made with abraham, and of his oath unto isaac; 16:17 and hath
confirmed the same to jacob for a law, and to israel for an
everlasting covenant, 16:18 saying, unto thee will i give the land of
canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 when ye were but few, even
a few, and strangers in it.

16:20 and when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to another people; 16:21 he suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he
reproved kings for their sakes, 16:22 saying, touch not mine anointed,
and do 
 
 ___________________________
 
rth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 o lord our god, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thine own.

29:17 i know also, my god, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. as for me, in the uprightness of mine heart i
have willingly offered all these things: and now have i seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 o lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which i have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congregation blessed the lord god of their f
 
 ___________________________
 
 came to seek the lord.

20:5 and jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of judah and jerusalem,
in the house of the lord, before the new court, 20:6 and said, o lord
god of our fathers, art not thou god in heaven? and rulest not thou
over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not
power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?  20:7 art not
thou our god, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
thy people israel, and gavest it to the seed of abraham thy friend for
ever?  20:8 and they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thy name, saying, 20:9 if, when evil cometh upon us, as
the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry
unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

20:10 and now, behold, the children of ammon and moab and mount seir,
whom thou wouldest not let israel invade, when they came out of the
land
 
 ___________________________
 
ongregation.

30:5 so they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all
israel, from beersheba even to dan, that they should come to keep the
passover unto the lord god of israel at jerusalem: for they had not
done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

30:6 so the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes
throughout all israel and judah, and according to the commandment of
the king, saying, ye children of israel, turn again unto the lord god
of abraham, isaac, and israel, and he will return to the remnant of
you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of assyria.

30:7 and be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which
trespassed against the lord god of their fathers, who therefore gave
them up to desolation, as ye see.

30:8 now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield
yourselves unto the lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath
sanctified for ever: and serve the lord your god, that the fier
 
 ___________________________
 
or ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name,
which is exalted above all blessing and praise.

9:6 thou, even thou, art lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven
of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are
therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them
all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

9:7 thou art the lord the god, who didst choose abram, and broughtest
him forth out of ur of the chaldees, and gavest him the name of
abraham; 9:8 and foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a
covenant with him to give the land of the canaanites, the hittites,
the amorites, and the perizzites, and the jebusites, and the
girgashites, to give it, i say, to his seed, and hast performed thy
words; for thou art righteous: 9:9 and didst see the affliction of our
fathers in egypt, and heardest their cry by the red sea; 9:10 and
shewedst signs and wonders upon pharaoh, and on all his servants, and
on all the people of his 
 
 ___________________________
 
all choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of jacob
whom he loved. selah.

47:5 god is gone up with a shout, the lord with the sound of a
trumpet.

47:6 sing praises to god, sing praises: sing praises unto our king,
sing praises.

47:7 for god is the king of all the earth: sing ye praises with
understanding.

47:8 god reigneth over the heathen: god sitteth upon the throne of his
holiness.

47:9 the princes of the people are gathered together, even the people
of the god of abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto god:
he is greatly exalted.



48:1 great is the lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our
god, in the mountain of his holiness.

48:2 beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount
zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great king.

48:3 god is known in her palaces for a refuge.

48:4 for, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.

48:5 they saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled,
 
 ___________________________
 
lord, o my soul. praise ye the lord.



105:1 o give thanks unto the lord; call upon his name: make known his
deeds among the people.

105:2 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

105:3 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.

105:4 seek the lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

105:5 remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth;

105:6 o ye seed of abraham his servant, ye children of jacob his
chosen.

105:7 he is the lord our god: his judgments are in all the earth.

105:8 he hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

105:9 which covenant he made with abraham, and his oath unto isaac;

105:10 and confirmed the same unto jacob for a law, and to israel for
an everlasting covenant:

105:11 saying, unto thee will i give the land of canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when t
 
 ___________________________
 
orth also with silver and gold: and there was
not one feeble person among their tribes.

105:38 egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell
upon them.

105:39 he spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the
night.

105:40 the people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them
with the bread of heaven.

105:41 he opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the
dry places like a river.

105:42 for he remembered his holy promise, and abraham his servant.

105:43 and he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness:

105:44 and gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the
labour of the people;

105:45 that they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. praise
ye the lord.



106:1 praise ye the lord. o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

106:2 who can utter the mighty acts of the lord? who can shew forth
all his praise?

106:3 blessed ar
 
 ___________________________
 
all see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

29:19 the meek also shall increase their joy in the lord, and the poor
among men shall rejoice in the holy one of israel.

29:20 for the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: 29:21 that make
a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

29:22 therefore thus saith the lord, who redeemed abraham, concerning
the house of jacob, jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his
face now wax pale.

29:23 but when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the
midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one
of jacob, and shall fear the god of israel.

29:24 they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and
they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

30:1 woe to the rebellious children, saith the lord, that take
counsel, but not of me; and
 
 ___________________________
 
 am he.

41:5 the isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid,
drew near, and came.

41:6 they helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
brother, be of good courage.

41:7 so the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, it is ready for the
sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 but thou, israel, art my servant, jacob whom i have chosen, the
seed of abraham my friend.

41:9 thou whom i have taken from the ends of the earth, and called
thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my
servant; i have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 fear thou not; for i am with thee: be not dismayed; for i am thy
god: i will strengthen thee; yea, i will help thee; yea, i will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded: they shall be
 
 ___________________________
 
ss, and hath no light? let him
trust in the name of the lord, and stay upon his god.

50:11 behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
have kindled. this shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in
sorrow.

51:1 hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek
the lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of
the pit whence ye are digged.

51:2 look unto abraham your father, and unto sarah that bare you: for
i called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.

51:3 for the lord shall comfort zion: he will comfort all her waste
places; and he will make her wilderness like eden, and her desert like
the garden of the lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein,
thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

51:4 hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, o my nation:
for a law shall proceed from me, and i will make my judgment to rest
for 
 
 ___________________________
 
 them through the deep, as an horse in the
wilderness, that they should not stumble?  63:14 as a beast goeth down
into the valley, the spirit of the lord caused him to rest: so didst
thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name.

63:15 look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the
sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained?  63:16 doubtless thou art our father, though abraham be
ignorant of us, and israel acknowledge us not: thou, o lord, art our
father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.

63:17 o lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear? return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of
thine inheritance.

63:18 the people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while:
our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

63:19 we are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not
called by th
 
 ___________________________
 
4
considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two
families which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
before them.

33:25 thus saith the lord; if my covenant be not with day and night,
and if i have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 33:26
then will i cast away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for i will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; go and speak to zedekiah king of judah,
and tell him, thus saith the lord; behold, i will give this city in
 
 ___________________________
 
aptivity, in the
tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped
out of jerusalem came unto me, saying, the city is smitten.

33:22 now the hand of the lord was upon me in the evening, afore he
that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in
the morning; and my mouth was opened, and i was no more dumb.

33:23 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 33:24 son of
man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of israel speak,
saying, abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many;
the land is given us for inheritance.

33:25 wherefore say unto them, thus saith the lord god; ye eat with
the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood:
and shall ye possess the land?  33:26 ye stand upon your sword, ye
work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and
shall ye possess the land?  33:27 say thou thus unto them, thus saith
the lord god; as i live, surely they that are in the waste
 
 ___________________________
 
 earth: they shall be afraid of the lord
our god, and shall fear because of thee.

7:18 who is a god like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not
his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.

7:19 he will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will
subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea.

7:20 thou wilt perform the truth to jacob, and the mercy to abraham,
which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.




nahum


1:1 the burden of nineveh. the book of the vision of nahum the elkoshite.

1:2 god is jealous, and the lord revengeth; the lord revengeth, and is
furious; the lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he
reserveth wrath for his enemies.

1:3 the lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked: the lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the
storm, and the clouds a