
nurse unto it.

4:17 and the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, there is a
son born to naomi; and they called his name obed: he is the father of
jesse, the father of david.

4:18 now these are the generations of pharez: pharez begat hezron,
4:19 and hezron begat ram, and ram begat amminadab, 4:20 and amminadab
begat nahshon, and nahshon begat salmon, 4:21 and salmon begat boaz,
and boaz begat obed, 4:22 and obed begat jesse, and jesse begat david.




the first book of samuel

otherwise called:

the first book of the kings


1:1 now there was a certain man of ramathaimzophim, of mount ephraim,
and his name was elkanah, the son of jeroham, the son of elihu, the
son of tohu, the son of zuph, an ephrathite: 1:2 and he had two wives;
the name of the one was hannah, and the name of the other peninnah:
and peninnah had children, but hannah had no children.

1:3 and this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the lord of hosts in 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that thou hast asked of him.

1:18 and she said, let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. so the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

1:19 and they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
lord, and returned, and came to their house to ramah: and elkanah knew
hannah his wife; and the lord remembered her.

1:20 wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name samuel,
saying, because i have asked him of the lord.

1:21 and the man elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
lord the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

1:22 but hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, i will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then i will bring him, that he
may appear before the lord, and there abide for ever.

1:23 and elkanah her husband said unto her, do what seemeth thee good;
tarry until thou have weaned him; only the lord establish his w
 
 ___________________________
 
ervant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

2:16 and if any man said unto him, let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
answer him, nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, i will
take it by force.

2:17 wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
lord: for men abhorred the offering of the lord.

2:18 but samuel ministered before the lord, being a child, girded with
a linen ephod.

2:19 moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearly sacrifice.

2:20 and eli blessed elkanah and his wife, and said, the lord give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the lord. and
they went unto their own home.

2:21 and the lord visited hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
three sons and two daughter
 
 ___________________________
 
s. and the child samuel grew before the
lord.

2:22 now eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

2:23 and he said unto them, why do ye such things? for i hear of your
evil dealings by all this people.

2:24 nay, my sons; for it is no good report that i hear: ye make the
lord's people to transgress.

2:25 if one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst the lord, who shall intreat for him? notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the lord
would slay them.

2:26 and the child samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
lord, and also with men.

2:27 and there came a man of god unto eli, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord, did i plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in egypt in pharaoh's house?  2:28 and did i choose him
out of all the tribes of israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did i give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of isra
 
 ___________________________
 
both of them.

2:35 and i will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and i will build him a
sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

2:36 and it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, put me, i pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that i may eat a piece of bread.

3:1 and the child samuel ministered unto the lord before eli. and the
word of the lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

3:2 and it came to pass at that time, when eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 and
ere the lamp of god went out in the temple of the lord, where the ark
of god was, and samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 that the lord
called samuel: and he answered, here am i.

3:5 and he ran unto eli, and said, here am i; for thou ca
 
 ___________________________
 
lledst me.
and he said, i called not; lie down again. and he went and lay down.

3:6 and the lord called yet again, samuel. and samuel arose and went
to eli, and said, here am i; for thou didst call me. and he answered,
i called not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 now samuel did not yet know the lord, neither was the word of the
lord yet revealed unto him.

3:8 and the lord called samuel again the third time. and he arose and
went to eli, and said, here am i; for thou didst call me. and eli
perceived that the lord had called the child.

3:9 therefore eli said unto samuel, go, lie down: and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shalt say, speak, lord; for thy servant
heareth. so samuel went and lay down in his place.

3:10 and the lord came, and stood, and called as at other times,
samuel, samuel. then samuel answered, speak; for thy servant heareth.

3:11 and the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ord said to samuel, behold, i will do a thing in israel,
at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

3:12 in that day i will perform against eli all things which i have
spoken concerning his house: when i begin, i will also make an end.

3:13 for i have told him that i will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.

3:14 and therefore i have sworn unto the house of eli, that the
iniquity of eli's
 
 ___________________________
 
 house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.

3:15 and samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the lord. and samuel feared to shew eli the vision.

3:16 then eli called samuel, and said, samuel, my son. and he
answered, here am i.

3:17 and he said, what is the thing that the lord hath said unto thee?
i pray thee hide it not from me: god do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

3:18 and samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. and he
said, it is the lord: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 and samuel grew, and the lord was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground.

3:20 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
all israel from dan even to beersheba knew that samuel was
established to be a prophet of the lord.

3:21 and the lord appeared again in shiloh: for the lord revealed
himself to samuel in shiloh by the word of the lord.

4:1 and the word of samuel came to all israel. now israel went out
against the philistines to battle, and pitched beside ebenezer: and
the philistines pitched in aphek.

4:2 and the philistines put themselves in array against israel: and
when they joined battle, israel was smitten before the philistines:
and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

4:3 and when the people were come into the camp, the elders of israel
said, wherefore hath the lord smitten us to day before the
philistines? let
 
 ___________________________
 
s of kirjathjearim, saying, the
philistines have brought again the ark of the lord; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 and the men of kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
lord, and brought it into the house of abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified eleazar his son to keep the ark of the lord.

7:2 and it came to pass, while the ark abode in kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of
israel lamented after the lord.

7:3 and samuel spake unto all the house of israel, saying, if ye do
return unto the lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the philistines.

7:4 then the children of israel did put away baalim and ashtaroth, and
served the lord only.

7:5 and samuel said, gather all israel to mizpeh, and i will pray for
you unto the lord.

7:6 and they gathered toge
 
 ___________________________
 
ther to mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, we
have sinned against the lord. and samuel judged the children of israel
in mizpeh.

7:7 and when the philistines heard that the children of israel were
gathered together to mizpeh, the lords of the philistines went up
against israel. and when the children of israel heard it, they were
afraid of the philistines.

7:8 and the children of israel said to samuel, cease not to cry unto
the lord our god for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
philistines.

7:9 and samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the lord: and samuel cried unto the lord for
israel; and the lord heard him.

7:10 and as samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the philistines
drew near to battle against israel: but the lord thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were
 
 ___________________________
 
 smitten before israel.

7:11 and the men of israel went out of mizpeh, and pursued the
philistines, and smote them, until they came under bethcar.

7:12 then samuel took a stone, and set it between mizpeh and shen, and
called the name of it ebenezer, saying, hitherto hath the lord helped
us.

7:13 so the philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of israel: and the hand of the lord was against the philistines
all the days of samuel.

7:14 and the cities which the philistines had taken from israel were
restored to israel, from ekron even unto gath; and the coasts thereof
did israel deliver out of the hands of the philistines. and there was
peace between israel and the amorites.

7:15 and samuel judged israel all the days of his life.

7:16 and he went from year to year in circuit to bethel, and gilgal,
and mizpeh, and judged israel in all those places.

7:17 and his return was to ramah; for there was his house;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and there
he judged israel; and there he built an altar unto the lord.

8:1 and it came to pass, when samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over israel.

8:2 now the name of his firstborn was joel; and the name of his
second, abiah: they were judges in beersheba.

8:3 and his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

8:4 then all the elders of israel gathered themselves together, and
came to samuel unto ramah, 8:5 and said unto him, behold, thou art
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations.

8:6 but the thing displeased samuel, when they said, give us a king to
judge us. and samuel prayed unto the lord.

8:7 and the lord said unto samuel, hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that i should not reign over them.

8:8 according to all the wo
 
 ___________________________
 
rks which they have done since the day that
i brought them up out of egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 and samuel told all the words of the lord unto the people that
asked of him a king.

8:11 and he said, this will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots.

8:12 and he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains
over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of
 
 ___________________________
 
f your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to his officers, and to his servants.

8:16 and he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

8:17 he will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants.

8:18 and ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you; and the lord will not hear you in that day.

8:19 nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of samuel; and
they said, nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 that we also may
be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.

8:21 and samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the lord.

8:22 and the lord said to samuel, hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. and samuel said unto the men of israel, go ye every man
unto his city.

9:1 now there was a man of benjamin, whose name was kis
 
 ___________________________
 
ste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 as soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him.

9:14 and they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 now the lord had told samuel in his ear a day before saul came,
saying, 9:16 to morrow about this time i will send thee a man out of
the land of benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
philistines: for i have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me.

9:17 and when samuel saw saul, the lord said unto him, behold the man
whom i
 
 ___________________________
 
 spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

9:18 then saul drew near to samuel in the gate, and said, tell me, i
pray thee, where the seer's house is.

9:19 and samuel answered saul, and said, i am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
i will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 and as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. and on whom is all the desire of
israel? is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?  9:21 and
saul answered and said, am not i a benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of israel? and my
 
 ___________________________
 
 family the least of all the families of the
tribe of benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?  9:22 and
samuel took saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons.

9:23 and samuel said unto the cook, bring the portion which i gave
thee, of which i said unto thee, set it by thee.

9:24 and the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before saul. and samuel said, behold that which is left!
set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since i said, i have invited the people. so saul did eat with
samuel that day.

9:25 and when they were come down from the high place into the city,
samuel communed with saul up
 
 ___________________________
 
on the top of the house.

9:26 and they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that samuel called saul to the top of the house, saying, up, that
i may send thee away. and saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and samuel, abroad.

9:27 and as they were going down to the end of the city, samuel said
to saul, bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that i may shew thee the word of god.

10:1 then samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, is it not because the lord hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance?  10:2 when thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by rachel's sepulchre in the
border of benjamin at zelzah; and they will say unto thee, the asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, what shall i do
for my son?  10:3 then sh
 
 ___________________________
 
rophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man.

10:7 and let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion serve thee; for god is with thee.

10:8 and thou shalt go down before me to gilgal; and, behold, i will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till i
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 and it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
samuel, god gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 and when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the spirit of god came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, what is this that is come unto the son of kish? is saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 and one of the same place
 
 ___________________________
 
 answered and
said, but who is their father? therefore it became a proverb, is saul
also among the prophets?  10:13 and when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 and saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, whither went
ye?  and he said, to seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to samuel.

10:15 and saul's uncle said, tell me, i pray thee, what samuel said
unto you.

10:16 and saul said unto his uncle, he told us plainly that the asses
were found. but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 and samuel called the people together unto the lord to mizpeh;
10:18 and said unto the children of israel, thus saith the lord god of
israel, i brought up israel out of egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 and ye 
 
 ___________________________
 
have this day rejected your god,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us.
now therefore present yourselves before the lord by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 and when samuel had caused all the tribes of israel to come
near, the tribe of benjamin was taken.

10:21 when he had caused the tribe of benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of matri was taken, and saul the son of kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 therefore they enquired of the lord further, if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered, behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 and they ran and fetched him thence: and when h
 
 ___________________________
 
e stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? and all the
people shouted, and said, god save the king.

10:25 then samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the lord. and samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 and saul also went home to gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts god had touched.

10:27 but the children of belial said, how shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought no presents. but he held his peace.

11:1 then nahash the ammonite came up, and encamped against
jabeshgilead: and all the men of jabesh said unto nahash, make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

11:2 and nahash t
 
 ___________________________
 
 voices,
and wept.

11:5 and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul
said, what aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the
tidings of the men of jabesh.

11:6 and the spirit of god came upon saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 and he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, whosoever cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. and the fear of the lord fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 and when he numbered them in bezek, the children of israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of judah thirty thousand.

11:9 and they said unto the messengers that came, thus shall ye say
unto the men of jabeshgilead, to morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. and the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of jabesh; and they were glad.

 
 ___________________________
 

11:10 therefore the men of jabesh said, to morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 and it was so on the morrow, that saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together.

11:12 and the people said unto samuel, who is he that said, shall saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 and saul said, there shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the lord hath wrought salvation in israel.

11:14 then said samuel to the people, come, and let us go to gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 and all the people went to gilgal; and there they made saul king
before the lord in gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the lord;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and there saul and all the men of
israel rejoiced greatly.

12:1 and samuel said unto all israel, behold, i have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 and now, behold, the king walketh before you: and i am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and i have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day.

12:3 behold, here i am: witness against me before the lord, and before
his anointed: whose ox have i taken? or whose ass have i taken? or
whom have i defrauded? whom have i oppressed? or o
 
 ___________________________
 
f whose hand have i
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and i will restore it
you.

12:4 and they said, thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, he is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, it is the lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of sisera, captain of the host of hazor, and into the hand of the
philistines, and into the hand of the king of moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 and they cried unto the lord, and said, we have sinned, because
we have forsaken the lord, and have served baalim and ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

12:11 and the lord sent jerubbaal, and bedan, and jephthah, and
samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe.

12:12 and when ye saw that nahash the king of the children of ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the lord your god was your king.

12:13 now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the lord hath set a king over you.

12:14 if ye will fear the lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against 
 
 ___________________________
 
obey the voice of the lord, but rebel
against the commandment of the lord, then shall the hand of the lord
be against you, as it was against your fathers.

12:16 now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the lord
will do before your eyes.

12:17 is it not wheat harvest to day? i will call unto the lord, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the lord, in
asking you a king.

12:18 so samuel called unto the lord; and the lord sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the lord and samuel.

12:19 and all the people said unto samuel, pray for thy servants unto
the lord thy god, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 and samuel said unto the people, fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the lord, but serve the
lord with all your heart; 12:21 and turn ye not aside: 
 
 ___________________________
 
 they
came up, and pitched in michmash, eastward from bethaven.

13:6 when the men of israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 and some of the hebrews went over jordan to the land of gad and
gilead. as for saul, he was yet in gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling.

13:8 and he tarried seven days, according to the set time that samuel
had appointed: but samuel came not to gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him.

13:9 and saul said, bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. and he offered the burnt offering.

13:10 and it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, samuel came; and saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him.

13:11 and samuel said, what hast thou done? and saul said, because i
saw that the people were scattered from me, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the philistines gathered
themselves together at michmash; 13:12 therefore said i, the
philistines will come down now upon me to gilgal, and i have not made
supplication unto the lord: i forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 and samuel said to saul, thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the lord thy god, which he commanded thee: for
now would the lord have established thy kingdom upon israel for ever.

13:14 but now thy kingdom shall not continue: the lord hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the lord hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
lord commanded thee.

13:15 and samuel arose, and gat him up from gilgal unto gibeah of
be
 
 ___________________________
 
hters were these; the name of the
firstborn merab, and the name of the younger michal: 14:50 and the
name of saul's wife was ahinoam, the daughter of ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was abner, the son of ner, saul's uncle.

14:51 and kish was the father of saul; and ner the father of abner was
the son of abiel.

14:52 and there was sore war against the philistines all the days of
saul: and when saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 samuel also said unto saul, the lord sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the lord.

15:2 thus saith the lord of hosts, i remember that which amalek did to
israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
egypt.

15:3 now go and smite amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
es from havilah until thou comest to
shur, that is over against egypt.

15:8 and he took agag the king of the amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

15:9 but saul and the people spared agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

15:10 then came the word of the lord unto samuel, saying, 15:11 it
repenteth me that i have set up saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. and it
grieved samuel; and he cried unto the lord all night.

15:12 and when samuel rose early to meet saul in the morning, it was
told samuel, saying, saul came to carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to gilgal.

15:13 and samuel came to saul: and saul said unto him, blessed be thou
o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the lord: i have performed the commandment of the lord.

15:14 and samuel said, what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which i hear?  15:15 and saul
said, they have brought them from the amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
lord thy god; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 then samuel said unto saul, stay, and i will tell thee what the
lord hath said to me this night. and he said unto him, say on.

15:17 and samuel said, when thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of israel, and the lord anointed
thee king over israel?  15:18 and the lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, go and utterly destroy the sinners the amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
15:20 and saul said unto samuel, yea, i have obeyed the voice of the
lord, and have gone the way which the lord sent me, and have brought
agag the king of amalek, and have utterly destroyed the amalekites.

15:21 but the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the lord thy god in gilgal.

15:22 and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the lord? behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. because thou hast rejected the word of the
lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 and saul said unto samuel, i have sinned: for i have
transgressed the commandment of the lord, and thy wor
 
 ___________________________
 
ds: because i
feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

15:25 now therefore, i pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord.

15:26 and samuel said unto saul, i will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the lord, and the lord hath rejected thee
from being king over israel.

15:27 and as samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

15:28 and samuel said unto him, the lord hath rent the kingdom of
israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 and also the strength of israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 then he said, i have sinned: yet honour me now, i pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before israel, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord thy god.

15:31 so samuel turned again after saul; and saul wors
 
 ___________________________
 
hipped the lord.

15:32 then said samuel, bring ye hither to me agag the king of the
amalekites. and agag came unto him delicately. and agag said, surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 and samuel said, as the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. and samuel hewed agag in
pieces before the lord in gilgal.

15:34 then samuel went to ramah; and saul went up to his house to
gibeah of saul.

15:35 and samuel came no more to see saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless samuel mourned for saul: and the lord repented that he
had made saul king over israel.

16:1 and the lord said unto samuel, how long wilt thou mourn for saul,
seeing i have rejected him from reigning over israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, i will send thee to jesse the bethlehemite: for i
have provided me a king among his sons.

16:2 and samuel said, how can i go? if saul hear it, he will kill me.
and the lord sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id, take an heifer with thee, and say, i am come to
sacrifice to the lord.

16:3 and call jesse to the sacrifice, and i will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom i name unto thee.

16:4 and samuel did that which the lord spake, and came to bethlehem.
and the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, comest
thou peaceably?  16:5 and he said, peaceably: i am come to sacrifice
unto the lord: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.
and he sanctified jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.

16:6 and it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
eliab, and said, surely the lord's anointed is before him.

16:7 but the lord said unto s
 
 ___________________________
 
amuel, look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because i have refused him: for the lord
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the lord looketh on the heart.

16:8 then jesse called abinadab, and made him pass before samuel. and
he said, neither hath the lord chosen this.

16:9 then jesse made shammah to pass by. and he said, neither hath the
lord chosen this.

16:10 again, jesse made seven of his sons to pass before samuel. and
samuel said unto jesse, the lord hath not chosen these.

16:11 and samuel said unto jesse, are here all thy children? and he
said, there remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. and samuel said unto jesse, send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 and he sent, and brought him in. now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 then samuel took the
 
 ___________________________
 
 horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. so samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord departed from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.

16:15 and saul's servants said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 and
 
 ___________________________
 

sick.

19:15 and saul sent the messengers again to see david, saying, bring
him up to me in the bed, that i may slay him.

19:16 and when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

19:17 and saul said unto michal, why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? and michal answered saul, he
said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?  19:18 so david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it was told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as appointed
over them, the spirit of god was upon the messengers of saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 and when it was told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise
 
 ___________________________
 
. and saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, behold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan,
what have i done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing fr
 
 ___________________________
 
?
wherefore the lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 and now, behold, i know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 swear now therefore unto me by the lord, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father's house.

24:22 and david sware unto saul. and saul went home; but david and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 and samuel died; and all the israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at ramah. and david
arose, and went down to the wilderness of paran.

25:2 and there was a man in maon, whose possessions were in carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in carmel.

25:3 now the name of the man was nabal; and the name of his wife
abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a be
 
 ___________________________
 
ople
israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 and it came to pass in those days, that the philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with israel. and achish
said unto david, know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 and david said to achish, surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. and achish said to david, therefore will i make thee keeper of
mine head for ever.

28:3 now samuel was dead, and all israel had lamented him, and buried
him in ramah, even in his own city. and saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 and the philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
pitched in shunem: and saul gathered all israel together, and they
pitched in gilboa.

28:5 and when saul saw the host of the philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart greatly trembled.

28:6 and when saul enquired of the lord, the lord ans
 
 ___________________________
 
ng
me him up, whom i shall name unto thee.

28:9 and the woman said unto him, behold, thou knowest what saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
life, to cause me to die?  28:10 and saul sware to her by the lord,
saying, as the lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 then said the woman, whom shall i bring up unto thee? and he
said, bring me up samuel.

28:12 and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art saul.

28:13 and the king said unto her, be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and the woman said unto saul, i saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 and he said unto her, what form is he of? and she said, an old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. and saul perceived
that it was samuel, and he stooped with his face to the gro
 
 ___________________________
 
und, and
bowed himself.

28:15 and samuel said to saul, why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? and saul answered, i am sore distressed; for the philistines
make war against me, and god is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore i have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what i shall do.

28:16 then said samuel, wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?  28:17 and the
lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the lord hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
david: 28:18 because thou obeyedst not the voice of the lord, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon amalek, therefore hath the lord done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 moreover the lord will also deliver israel with thee into the
h
 
 ___________________________
 
and of the philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the lord also shall deliver the host of israel into the hand of
the philistines.

28:20 then saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of samuel: and there was no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 and the woman came unto saul, and saw that he was sore troubled,
and said unto him, behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and i
have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 now therefore, i pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
that thou mayest hav
 
 ___________________________
 
is armour in the house of ashtaroth: and they
fastened his body to the wall of bethshan.

31:11 and when the inhabitants of jabeshgilead heard of that which the
philistines had done to saul; 31:12 all the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of saul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of bethshan, and came to jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 and they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at
jabesh, and fasted seven days.




the second book of samuel

otherwise called:

the second book of the kings


1:1 now it came to pass after the death of saul, when david was
returned from the slaughter of the amalekites, and david had abode two
days in ziklag; 1:2 it came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold, a man came out of the camp from saul with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to david, that he
fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 and david said unto him, from whence comest thou? an
 
 ___________________________
 
 son, 6:21
joah his son, iddo his son, zerah his son, jeaterai his son.

6:22 the sons of kohath; amminadab his son, korah his son, assir his
son, 6:23 elkanah his son, and ebiasaph his son, and assir his son,
6:24 tahath his son, uriel his son, uzziah his son, and shaul his son.

6:25 and the sons of elkanah; amasai, and ahimoth.

6:26 as for elkanah: the sons of elkanah; zophai his son, and nahath
his son, 6:27 eliab his son, jeroham his son, elkanah his son.

6:28 and the sons of samuel; the firstborn vashni, and abiah.

6:29 the sons of merari; mahli, libni his son, shimei his son, uzza
his son, 6:30 shimea his son, haggiah his son, asaiah his son.

6:31 and these are they whom david set over the service of song in the
house of the lord, after that the ark had rest.

6:32 and they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle
of the congregation with singing, until solomon had built the house of
the lord in jerusalem: and then they waited on their office ac
 
 ___________________________
 
epers of the gates of the
tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the lord, were
keepers of the entry.

9:20 and phinehas the son of eleazar was the ruler over them in time
past, and the lord was with him.

9:21 and zechariah the son of meshelemiah was porter of the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

9:22 all these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two
hundred and twelve. these were reckoned by their genealogy in their
villages, whom david and samuel the seer did ordain in their set
office.

9:23 so they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the
house of the lord, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.

9:24 in four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north,
and south.

9:25 and their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come
after seven days from time to time with them.

9:26 for these levites, the four chief porters, were in their set
office, and were over the chambers and treas
 
 ___________________________
 
aying,
behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

11:2 and moreover in time past, even when saul was king, thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord thy god said
unto thee, thou shalt feed my people israel, and thou shalt be ruler
over my people israel.

11:3 therefore came all the elders of israel to the king to hebron;
and david made a covenant with them in hebron before the lord; and
they anointed david king over israel, according to the word of the
lord by samuel.

11:4 and david and all israel went to jerusalem, which is jebus; where
the jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

11:5 and the inhabitants of jebus said to david, thou shalt not come
hither. nevertheless david took the castle of zion, which is the city
of david.

11:6 and david said, whosoever smiteth the jebusites first shall be
chief and captain. so joab the son of zeruiah went first up, and was
chief.

11:7 and david dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the cit
 
 ___________________________
 
treasures.

26:25 and his brethren by eliezer; rehabiah his son, and jeshaiah his
son, and joram his son, and zichri his son, and shelomith his son.

26:26 which shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.

26:28 and all that samuel the seer, and saul the son of kish, and
abner the son of ner, and joab the son of zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 of the izharites, chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 and of the hebronites, hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
israel on this side jordan westward in a
 
 ___________________________
 
ch royal majesty as had not been on
any king before him in israel.

29:26 thus david the son of jesse reigned over all israel.

29:27 and the time that he reigned over israel was forty years; seven
years reigned he in hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
jerusalem.

29:28 and he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour:
and solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 now the acts of david the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of samuel the seer, and in the book of nathan the
prophet, and in the book of gad the seer, 29:30 with all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.




the second book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the lord his god was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the levites prepared for
them.

35:16 so all the service of the lord was prepared the same day, to
keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the
lord, according to the commandment of king josiah.

35:17 and the children of israel that were present kept the passover
at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.

35:18 and there was no passover like to that kept in israel from the
days of samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of israel keep
such a passover as josiah kept, and the priests, and the levites, and
all judah and israel that were present, and the inhabitants of
jerusalem.

35:19 in the eighteenth year of the reign of josiah was this passover
kept.

35:20 after all this, when josiah had prepared the temple, necho king
of egypt came up to fight against charchemish by euphrates: and josiah
went out against him.

35:21 but he sent ambassadors to him, saying, w
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the lord, and he answered them.

99:7 he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, o lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our god, and worship at his holy hill; for the
lord our god is holy.



100:1 make a joyful noise unto the lord, all ye lands.

100:2 
 
 ___________________________
 
dge, o lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

14:21 do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne
of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

14:22 are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that can cause
rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, o lord our
god?  therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these
things.

15:1 then said the lord unto me, though moses and samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth.

15:2 and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, whither shall
we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, thus saith the lord; such as
are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity.

15:3 and i will appoint over them four kinds, saith the lord: the
