 and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built david an house.

5:12 and david perceived that the lord had established him king over
israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people israel's
sake.

5:13 and david took him more concubines and wives out of jerusalem,
after he was come from hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters
born to david.

5:14 and these be the names of those that were born unto him in
jerusalem; shammuah, and shobab, and nathan, and solomon, 5:15 ibhar
also, and elishua, and nepheg, and japhia, 5:16 and elishama, and
eliada, and eliphalet.

5:17 but when the philistines heard that they had anointed david king
over israel, all the philistines came up to seek david; and david
heard of it, and went down to the hold.

5:18 the philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
rephaim.

5:19 and david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go up to the
philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
it was alive;
but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 and he said, while the child was yet alive, i fasted and wept:
for i said, who can tell whether god will be gracious to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast?
can i bring him back again? i shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 and david comforted bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name solomon:
and the lord loved him.

12:25 and he sent by the hand of nathan the prophet; and he called his
name jedidiah, because of the lord.

12:26 and joab fought against rabbah of the children of ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 and joab sent messengers to david, and said, i have fought
against rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

12:28 now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest i take the city, and it be called
afte
 
 ___________________________
 
biathar
the priest: and they following adonijah helped him.

1:8 but zadok the priest, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and nathan
the prophet, and shimei, and rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
david, were not with adonijah.

1:9 and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
zoheleth, which is by enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of judah the king's servants: 1:10 but nathan
the prophet, and benaiah, and the mighty men, and solomon his brother,
he called not.

1:11 wherefore nathan spake unto bathsheba the mother of solomon,
saying, hast thou not heard that adonijah the son of haggith doth
reign, and david our lord knoweth it not?  1:12 now therefore come,
let me, i pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine
own life, and the life of thy son solomon.

1:13 go and get thee in unto king david, and say unto him, didst not
thou, my lord, o king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, assuredly
solomon th
 
 ___________________________
 
 then doth adonijah reign?  1:14 behold, while thou yet talkest
there with the king, i also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 and bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
king was very old; and abishag the shunammite ministered unto the
king.

1:16 and bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. and the
king said, what wouldest thou?  1:17 and she said unto him, my lord,
thou swarest by the lord thy god unto thine handmaid, saying,
assuredly solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne.

1:18 and now, behold, adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 and he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
abiathar the priest, and joab the captain of the host: but solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

1:20 and thou, my lord, o king, the eyes of all israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the th
 
 ___________________________
 
rone of my lord
the king after him.

1:21 otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall
sleep with his fathers, that i and my son solomon shall be counted
offenders.

1:22 and, lo, while she yet talked with the king, nathan the prophet
also came in.

1:23 and they told the king, saying, behold nathan the prophet. and
when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king
with his face to the ground.

1:24 and nathan said, my lord, o king, hast thou said, adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?  1:25 for he is gone
down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in
ab
 
 ___________________________
 
undance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of
the host, and abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
before him, and say, god save king adonijah.

1:26 but me, even me thy servant, and zadok the priest, and benaiah
the son of jehoiada, and thy servant solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him?  1:28 then king david answered and said, call me bathsheba.
and she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.

1:29 and the king sware, and said, as the lord liveth, that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress, 1:30 even as i sware unto thee
by the lord god of israel, saying, assuredly solomon thy
 
 ___________________________
 
 son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
will i certainly do this day.

1:31 then bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the king, and said, let my lord king david live for ever.

1:32 and king david said, call me zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada. and they came before the
king.

1:33 the king also said unto them, take with you the servants of your
lord, and cause solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to gihon: 1:34 and let zadok the priest and nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, god save king solomon.

1:35 then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and i have appointed him to
be ruler over israel and over judah.

1:36 and benaiah the son of jehoiada answered the king, and said,
amen: the lord god of my lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 the king say so too.

1:37 as the lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
david.

1:38 so zadok the priest, and nathan the prophet, and benaiah the son
of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the pelethites, went down, and
caused solomon to ride upon king david's mule, and brought him to
gihon.

1:39 and zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed solomon. and they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, god save king solomon.

1:40 and all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 and adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar?  1:42 and while he yet spake, behold, jonathan t
 
 ___________________________
 
he son of
abiathar the priest came; and adonijah said unto him, come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 and jonathan answered and said to adonijah, verily our lord king
david hath made solomon king.

1:44 and the king hath sent with him zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the
pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:
1:45 and zadok the priest and nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again. this is the noise that ye have heard.

1:46 and also solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

1:47 and moreover 
 
 ___________________________
 
the king's servants came to bless our lord king
david, saying, god make the name of solomon better than thy name, and
make his throne greater than thy throne. and the king bowed himself
upon the bed.

1:48 and also thus said the king, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
seeing it.

1:49 and all the guests that were with adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went every man his way.

1:50 and adonijah feared because of solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the horns of the altar.

1:51 and it was told solomon, saying, behold, adonijah feareth king
solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar,
saying, let king solomon swear unto me today that he will not slay his
servant with the sword.

1:52 and solomon said, if he will shew himself a worthy man, there
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 so king solomon sent
 
 ___________________________
 
, and they brought him down from the altar.
and he came and bowed himself to king solomon: and solomon said unto
him, go to thine house.

2:1 now the days of david drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
solomon his son, saying, 2:2 i go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 and keep the charge of
the lord thy god, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, if thy children take
heed to their 
 
 ___________________________
 
 by the lord, saying, i will not put thee to death with
the sword.

2:9 now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 so david slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
david.

2:11 and the days that david reigned over israel were forty years:
seven years reigned he in hebron, and thirty and three years reigned
he in jerusalem.

2:12 then sat solomon upon the throne of david his father; and his
kingdom was established greatly.

2:13 and adonijah the son of haggith came to bathsheba the mother of
solomon. and she said, comest thou peaceably? and he said, peaceably.

2:14 he said moreover, i have somewhat to say unto thee. and she said,
say on.

2:15 and he said, thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all
israel set their faces on me, that i should reign: howbeit the kingdom
is turned about, and is become my brother's: fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r it was his from the
lord.

2:16 and now i ask one petition of thee, deny me not. and she said
unto him, say on.

2:17 and he said, speak, i pray thee, unto solomon the king, (for he
will not say thee nay,) that he give me abishag the shunammite to
wife.

2:18 and bathsheba said, well; i will speak for thee unto the king.

2:19 bathsheba therefore went unto king solomon, to speak unto him for
adonijah. and the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto
her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the
king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.

2:20 then she said, i desire one small petition of thee; i pray thee,
say me not nay. and the king said unto her, ask on, my mother: for i
will not say thee nay.

2:21 and she said, let abishag the shunammite be given to adonijah thy
brother to wife.

2:22 and king solomon answere
 
 ___________________________
 
d and said unto his mother, and why dost
thou ask abishag the shunammite for adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for abiathar the
priest, and for joab the son of zeruiah.

2:23 then king solomon sware by the lord, saying, god do so to me, and
more also, if adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 now therefore, as the lord liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of david my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 and king solomon sent by the hand of benaiah the son of jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 and unto abiathar the priest said the king, get thee to 
 
 ___________________________
 
anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but i will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the lord
god before david my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 so solomon thrust out abiathar from being priest unto the lord;
that he might fulfil the word of the lord, which he spake concerning
the house of eli in shiloh.

2:28 then tidings came to joab: for joab had turned after adonijah,
though he turned not after absalom. and joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 and it was told king solomon that joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. then solomon
sent benaia
 
 ___________________________
 
, the saying is good: as my lord the
king hath said, so will thy servant do. and shimei dwelt in jerusalem
many days.

2:39 and it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
servants of shimei ran away unto achish son of maachah king of gath.
and they told shimei, saying, behold, thy servants be in gath.

2:40 and shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to gath to achish
to seek his servants: and shimei went, and brought his servants from
gath.

2:41 and it was told solomon that shimei had gone from jerusalem to
gath, and was come again.

2:42 and the king sent and called for shimei, and said unto him, did i
not make thee to swear by the lord, and protested unto thee, saying,
know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, the word
that i have heard is good.

2:43 why then hast thou not kept the oath of the lord, and the
commandment that i have charged thee with?  2:44 th
 
 ___________________________
 
e king said
moreover to shimei, thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart
is privy to, that thou didst to david my father: therefore the lord
shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head; 2:45 and king solomon
shall be blessed, and the throne of david shall be established before
the lord for ever.

2:46 so the king commanded benaiah the son of jehoiada; which went
out, and fell upon him, that he died. and the kingdom was established
in the hand of solomon.

3:1 and solomon made affinity with pharaoh king of egypt, and took
pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of david, until he
had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the lord,
and the wall of jerusalem round about.

3:2 only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no
house built unto the name of the lord, until those days.

3:3 and solomon loved the lord, walking in the statutes of david his
father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

3
 
 ___________________________
 
:4 and the king went to gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 in gibeon the lord appeared to solomon in a dream by night: and
god said, ask what i shall give thee.

3:6 and solomon said, thou hast shewed unto thy servant david my
father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on his throne, as it is this day.

3:7 and now, o lord my god, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
david my father: and i am but a little child: i know not how to go out
or come in.

3:8 and thy servant is in the midst of
 
 ___________________________
 
 thy people which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.

3:9 give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that i may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people?  3:10 and the speech pleased the
lord, that solomon had asked this thing.

3:11 and god said unto him, because thou hast asked this thing, and
hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for
thyself understanding to discern judgment; 3:12 behold, i have done
according to thy words: lo, i have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

3:13 and i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings
like unto thee all thy days.

3:14 and if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my
commandments, as thy father david did walk, then i will lengthen thy
days.

3:15 and solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. and he came to
jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the lord, and
offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a
feast to all his servants.

3:16 then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
stood before him.

3:17 and the one woman said, o my lord, i and this woman dwell in one
house; and i was delivered of a child with her in the house.

3:18 and it came to pass the third day after that i
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto the king,
for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, o my lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it. but the other said, let it
be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

3:27 then the king answered and said, give her the living child, and
in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

3:28 and all israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged;
and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of god was in
him, to do judgment.

4:1 so king solomon was king over all israel.

4:2 and these were the princes which he had; azariah the son of zadok
the priest, 4:3 elihoreph and ahiah, the sons of shisha, scribes;
jehoshaphat the son of ahilud, the recorder.

4:4 and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over the host: and zadok and
abiathar were the priests: 4:5 and azariah the son of nathan was over
the officers: and zabud the son of nathan was principal officer, and
the king's friend: 4:6 and ahishar was over the household: and
adoniram 
 
 ___________________________
 
the son of abda was over the tribute.

4:7 and solomon had twelve officers over all israel, which provided
victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year
made provision.

4:8 and these are their names: the son of hur, in mount ephraim: 4:9
the son of dekar, in makaz, and in shaalbim, and bethshemesh, and
elonbethhanan: 4:10 the son of hesed, in aruboth; to him pertained
sochoh, and all the land of hepher: 4:11 the son of abinadab, in all
the region of dor; which had taphath the daughter of solomon to wife:
4:12 baana
 
 ___________________________
 
ach and megiddo,
and all bethshean, which is by zartanah beneath jezreel, from
bethshean to abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond jokneam:
4:13 the son of geber, in ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of
jair the son of manasseh, which are in gilead; to him also pertained
the region of argob, which is in bashan, threescore great cities with
walls and brasen bars: 4:14 ahinadab the son of iddo had mahanaim:
4:15 ahimaaz was in naphtali; he also took basmath the daughter of
solomon to wife: 4:16 baanah the son of hushai was in asher and in
aloth: 4:17 jehoshaphat the son of paruah, in issachar: 4:18 shimei
the son of elah, in benjamin: 4:19 geber the son of uri was in the
country of gilead, in the country of sihon king of the amorites, and
of og king of bashan; and he was the only officer which was in the
land.

4:20 judah and israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.

4:21 and solomon reigned over all
 
 ___________________________
 
 kingdoms from the river unto the
land of the philistines, and unto the border of egypt: they brought
presents, and served solomon all the days of his life.

4:22 and solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine
flour, and threescore measures of meal, 4:23 ten fat oxen, and twenty
oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and
roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.

4:24 for he had dominion over all the region on this side the river,
from tiphsah even to azzah, over all the kings on this side the river:
and he had peace on all sides round about him.

4:25 and judah and israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and

 
 ___________________________
 
under his fig tree, from dan even to beersheba, all the days of
solomon.

4:26 and solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,
and twelve thousand horsemen.

4:27 and those officers provided victual for king solomon, and for all
that came unto king solomon's table, every man in his month: they
lacked nothing.

4:28 barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they
unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his
charge.

4:29 and god gave solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

4:30 and solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the east country, and all the wisdom of egypt.

4:31 for he was wiser than all m
 
 ___________________________
 
en; than ethan the ezrahite, and
heman, and chalcol, and darda, the sons of mahol: and his fame was in
all nations round about.

4:32 and he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a
thousand and five.

4:33 and he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

4:34 and there came of all people to hear the wisdom of solomon, from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.

5:1 and hiram king of tyre sent his servants unto solomon; for he had
heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for
hiram was ever a lover of david.

5:2 and solomon sent to hiram, saying, 5:3 thou knowest how that david
my father could not build an house unto the name of the lord his god
for the wars which were about him on every side, until the lord put
them under the soles of his feet.

5:4 but n
 
 ___________________________
 
nto david my father, saying, thy son, whom
i will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto
my name.

5:6 now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of
lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee
will i give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt
appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can
skill to hew timber like unto the sidonians.

5:7 and it came to pass, when hiram heard the words of solomon, that
he rejoiced greatly, and said, blessed be the lord this day, which
hath given unto david a wise son over this great people.

5:8 and hiram sent to solomon, saying, i have considered the things
which thou sentest to me for: and i will do all thy desire concerning
timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

5:9 my servants shall bring them down from lebanon unto the sea: and i
will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt
appoint me, and will cause them to b
 
 ___________________________
 
e discharged there, and thou shalt
receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for
my household.

5:10 so hiram gave solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all
his desire.

5:11 and solomon gave hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food
to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave solomon
to hiram year by year.

5:12 and the lord gave solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there
was peace between hiram and solomon; and they two made a league
together.

5:13 and king solomon raised a levy out of all israel; and the levy
was thirty thousand men.

5:14 and he sent them to lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a
month they were in lebanon, and two months at home: and adoniram was
over the levy.

5:15 and solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens,
and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains; 5:16 beside the chief
of solomon's officers which were over the work, three thousand
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.

5:17 and the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly
stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.

5:18 and solomon's builders and hiram's builders did hew them, and the
stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.

6:1 and it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after
the children of israel were come out of the land of egypt, in the
fourth year of solomon's reign over israel, in the month zif, which is
the second month, that he began to build the house of the lord.

6:2 and the house which king solomon built for the lord, the length
thereof was threescore cub
 
 ___________________________
 
iron heard in the house, while it was in
building.

6:8 the door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the
house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber,
and out of the middle into the third.

6:9 so he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with
beams and boards of cedar.

6:10 and then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits
high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.

6:11 and the word of the lord came to solomon, saying, 6:12 concerning
this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my
statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to
walk in them; then will i perform my word with thee, which i spake
unto david thy father: 6:13 and i will dwell among the children of
israel, and will not forsake my people israel.

6:14 so solomon built the house, and finished it.

6:15 and he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,
both the floor of the house, a
 
 ___________________________
 
e before it, was forty cubits
long.

6:18 and the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open
flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.

6:19 and the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the
ark of the covenant of the lord.

6:20 and the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and
twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and
he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of
cedar.

6:21 so solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made
a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid
it with gold.

6:22 and the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished
all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid
with gold.

6:23 and within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each
ten cubits high.

6:24 and five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits
the other wing of the cherub: from the u
 
 ___________________________
 
m trees and open flowers:
and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.

6:36 and he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and
a row of cedar beams.

6:37 in the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the lord
laid, in the month zif: 6:38 and in the eleventh year, in the month
bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all
the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. so was he
seven years in building it.

7:1 but solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he
finished all his house.

7:2 he built also the house of the forest of lebanon; the length
thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits,
and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars,
with cedar beams upon the pillars.

7:3 and it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on
forty five pillars, fifteen in a row.

7:4 and there were windows in three rows, and light was against l
 
 ___________________________
 
st light in three ranks.

7:6 and he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty
cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was
before them: and the other pillars and the thick beam were before
them.

7:7 then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the
porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the
floor to the other.

7:8 and his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch,
which was of the like work. solomon made also an house for pharaoh's
daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.

7:9 all these were of costly stones, according to the measures of
hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the
foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great
court.

7:10 and the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones,
stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

7:11 and above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones,
a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd cedars.

7:12 and the great court round about was with three rows of hewed
stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the
house of the lord, and for the porch of the house.

7:13 and king solomon sent and fetched hiram out of tyre.

7:14 he was a widow's son of the tribe of naphtali, and his father was
a man of tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and
understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. and he came to
king solomon, and wrought all his work.

7:15 for he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece:
and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.

7:16 and he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops
of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and
the height of the other chapiter was five cubits: 7:17 and nets of
checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were
upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapite
 
 ___________________________
 
ne measure, and one size.

7:38 then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty
baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten
bases one laver.

7:39 and he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on
the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of
the house eastward over against the south.

7:40 and hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. so
hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king solomon for
the house of the lord: 7:41 the two pillars, and the two bowls of the
chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two
networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the
top of the pillars; 7:42 and four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the
two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the pillars; 7:43 and the
ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases; 7:44 and one sea, and twelve
oxen under
 
 ___________________________
 
 the sea; 7:45 and the pots, and the shovels, and the
basons: and all these vessels, which hiram made to king solomon for
the house of the lord, were of bright brass.

7:46 in the plain of jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between succoth and zarthan.

7:47 and solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were
exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.

7:48 and solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of
the lord: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the
shewbread was, 7:49 and the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the
right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, 7:50 and the bowls, and the
snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure
gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house,
the most holy place, and for the 
 
 ___________________________
 
doors of the house, to wit, of the
temple.

7:51 so was ended all the work that king solomon made for the house of
the lord. and solomon brought in the things which david his father had
dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
among the treasures of the house of the lord.

8:1 then solomon assembled the elders of israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of israel, unto
king solomon in jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the
covenant of the lord out of the city of david, which is zion.

8:2 and all the men of israel assembled themselves unto king solomon
at the feast in the month ethanim, which is the seventh month.

8:3 and all the elders of israel came, and the priests took up the
ark.

8:4 and they brought up the ark of the lord, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
even those did the priests
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the levites bring up.

8:5 and king solomon, and all the congregation of israel, that were
assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep
and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

8:6 and the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the lord
unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims.

8:7 for the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of
the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof

 
 ___________________________
 
are unto this day.

8:9 there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which
moses put there at horeb, when the lord made a covenant with the
children of israel, when they came out of the land of egypt.

8:10 and it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud filled the house of the lord, 8:11 so that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the lord had filled the house of the lord.

8:12 then spake solomon, the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 i have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.

8:14 and the king turned his face about, and blessed all the
congregation of israel: (and all the congregation of israel stood;)
8:15 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, which spake with
his mouth unto david my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
saying, 8:16 since the day that i brought forth my people isra
 
 ___________________________
 
hy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my
name.

8:20 and the lord hath performed his word that he spake, and i am
risen up in the room of david my father, and sit on the throne of
israel, as the lord promised, and have built an house for the name of
the lord god of israel.

8:21 and i have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of egypt.

8:22 and solomon stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of
all the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands toward
heaven: 8:23 and he said, lord god of israel, there is no god like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
8:24 who hast kept with thy servant david my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is this day
 
 ___________________________
 
u
broughtest forth out of egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
8:52 that thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
and unto the supplication of thy people israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 for thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of moses
thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of egypt, o lord
god.

8:54 and it was so, that when solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication unto the lord, he arose from before the
altar of the lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.

8:55 and he stood, and blessed all the congregation of israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 blessed be the lord, that hath given rest
unto his people israel, according to all that he promised: there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the
hand of moses his servant.

8
 
 ___________________________
 
e nigh unto the lord our god day and night, that he
maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people israel
at all times, as the matter shall require: 8:60 that all the people of
the earth may know that the lord is god, and that there is none else.

8:61 let your heart therefore be perfect with the lord our god, to
walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.

8:62 and the king, and all israel with him, offered sacrifice before
the lord.

8:63 and solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
offered unto the lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred
and twenty thousand sheep. so the king and all the children of israel
dedicated the house of the lord.

8:64 the same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was
before the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the
brasen altar that was before the lord was too little to receive
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 and at that time solomon held a feast, and all israel with him, a
great congregation, from the entering in of hamath unto the river of
egypt, before the lord our god, seven days and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 on the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
goodness that the lord had done for david his servant, and for israel
his people.

9:1 and it came to pass, when solomon had finished the building of the
house 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the lord, and the king's house, and all solomon's desire
which he was pleased to do, 9:2 that the lord appeared to solomon the
second time, as he had appeared unto him at gibeon.

9:3 and the lord said unto him, i have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication, that thou hast made before me: i have hallowed this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine
eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

9:4 and if thou wilt walk before me, as david thy father walked, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that i
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statute
 
 ___________________________
 
use, which is high, every one that passeth
by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, why
hath the lord done thus unto this land, and to this house?  9:9 and
they shall answer, because they forsook the lord their god, who
brought forth their fathers out of the land of egypt, and have taken
hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them:
therefore hath the lord brought upon them all this evil.

9:10 and it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when solomon had
built the two houses, the house of the lord, and the king's house,
9:11 (now hiram the king of tyre had furnished solomon with cedar
trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that
then king solomon gave hiram twenty cities in the land of galilee.

9:12 and hiram came out from tyre to see the cities which solomon had
given him; and they pleased him not.

9:13 and he said, what cities are these which thou hast given me, my
brother? and he called them the land
 
 ___________________________
 
 of cabul unto this day.

9:14 and hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.

9:15 and this is the reason of the levy which king solomon raised; for
to build the house of the lord, and his own house, and millo, and the
wall of jerusalem, and hazor, and megiddo, and gezer.

9:16 for pharaoh king of egypt had gone up, and taken gezer, and burnt
it with fire, and slain the canaanites that dwelt in the city, and
given it for a present unto his daughter, solomon's wife.

9:17 and solomon built gezer, and bethhoron the nether, 9:18 and
baalath, and tadmor in the wilderness, in the land, 9:19 and all the
cities of store that solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and
cities for his horsemen, and that which solomon desired to build in
jerusalem, and in lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

9:20 and all the people that were left of the amorites, hittites,
perizzites, hivites, and jebusites, which were not of the children of
israel, 9:21 their children that were 
 
 ___________________________
 
left after them in the land,
whom the children of israel also were not able utterly to destroy,
upon those did solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.

9:22 but of the children of israel did solomon make no bondmen: but
they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his
captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.

9:23 these were the chief of the officers that were over solomon's
work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that
wrought in the work.

9:24 but pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of david unto her
house which solomon had built for her: then did he build millo.

9:25 and three times in a year did solomon offer burnt offerings and
peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the lord, and he
burnt incense upon the altar that was before the lord. so he finished
the house.

9:26 and king solomon made a navy of ships
 
 ___________________________
 
 in eziongeber, which is
beside eloth, on the shore of the red sea, in the land of edom.

9:27 and hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had
knowledge of the sea, with the servants of solomon.

9:28 and they came to ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four
hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king solomon.

10:1 and when the queen of sheba heard of the fame of solomon
concerning the name of the lord, she came to prove him with hard
questions.

10:2 and she came to jerusalem with a very great train, with camels
that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when
she was come to solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her
heart.

10:3 and solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing
hid from the king, which he told her not.

10:4 and when the queen of sheba had seen all solomon's wisdom, and
the house that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

10:9 blessed be the lord thy god, which delighted in thee, to set thee
on the throne of israel: because the lord loved israel for ever,
therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

10:10 and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more
such abundance of spices as these which the queen of sheba gave to
king solomon.

10:11 and the navy also of hiram, that brought gold from ophir,
brought in from ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious
stones.

10:12 and the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of
the lord, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for
singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.

10:13 and king solomon gave unto the queen of sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which solomon gave her of his royal
bount
 
 ___________________________
 
y.

so she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.

10:14 now the weight of gold that came to solomon in one year was six
hundred threescore and six talents of gold, 10:15 beside that he had
of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of
all the kings of arabia, and of the governors of the country.

10:16 and king solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of gold went to one target.

10:17 and he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of
gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the
forest of lebanon.

10:18 moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with the best gold.

10:19 the throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round
behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat,
and two li
 
 ___________________________
 
ons stood beside the stays.

10:20 and twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.

10:21 and all king solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all
the vessels of the house of the forest of lebanon were of pure gold;
none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of
solomon.

10:22 for the king had at sea a navy of tharshish with the navy of
hiram: once in three years came the navy of tharshish, bringing gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

10:23 so king solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches
and for wisdom.

10:24 and all the earth sought to solomon, to hear his wisdom, which
god had put in his heart.

10:25 and they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spice
 
 ___________________________
 
s, horses, and
mules, a rate year by year.

10:26 and solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had
a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen,
whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at
jerusalem.

10:27 and the king made silver to be in jerusalem as stones, and
cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for
abundance.

10:28 and solomon had horses brought out of egypt, and linen yarn: the
king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

10:29 and a chariot came up and went out of egypt for six hundred
shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for
all the kings of the hittites, and for the kings of syria, did they
bring them out by their means.

11:1 but king solomon loved many strange women, together with the
daughter of pharaoh, women of the moabites, ammonites, edomites,
zidonians, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
ittites: 11:2 of the nations concerning which the lord
said unto the children of israel, ye shall not go in to them, neither
shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 and he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

11:4 for it came to pass, when solomon was old, that his wives turned
away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with
the lord his god, as was the heart of david his father.

11:5 for solomon went after ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians,
and after milcom the abomination of the ammonites.

11:6 and solomon did evil in the sight of the lord, and went not fully
after the lord, as did david his father.

11:7 then did solomon build an high place for chemosh, the abomination
of moab, in the hill that is
 
 ___________________________
 
 before jerusalem, and for molech, the
abomination of the children of ammon.

11:8 and likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods.

11:9 and the lord was angry with solomon, because his heart was turned
from the lord god of israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 11:10
and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
after other gods: but he kept not that which the lord commanded.

11:11 wherefore the lord said unto solomon, forasmuch as this is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which i
have commanded thee, i will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 notwithstandin
 
 ___________________________
 
g in thy days i will not do it for david thy
father's sake: but i will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

11:13 howbeit i will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for david my servant's sake, and for jerusalem's sake
which i have chosen.

11:14 and the lord stirred up an adversary unto solomon, hadad the
edomite: he was of the king's seed in edom.

11:15 for it came to pass, when david was in edom, and joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had
smitten every male in edom; 11:16 (for six months did joab remain
there with all israel, until he had cut off every male in edom:) 11:17
that hadad fled, he and certain edomites of his father's servants with
him, to go into egypt; hadad being yet a little child.

11:18 and they arose out of midian, and c
 
 ___________________________
 
hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered, nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 and god stirred him up another adversary, rezon the son of
eliadah, which fled from his lord hadadezer king of zobah: 11:24 and
he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when david
slew them of zobah: and they went to damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reigned in damascus.

11:25 and he was an adversary to israel all the days of solomon,
beside the mischief that hadad did: and he abhorred israel, and
reigned over syria.

11:26 and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephrathite of zereda,
solomon's servant, whose mother's name was zeruah, a widow woman, even
he lifted up his hand against the king.

11:27 and this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
king: solomon built millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of
david his father.

11:28 and the man jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and solomon
seei
 
 ___________________________
 
ll the charge of the house of joseph.

11:29 and it came to pass at that time when jeroboam went out of
jerusalem, that the prophet ahijah the shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 and ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pieces: 11:31 and he said to jeroboam, take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the lord, the god of israel, behold, i will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (but he shall have one tribe for my servant david's
sake, and for jerusalem's sake, the city which i have chosen out of
all the tribes of israel:) 11:33 because that they have forsaken me,
and have worshipped ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians, chemosh
the god of the moabites, and milcom the god of the children of ammon,
and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine
eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did dav
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that
thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over israel.

11:38 and it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that i command
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statutes and my commandments, as david my servant did; that i
will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as i built for david,
and will give israel unto thee.

11:39 and i will for this afflict the seed of david, but not for ever.

11:40 solomon sought therefore to kill jeroboam. and jeroboam arose,
and fled into egypt, unto shishak king of egypt, and was in egypt
until the death of solomon.

11:41 and the rest of the acts of solomon, and all that he did, and
his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of solomon?
11:42 and the time that solomon reigned in jerusalem over all israel
was forty years.

11:43 and solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of david his father: and rehoboam his son reig
 
 ___________________________
 
ned in his stead.

12:1 and rehoboam went to shechem: for all israel were come to shechem
to make him king.

12:2 and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat, who was yet
in egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king
solomon, and jeroboam dwelt in egypt;) 12:3 that they sent and called
him. and jeroboam and all the congregation of israel came, and spake
unto rehoboam, saying, 12:4 thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

12:5 and he said unto them, depart yet for three days, then come again
to me. and the people departed.

12:6 and king rehoboam consulted with the old men, that s
 
 ___________________________
 
tood before
solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, how do ye advise that
i may answer this people?  12:7 and they spake unto him, saying, if
thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy
servants for ever.

12:8 but he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given
him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and
which stood before him: 12:9 and he said unto them, what cou
 
 ___________________________
 
pass, when all israel heard that jeroboam was
come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and
made him king over all israel: there was none that followed the house
of david, but the tribe of judah only.

12:21 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he assembled all the
house of judah, with the tribe of benjamin, an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of israel, to bring the kingdom again to rehoboam the son of solomon.

12:22 but the word of god came unto shemaiah the man of god, saying,
12:23 speak unto rehoboam, the son of solomon, king of judah, and unto
all the house of judah and benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, 12:24 thus saith the lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of israel: return every man to his
house; for this thing is from me. they hearkened therefore to the word
of the lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
lord.
 
 ___________________________
 
 14:18 and
they buried him; and all israel mourned for him, according to the word
of the lord, which he spake by the hand of his servant ahijah the
prophet.

14:19 and the rest of the acts of jeroboam, how he warred, and how he
reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of israel.

14:20 and the days which jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years:
and he slept with his fathers, and nadab his son reigned in his stead.

14:21 and rehoboam the son of solomon reigned in judah. rehoboam was
forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
seventeen years in jerusalem, the city which the lord did choose out
of all the tribes of israel, to put his name there. and his mother's
name was naamah an ammonitess.

14:22 and judah did evil in the sight of the lord, and they provoked
him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all
that their fathers had done.

14:23 for they also built them high places, and images, an
 
 ___________________________
 
hill, and under every green tree.

14:24 and there were also sodomites in the land: and they did
according to all the abominations of the nations which the lord cast
out before the children of israel.

14:25 and it came to pass in the fifth year of king rehoboam, that
shishak king of egypt came up against jerusalem: 14:26 and he took
away the treasures of the house of the lord, and the treasures of the
king's house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields
of gold which solomon had made.

14:27 and king rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and
committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept
the door of the king's house.

14:28 and it was so, when the king went into the house of the lord,
that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard
chamber.

14:29 now the rest of the acts of rehoboam, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
14:30 and there was war between r
 
 ___________________________
 
d, of which the lord
said, in jerusalem will i put my name.

21:5 and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the lord.

21:6 and he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times,
and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he
wrought much wickedness in the sight of the lord, to provoke him to
anger.

21:7 and he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the
house, of which the lord said to david, and to solomon his son, in
this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen out of all tribes of
israel, will i put my name for ever: 21:8 neither will i make the feet
of israel move any more out of the land which i gave their fathers;
only if they will observe to do according to all that i have commanded
them, and according to all the law that my servant moses commanded
them.

21:9 but they hearkened not: and manasseh seduced them to do more evil
than did the nations whom the lord destroyed before 
 
 ___________________________
 
n, which was in the suburbs, and burned
the chariots of the sun with fire.

23:12 and the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of
ahaz, which the kings of judah had made, and the altars which manasseh
had made in the two courts of the house of the lord, did the king beat
down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into
the brook kidron.

23:13 and the high places that were before jerusalem, which were on
the right hand of the mount of corruption, which solomon the king of
israel had builded for ashtoreth the abomination of the zidonians, and
for chemosh the abomination of the moabites, and for milcom the
abomination of the children of ammon, did the king defile.

23:14 and he brake in pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and
filled their places with the bones of men.

23:15 moreover the altar that was at bethel, and the high place which
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin, had made, both that
altar and the high place he
 
 ___________________________
 
was besieged.

24:11 and nebuchadnezzar king of babylon came against the city, and
his servants did besiege it.

24:12 and jehoiachin the king of judah went out to the king of
babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and
his officers: and the king of babylon took him in the eighth year of
his reign.

24:13 and he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the
lord, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the
vessels of gold which solomon king of israel had made in the temple of
the lord, as the lord had said.

24:14 and he carried away all jerusalem, and all the princes, and all
the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the
craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the
people of the land.

24:15 and he carried away jehoiachin to babylon, and the king's
mother, and the king's wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the
land, those carried he into captivity from jerusalem to ba
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the lord, did
the chaldees break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to
babylon.

25:14 and the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons,
and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they
away.

25:15 and the firepans, and the bowls, and such things as were of
gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took
away.

25:16 the two pillars, one sea, and the bases which solomon had made
for the house of the lord; the brass of all these vessels was without
weight.

25:17 the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the
chapiter upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three
cubits; and the wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter
round about, all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar
with wreathen work.

25:18 and the captain of the guard took seraiah the chief priest, and
zephaniah the second priest, and the three ke
 
 ___________________________
 
 jezreelitess; the second
daniel, of abigail the carmelitess: 3:2 the third, absalom the son of
maachah the daughter of talmai king of geshur: the fourth, adonijah
the son of haggith: 3:3 the fifth, shephatiah of abital: the sixth,
ithream by eglah his wife.

3:4 these six were born unto him in hebron; and there he reigned seven
years and six months: and in jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
years.

3:5 and these were born unto him in jerusalem; shimea, and shobab, and
nathan, and solomon, four, of bathshua the daughter of ammiel: 3:6
ibhar also, and elishama, and eliphelet, 3:7 and nogah, and nepheg,
and japhia, 3:8 and elishama, and eliada, and eliphelet, nine.

3:9 these were all the sons of david, beside the sons of the
concubines, and tamar their sister.

3:10 and solomon's son was rehoboam, abia his son, asa his son,
jehoshaphat his son, 3:11 joram his son, ahaziah his son, joash his
son, 3:12 amaziah his son, azariah his son, jotham his son, 3:13 ahaz
his son, h
 
 ___________________________
 
iam. the sons
also of aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

6:4 eleazar begat phinehas, phinehas begat abishua, 6:5 and abishua
begat bukki, and bukki begat uzzi, 6:6 and uzzi begat zerahiah, and
zerahiah begat meraioth, 6:7 meraioth begat amariah, and amariah begat
ahitub, 6:8 and ahitub begat zadok, and zadok begat ahimaaz, 6:9 and
ahimaaz begat azariah, and azariah begat johanan, 6:10 and johanan
begat azariah, (he it is that executed the priest's office in the
temple that solomon built in jerusalem:) 6:11 and azariah begat
amariah, and amariah begat ahitub, 6:12 and ahitub begat zadok, and
zadok begat shallum, 6:13 and shallum begat hilkiah, and hilkiah begat
azariah, 6:14 and azariah begat seraiah, and seraiah begat jehozadak,
6:15 and jehozadak went into captivity, when the lord carried away
judah and jerusalem by the hand of nebuchadnezzar.

6:16 the sons of levi; gershom, kohath, and merari.

6:17 and these be the names of the sons of gershom; libni, and sh
 
 ___________________________
 

his son, 6:27 eliab his son, jeroham his son, elkanah his son.

6:28 and the sons of samuel; the firstborn vashni, and abiah.

6:29 the sons of merari; mahli, libni his son, shimei his son, uzza
his son, 6:30 shimea his son, haggiah his son, asaiah his son.

6:31 and these are they whom david set over the service of song in the
house of the lord, after that the ark had rest.

6:32 and they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle
of the congregation with singing, until solomon had built the house of
the lord in jerusalem: and then they waited on their office according
to their order.

6:33 and these are they that waited with their children. of the sons
of the kohathites: heman a singer, the son of joel, the son of
shemuel, 6:34 the son of elkanah, the son of jeroham, the son of
eliel, the son of toah, 6:35 the son of zuph, the son of elkanah, the
son of mahath, the son of amasai, 6:36 the son of elkanah, the son of
joel, the son of azariah, the son of zephan
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
all that he had.

14:1 now hiram king of tyre sent messengers to david, and timber of
cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house.

14:2 and david perceived that the lord had confirmed him king over
israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people
israel.

14:3 and david took more wives at jerusalem: and david begat more sons
and daughters.

14:4 now these are the names of his children which he had in
jerusalem; shammua, and shobab, nathan, and solomon, 14:5 and ibhar,
and elishua, and elpalet, 14:6 and nogah, and nepheg, and japhia, 14:7
and elishama, and beeliada, and eliphalet.

14:8 and when the philistines heard that david was anointed king over
all israel, all the philistines went up to seek david. and david heard
of it, and went out against them.

14:9 and the philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of
rephaim.

14:10 and david enquired of god, saying, shall i go up against the
philistines? and wilt thou delive
 
 ___________________________
 
ans of damascus came to help hadarezer king of
zobah, david slew of the syrians two and twenty thousand men.

18:6 then david put garrisons in syriadamascus; and the syrians became
david's servants, and brought gifts. thus the lord preserved david
whithersoever he went.

18:7 and david took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
hadarezer, and brought them to jerusalem.

18:8 likewise from tibhath, and from chun, cities of hadarezer,
brought david very much brass, wherewith solomon made the brasen sea,
and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.

18:9 now when tou king of hamath heard how david had smitten all the
host of hadarezer king of zobah; 18:10 he sent hadoram his son to king
david, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he
had fought against hadarezer, and smitten him; (for hadarezer had war
with tou;) and with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and
brass.

18:11 them also king david dedicated unto the lord, with the silver
 
 ___________________________
 
and this is
the altar of the burnt offering for israel.

22:2 and david commanded to gather together the strangers that were in
the land of israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build
the house of god.

22:3 and david prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors
of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without
weight; 22:4 also cedar trees in abundance: for the zidonians and they
of tyre brought much cedar wood to david.

22:5 and david said, solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
that is to be builded for the lord must be exceeding magnifical, of
fame and of glory throughout all countries: i will therefore now make
preparation for it. so david prepared abundantly before his death.

22:6 then he called for solomon his son, and charged him to build an
house for the lord god of israel.

22:7 and david said to solomon, my son, as for me, it was in my mind
to build an house unto the name of the lord my god: 22:8 but the word
 
 ___________________________
 

of the lord came to me, saying, thou hast shed blood abundantly, and
hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name,
because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

22:9 behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest;
and i will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his
name shall be solomon, and i will give peace and quietness unto israel
in his days.

22:10 he shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and
i will be his father; and i will establish the throne of his kingdom
over israel for ever.

22:11 now, my son, the lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build
the house of the lord thy god, as he hath said of thee.

22:12 only the lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charge concerning israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
er; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in
abundance: timber also and stone have i prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every
manner of work.

22:16 of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is
no number. arise therefore, and be doing, and the lord be with thee.

22:17 david also commanded all the princes of israel to help solomon
his son, saying, 22:18 is not the lord your god with you? and hath he
not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of
the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the lord, and
before his people.

22:19 now set your heart and your soul to seek the lord your god;
arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the lord god, to bring
the ark of the covenant of the lord, and the holy vessels of god, into
the house that is to be built to the name of the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d.

23:1 so when david was old and full of days, he made solomon his son
king over israel.

23:2 and he gathered together all the princes of israel, with the
priests and the levites.

23:3 now the levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and
upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and
eight thousand.

23:4 of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work
of the house of the lord; and six thousand were officers and judges:
23:5 moreover four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised
the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
28:3 but
god said unto me, thou shalt not build an house for my name, because
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 howbeit the lord god of israel chose me before all the house of
my father to be king over israel for ever: for he hath chosen judah to
be the ruler; and of the house of judah, the house of my father; and
among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all
israel: 28:5 and of all my sons, (for the lord hath given me many
sons,) he hath chosen solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the lord over israel.

28:6 and he said unto me, solomon thy son, he shall build my house and
my courts: for i have chosen him to be my son, and i will be his
father.

28:7 moreover i will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant
to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

28:8 now therefore in the sight of all israel the congregation of the
lord, and in the audience of our god, keep and seek for all the
commandme
 
 ___________________________
 
nts of the lord your god: that ye may possess this good land,
and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.

28:9 and thou, solomon my son, know thou the god of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the lord
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:10 take heed now; for the lord hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 then david gave to solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses
 
 ___________________________
 
 bowls, and the cups: and for the
golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise
silver by weight for every bason of silver: 28:18 and for the altar of
incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the
ark of the covenant of the lord.

28:19 all this, said david, the lord made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

28:20 and david said to solomon his son, be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the lord god, even
my god, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of
the lord.

28:21 and, behold, the courses of the priests and the levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of god: and
there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing
skilful man, for any manner of ser
 
 ___________________________
 
vice: also the princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy commandment.

29:1 furthermore david the king said unto all the congregation,
solomon my son, whom alone god hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the lord
god.

29:2 now i have prepared with all my might for the house of my god the
gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of
iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious
stones, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 all
thine own.

29:17 i know also, my god, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. as for me, in the uprightness of mine heart i
have willingly offered all these things: and now have i seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 o lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which i have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congregation blessed the lord god of their fathers, and
bowed down their heads, and worshipped the lord, and the king.

29:21 and they sacrificed sacrifices unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings unto the lord, on the m
 
 ___________________________
 
orrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all israel: 29:22 and did
eat and drink before the lord on that day with great gladness. and
they made solomon the son of david king the second time, and anointed
him unto the lord to be the chief governor, and zadok to be priest.

29:23 then solomon sat on the throne of the lord as king instead of
david his father, and prospered; and all israel obeyed him.

29:24 and all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons
likewise of king david, submitted themselves unto solomon the king.

29:25 and the lord magnified solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on
any king before him in israel.

29:26 thus david the son of jesse reigned over all israel.

29:27 and the t
 
 ___________________________
 
ime that he reigned over israel was forty years; seven
years reigned he in hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
jerusalem.

29:28 and he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour:
and solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 now the acts of david the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of samuel the seer, and in the book of nathan the
prophet, and in the book of gad the seer, 29:30 with all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.




the second book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the lord his god was with
 
 ___________________________
 
 him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 so solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of god, which moses the servant of the lord had made in
the wilderness.

1:4 but the ark of god had david brought up from kirjathjearim to the
place which david had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at jerusalem.

1:5 moreover the brasen altar, that bezaleel the son of uri, the son
of hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the lord: an
 
 ___________________________
 
d
solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 and solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the lord,
which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a
thousand burnt offerings upon it.

1:7 in that night did god appear unto solomon, and said unto him, ask
what i shall give thee.

1:8 and solomon said unto god, thou hast shewed great mercy unto david
my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

1:9 now, o lord god, let thy promise unto david my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of
the earth in multitude.

1:10 give me now wisdom and knowledge, that i may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
great?  1:11 and god said to solomon, because this was in thine heart,
and thou hast not a
 
 ___________________________
 
sked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom
and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom
i have made thee king: 1:12 wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee;
and i will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of
the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like.

1:13 then solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at
gibeon to jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation,
and reigned over israel.

1:14 and solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand
and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he
placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at jerusalem.

1:15 and the king made silver and gold at jerusalem as plenteous as
stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the
vale
 
 ___________________________
 
 for abundance.

1:16 and solomon had horses brought out of egypt, and linen yarn: the
king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

1:17 and they fetched up, and brought forth out of egypt a chariot for
six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty:
and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the hittites, and
for the kings of syria, by their means.

2:1 and solomon determined to build an house for the name of the lord,
and an house for his kingdom.

2:2 and solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

2:3 and solomon sent to huram the king of tyre, saying, as thou didst
deal with david my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 behold, i build an house to the name o
 
 ___________________________
 
 to cut timber in
lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants, 2:9 even
to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which i am about to
build shall be wonderful great.

2:10 and, behold, i will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil.

2:11 then huram the king of tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
solomon, because the lord hath loved his people, he hath made thee
king over them.

2:12 huram said moreover, blessed be the lord god of israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to david the king a wise son, endued
with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
lord, and an house for his kingdom.

2:13 and now i have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
huram my father's, 2:14 the son of a woman of the daughters of dan,
and his father was a man of ty
 
 ___________________________
 
in crimson; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord david thy father.

2:15 now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 2:16 and
we will cut wood out of lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we
will bring it to thee in floats by sea to joppa; and thou shalt carry
it up to jerusalem.

2:17 and solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
israel, after the numbering wherewith david his father had numbered
them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

2:18 and he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

3:1 then solomon began to build the house of the lord at jerusalem in
mou
 
 ___________________________
 
nt moriah, where the lord appeared unto david his father, in the
place that david had prepared in the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

3:2 and he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
the fourth year of his reign.

3:3 now these are the things wherein solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of god. the length by cubits after the first
measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

3:4 and the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the
height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

3:5 and the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid
with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains
 
 ___________________________
 
:8 he made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on
the right side, and five on the left. and he made an hundred basons of
gold.

4:9 furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

4:10 and he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over
against the south.

4:11 and huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. and
huram finished the work that he was to make for king solomon for the
house of god; 4:12 to wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the
top of the pillars; 4:13 and four hundred pomegranates on the two
wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two
pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.

4:14 he made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases; 4:15 one
sea, and twelve oxen und
 
 ___________________________
 
er it.

4:16 the pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
instruments, did huram his father make to king solomon for the house
of the lord of bright brass.

4:17 in the plain of jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between succoth and zeredathah.

4:18 thus solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the
weight of the brass could not be found out.

4:19 and solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of god,
the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;
4:20 moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner
doors thereof for the most holy p
 
 ___________________________
 
lace, and the doors of the house of
the temple, were of gold.

5:1 thus all the work that solomon made for the house of the lord was
finished: and solomon brought in all the things that david his father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasures of the house of god.

5:2 then solomon assembled the elders of israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of israel, unto
jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of the
city of david, which is zion.

5:3 wherefore all the men of israel assembled themselves unto the king
in the feast which was in the seventh month.

5:4 and all the elders of israel came; and the levites took up the
ark.

5:5 and they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
these did the priests and the levites bring up.

5:6 also king solomon, and all the congregation of israel that were
assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which
could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

5:7 and the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the lord
unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims: 5:8 for the cherubims spread
forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof above.

5:9 and they 
 
 ___________________________
 
umpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in praising and thanking the lord; and when they lifted up
their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick,
and praised the lord, saying, for he is good; for his mercy endureth
for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house
of the lord; 5:14 so that the priests could not stand to minister by
reason of the cloud: for the glory of the lord had filled the house of
god.

6:1 then said solomon, the lord hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 but i have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for
thy dwelling for ever.

6:3 and the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation
of israel: and all the congregation of israel stood.

6:4 and he said, blessed be the lord god of israel, who hath with his
hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father david,
saying, 6:5 since the day that i brought forth my people out of th
 
 ___________________________
 
0 the lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken:
for i am risen up in the room of david my father, and am set on the
throne of israel, as the lord promised, and have built the house for
the name of the lord god of israel.

6:11 and in it have i put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
lord, that he made with the children of israel.

6:12 and he stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of all
the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands: 6:13 for
solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five
cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of
the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
before all the congregation of israel, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven.

6:14 and said, o lord god of israel, there is no god like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 6:15
thou which 
 
 ___________________________
 
thy people which
have sinned against thee.

6:40 now, my god, let, i beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

6:41 now therefore arise, o lord god, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, o lord god, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

6:42 o lord god, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
the mercies of david thy servant.

7:1 now when solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and
the glory of the lord filled the house.

7:2 and the priests could not enter into the house of the lord,
because the glory of the lord had filled the lord's house.

7:3 and when all the children of israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glory of the lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and
praise
 
 ___________________________
 
d the lord, saying, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for
ever.

7:4 then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
lord.

7:5 and king solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all
the people dedicated the house of god.

7:6 and the priests waited on their offices: the levites also with
instruments of musick of the lord, which david the king had made to
praise the lord, because his mercy endureth for ever, when david
praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
them, and all israel stood.

7:7 moreover solomon hallowed the midd
 
 ___________________________
 
le of the court that was before
the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which solomon had
made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat
offerings, and the fat.

7:8 also at the same time solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of
hamath unto the river of egypt.

7:9 and in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept
the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

7:10 and on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the
goodness that the lord had shewed unto david, and to solomon, and to
israel his pe
 
 ___________________________
 
ople.

7:11 thus solomon finished the house of the lord, and the king's
house: and all that came into solomon's heart to make in the house of
the lord, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

7:12 and the lord appeared to solomon by night, and said unto him, i
have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an
house of sacrifice.

7:13 if i shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if i command the
locusts to devour the land, or if i send pestilence among my people;
7:14 if my people, which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will i hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

7:15 now mine
 
 ___________________________
 
1 and this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every
one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, why hath the lord done
thus unto this land, and unto this house?  7:22 and it shall be
answered, because they forsook the lord god of their fathers, which
brought them forth out of the land of egypt, and laid hold on other
gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought
all this evil upon them.

8:1 and it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein solomon
had built the house of the lord, and his own house, 8:2 that the
cities which huram had restored to solomon, solomon built them, and
caused the children of israel to dwell there.

8:3 and solomon went to hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.

8:4 and he built tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
which he built in hamath.

8:5 also he built bethhoron the upper, and bethhoron the nether,
fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars; 8:6 and baalath, and all
the store cit
 
 ___________________________
 
ies that solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the
cities of the horsemen, and all that solomon desired to build in
jerusalem, and in lebanon, and throughout all the land of his
dominion.

8:7 as for all the people that were left of the hittites, and the
amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites,
which were not of israel, 8:8 but of their children, who were left
after them in the land, whom the children of israel consumed not, them
did solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

8:9 but of the children of israel did solomon make no servants for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and
captains of his chariots and horsemen.

8:10 and these were the chief of king solomon's officers, even two
hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

8:11 and solomon brought up the daughter of pharaoh out of the city of
david unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, my wife
shall not dwell in
 
 ___________________________
 
 the house of david king of israel, because the
places are holy, whereunto the ark of the lord hath come.

8:12 then solomon offered burnt offerings unto the lord on the altar
of the lord, which he had built before the porch, 8:13 even after a
certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of
moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 and he appointed, according to the order of david his father, the
courses of the priests to their service
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had david the man of god commanded.

8:15 and they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
priests and levites concerning any matter, or concerning the
treasures.

8:16 now all the work of solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the lord, and until it was finished. so the
house of the lord was perfected.

8:17 then went solomon to eziongeber, and to eloth, at the sea side in
the land of edom.

8:18 and huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and
servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the
servants of solomon to ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty
talents of gold, and brought them to king solomon.

9:1 and whe
 
 ___________________________
 
n the queen of sheba heard of the fame of solomon, she came
to prove solomon with hard questions at jerusalem, with a very great
company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and
precious stones: and when she was come to solomon, she communed with
him of all that was in her heart.

9:2 and solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid
from solomon which he told her not.

9:3 and when the queen of sheba had seen the wisdom of solomon, and
the house that he had built, 9:4 and the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent
by which he went up into the house of the lord; there was no more
spirit in her.

9:5 and she said to the king, it was a true report which i heard in
mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: 9:6 howbeit i believed
not their words, until i came, and mine eyes had seen it: an
 
 ___________________________
 
ants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

9:8 blessed be the lord thy god, which delighted in thee to set thee
on his throne, to be king for the lord thy god: because thy god loved
israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over
them, to do judgment and justice.

9:9 and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any
such spice as the queen of sheba gave king solomon.

9:10 and the servants also of huram, and the servants of solomon,
which brought gold from ophir, brought algum trees and precious
stones.

9:11 and the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the
lord, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers:
and there were none such seen before in the land of judah.

9:12 and king solomon gave to the queen of sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king.
so she tu
 
 ___________________________
 
rned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

9:13 now the weight of gold that came to solomon in one year was six
hundred and threescore and six talents of gold; 9:14 beside that which
chapmen and merchants brought. and all the kings of arabia and
governors of the country brought gold and silver to solomon.

9:15 and king solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

9:16 and three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred
shekels of gold went to one shield. and the king put them in the house
of the forest of lebanon.

9:17 moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with pure gold.

9:18 and there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the
s
 
 ___________________________
 
itting place, and two lions standing by the stays: 9:19 and twelve
lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps.
there was not the like made in any kingdom.

9:20 and all the drinking vessels of king solomon were of gold, and
all the vessels of the house of the forest of lebanon were of pure
gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the
days of solomon.

9:21 for the king's ships went to tarshish with the servants of huram:
every three years once came the ships of tarshish bringing gold, and
silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

9:22 and king solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and
wisdom.

9:23 and all the kings of the earth sought the presence of solomon, to
hear his wisdom, that god had put in his heart.

9:24 and they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and raiment, harness
 
 ___________________________
 
, and spices, horses, and mules,
a rate year by year.

9:25 and solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at jerusalem.

9:26 and he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the
land of the philistines, and to the border of egypt.

9:27 and the king made silver in jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees
made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.

9:28 and they brought unto solomon horses out of egypt, and out of all

 
 ___________________________
 
lands.

9:29 now the rest of the acts of solomon, first and last, are they not
written in the book of nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of
ahijah the shilonite, and in the visions of iddo the seer against
jeroboam the son of nebat?  9:30 and solomon reigned in jerusalem over
all israel forty years.

9:31 and solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city
of david his father: and rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

10:1 and rehoboam went to shechem: for to shechem were all israel come
to make him king.

10:2 and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat, who was in
egypt, whither he fled from the presence of solomon the king, heard
it, that jeroboam returned out of egypt.

10:3 and they sent and called him. so jeroboam and all israel came and
spake to rehoboam, saying, 10
 
 ___________________________
 
:4 thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and
his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

10:5 and he said unto them, come again unto me after three days. and
the people departed.

10:6 and king rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood
before solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, what counsel
give ye me to return answer to this people?  10:7 and they spake unto
him, saying, if thou be kind to this people, and please them, and
speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.

10:8 but he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood
before him.

10:9 and he said unto them, what advice give ye that we may return
answer to this peopl
 
 ___________________________
 
g
rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

10:19 and israel rebelled against the house of david unto this day.

11:1 and when rehoboam was come to jerusalem, he gathered of the house
of judah and benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to rehoboam.

11:2 but the word of the lord came to shemaiah the man of god, saying,
11:3 speak unto rehoboam the son of solomon, king of judah, and to all
israel in judah and benjamin, saying, 11:4 thus saith the lord, ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to
his house: for this thing is done of me. and they obeyed the words of
the lord, and returned from going against jeroboam.

11:5 and rehoboam dwelt in jerusalem, and built cities for defence in
judah.

11:6 he built even bethlehem, and etam, and tekoa, 11:7 and bethzur,
and shoco, and adullam, 11:8 and gath, and mareshah, an
 
 ___________________________
 
e to judah and jerusalem: for jeroboam and his sons had cast them
off from executing the priest's office unto the lord: 11:15 and he
ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for
the calves which he had made.

11:16 and after them out of all the tribes of israel such as set their
hearts to seek the lord god of israel came to jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the lord god of their fathers.

11:17 so they strengthened the kingdom of judah, and made rehoboam the
son of solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of david and solomon.

11:18 and rehoboam took him mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son
of david to wife, and abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse;
11:19 which bare him children; jeush, and shamariah, and zaham.

11:20 and after her he took maachah the daughter of absalom; which
bare him abijah, and attai, and ziza, and shelomith.

11:21 and rehoboam loved maachah the daughter of absalom above all his
wives an
 
 ___________________________
 
therefore i will not destroy them, but i will grant them some
deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon jerusalem by
the hand of shishak.

12:8 nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my
service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.

12:9 so shishak king of egypt came up against jerusalem, and took away
the treasures of the house of the lord, and the treasures of the
king's house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold
which solomon had made.

12:10 instead of which king rehoboam made shields of brass, and
committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the
entrance of the king's house.

12:11 and when the king entered into the house of the lord, the guard
came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

12:12 and when he humbled himself, the wrath of the lord turned from
him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in judah
things went well.

12:13 so king reh
 
 ___________________________
 

war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: jeroboam also set the
battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
being mighty men of valour.

13:4 and abijah stood up upon mount zemaraim, which is in mount
ephraim, and said, hear me, thou jeroboam, and all israel; 13:5 ought
ye not to know that the lord god of israel gave the kingdom over
israel to david for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?  13:6 yet jeroboam the son of nebat, the servant of solomon the
son of david, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

13:7 and there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of belial,
and have strengthened themselves against rehoboam the son of solomon,
when rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 and now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the lord in the hand
of the sons of david; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 hav
 
 ___________________________
 
ve to the congregation a
thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to
the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a
great number of priests sanctified themselves.

30:25 and all the congregation of judah, with the priests and the
levites, and all the congregation that came out of israel, and the
strangers that came out of the land of israel, and that dwelt in
judah, rejoiced.

30:26 so there was great joy in jerusalem: for since the time of
solomon the son of david king of israel there was not the like in
jerusalem.

30:27 then the priests the levites arose and blessed the people: and
their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling
place, even unto heaven.

31:1 now when all this was finished, all israel that were present went
out to the cities of judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut
down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of
all judah and benjamin, in ephraim also and ma
 
 ___________________________
 
built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the lord.

33:6 and he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley
of the son of hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments,
and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the lord, to provoke him
to anger.

33:7 and he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the
house of god, of which god had said to david and to solomon his son,
in this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen before all the
tribes of israel, will i put my name for ever: 33:8 neither will i any
more remove the foot of israel from out of the land which i have
appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
i have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and
the ordinances by the hand of moses.

33:9 so manasseh made judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem to err,
and to do worse than the hea
 
 ___________________________
 
e, even to serve the lord their god. and
all his days they departed not from following the lord, the god of
their fathers.

35:1 moreover josiah kept a passover unto the lord in jerusalem: and
they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

35:2 and he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to
the service of the house of the lord, 35:3 and said unto the levites
that taught all israel, which were holy unto the lord, put the holy
ark in the house which solomon the son of david king of israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the
lord your god, and his people israel, 35:4 and prepare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of david king of israel, and according to the writing of
solomon his son.

35:5 and stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the levi
 
 ___________________________
 
oda, the children of
gazzam, 2:49 the children of uzza, the children of paseah, the
children of besai, 2:50 the children of asnah, the children of
mehunim, the children of nephusim, 2:51 the children of bakbuk, the
children of hakupha, the children of harhur, 2:52 the children of
bazluth, the children of mehida, the children of harsha, 2:53 the
children of barkos, the children of sisera, the children of thamah,
2:54 the children of neziah, the children of hatipha.

2:55 the children of solomon's servants: the children of sotai, the
children of sophereth, the children of peruda, 2:56 the children of
jaalah, the children of darkon, the children of giddel, 2:57 the
children of shephatiah, the children of hattil, the children of
pochereth of zebaim, the children of ami.

2:58 all the nethinims, and the children of solomon's servants, were
three hundred ninety and two.

2:59 and these were they which went up from telmelah, telharsa,
cherub, addan, and immer: but they could not s
 
 ___________________________
 
, the children of nekoda, 7:51 the
children of gazzam, the children of uzza, the children of phaseah,
7:52 the children of besai, the children of meunim, the children of
nephishesim, 7:53 the children of bakbuk, the children of hakupha, the
children of harhur, 7:54 the children of bazlith, the children of
mehida, the children of harsha, 7:55 the children of barkos, the
children of sisera, the children of tamah, 7:56 the children of
neziah, the children of hatipha.

7:57 the children of solomon's servants: the children of sotai, the
children of sophereth, the children of perida, 7:58 the children of
jaala, the children of darkon, the children of giddel, 7:59 the
children of shephatiah, the children of hattil, the children of
pochereth of zebaim, the children of amon.

7:60 all the nethinims, and the children of solomon's servants, were
three hundred ninety and two.

7:61 and these were they which went up also from telmelah, telharesha,
cherub, addon, and immer: but they coul
 
 ___________________________
 
dwelt at jerusalem: the rest of the
people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in jerusalem the
holy city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities.

11:2 and the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered
themselves to dwell at jerusalem.

11:3 now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in jerusalem:
but in the cities of judah dwelt every one in his possession in their
cities, to wit, israel, the priests, and the levites, and the
nethinims, and the children of solomon's servants.

11:4 and at jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of judah, and of
the children of benjamin. of the children of judah; athaiah the son of
uzziah, the son of zechariah, the son of amariah, the son of
shephatiah, the son of mahalaleel, of the children of perez; 11:5 and
maaseiah the son of baruch, the son of colhozeh, the son of hazaiah,
the son of adaiah, the son of joiarib, the son of zechariah, the son
of shiloni.

11:6 all the sons of perez that dwelt at jerusalem wer
 
 ___________________________
 
s heard even afar
off.

12:44 and at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of
the law for the priests and levites: for judah rejoiced for the
priests and for the levites that waited.

12:45 and both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their god,
and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of
david, and of solomon his son.

12:46 for in the days of david and asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the days of zerubbabel, and in the days of
nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the levites; and the
levites sanctified them unto the children of aaron.

13:1 on that day they read in the book of moses in the audience of the
people; and there
 
 ___________________________
 
also saw i jews that had married wives of ashdod,
of ammon, and of moab: 13:24 and their children spake half in the
speech of ashdod, and could not speak in the jews' language, but
according to the language of each people.

13:25 and i contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of
them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by god, saying,
ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.

13:26 did not solomon king of israel sin by these things? yet among
many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his god,
and god made him king over all israel: nevertheless even him did
outlandish women cause to sin.

13:27 shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
transgress against our god in marrying strange wives?  13:28 and one
of the sons of joiada, the son of eliashib the high priest, was son in
law to sanballat the horonite: therefore i chased him from me.

13:29 
 
 ___________________________
 
power.

150:2 praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his
excellent greatness.

150:3 praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the
psaltery and harp.

150:4 praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
instruments and organs.

150:5 praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high
sounding cymbals.

150:6 let every thing that hath breath praise the lord. praise ye the lord.




the proverbs


1:1 the proverbs of solomon the son of david, king of israel; 1:2 to
know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;
1:3 to receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
equity; 1:4 to give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge
and discretion.

1:5 a wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels: 1:6 to understand a
proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark
sayings.

1:7 th
 
 ___________________________
 
n is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.

9:14 for she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
places of the city, 9:15 to call passengers who go right on their
ways: 9:16 whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him
that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 9:17 stolen waters are
sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

9:18 but he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests
are in the depths of hell.

10:1 the proverbs of solomon. a wise son maketh a glad father: but a
foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

10:2 treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness
delivereth from death.

10:3 the lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but
he casteth away the substance of the wicked.

10:4 he becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of
the diligent maketh rich.

10:5 he that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth
in harvest is a son that causet
 
 ___________________________
 
thful, and by the vineyard of the
man void of understanding; 24:31 and, lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down.

24:32 then i saw, and considered it well: i looked upon it, and
received instruction.

24:33 yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep: 24:34 so shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth; and thy want as an armed man.

25:1 these are also proverbs of solomon, which the men of hezekiah
king of judah copied out.

25:2 it is the glory of god to conceal a thing: but the honour of
kings is to search out a matter.

25:3 the heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
kings is unsearchable.

25:4 take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer.

25:5 take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall
be established in righteousness.

25:6 put not forth thyself in the prese
 
 ___________________________
 
nd as nails fastened by the
masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

12:12 and further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many
books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

12:13 let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear god, and
keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

12:14 for god shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.




the song of solomon


1:1 the song of songs, which is solomon's.

1:2 let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is
better than wine.

1:3 because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as
ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

1:4 draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
love more than wine: the upright love thee.

1:5 i am black, but comely, o ye daughters of 
 
 ___________________________
 
jerusalem, as the tents
of kedar, as the curtains of solomon.

1:6 look not upon me, because i am black, because the sun hath looked
upon me: my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the
keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have i not kept.

1:7 tell me, o thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where
thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should i be as one that
turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?  1:8 if thou know not,
o thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock, a
 
 ___________________________
 
i found him whom my soul loveth: i held him, and would
not let him go, until i had brought him into my mother's house, and
into the chamber of her that conceived me.

3:5 i charge you, o ye daughters of jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
please.

3:6 who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of
smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the
merchant?  3:7 behold his bed, which is solomon's; threescore valiant
men are about it, of the valiant of israel.

3:8 they all hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his
sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.

3:9 king solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of lebanon.

3:10 he made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of
gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with
love, for the daughters of jerusalem.

3:11 go forth, o ye daughters of zion, and behold king solomo
 
 ___________________________
 
e, neither can the floods drown it:
if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
utterly be contemned.

8:8 we have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?  8:9 if she be
a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.

8:10 i am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was i in his eyes
as one that found favour.

8:11 solomon had a vineyard at baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto
keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand
pieces of silver.

8:12 my vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, o solomon, must
have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.

8:13 thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
voice: cause me to hear it.

8:14 make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young
hart upon the mountains of spices.



 
 ___________________________
 
:18 the caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the
bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they
ministered, took they away.

52:19 and the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the
caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that
which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver,
took the captain of the guard away.

52:20 the two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were
under the bases, which king solomon had made in the house of the lord:
the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

52:21 and concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was
eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the
thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

52:22 and a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one
chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the
chapiters round about, all of brass. the second pillar also and the
pomegranates were 