and bela the son of beor reigned in edom: and the name of his
city was dinhabah.

36:33 and bela died, and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned in
his stead.

36:34 and jobab died, and husham of the land of temani reigned in his
stead.

36:35 and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in
the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was
avith.

36:36 and hadad died, and samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead.

36:37 and samlah died, and saul of rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.

36:38 and saul died, and baalhanan the son of achbor reigned in his
stead.

36:39 and baalhanan the son of achbor died, and hadar reigned in his
stead: and the name of his city was pau; and his wife's name was
mehetabel, the daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

36:40 and these are the names of the dukes that came of esau,
according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36
 
 ___________________________
 
 and fight our battles.

8:21 and samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the lord.

8:22 and the lord said to samuel, hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. and samuel said unto the men of israel, go ye every man
unto his city.

9:1 now there was a man of benjamin, whose name was kish, the son of
abiel, the son of zeror, the son of bechorath, the son of aphiah, a
benjamite, a mighty man of power.

9:2 and he had a son, whose name was saul, a choice young man, and a
goodly: and there was not among the children of israel a goodlier
person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any
of the people.

9:3 and the asses of kish saul's father were lost. and kish said to
saul his son, take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses.

9:4 and he passed through mount ephraim, and passed through the land
of shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of shalim, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
here they were not: and he passed through the
land of the benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 and when they were come to the land of zuph, saul said to his
servant that was with him, come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 and he said unto him, behold now, there is in this city a man of
god, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go.

9:7 then said saul to his servant, but, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
re is
not a present to bring to the man of god: what have we?  9:8 and the
servant answered saul again, and said, behold, i have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will i give to the man of god,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (beforetime in israel, when a man went to enquire of god, thus he
spake, come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
prophet was beforetime called a seer.)  9:10 then said saul to his
servant, well said; come, let us go. so they went unto the city where
the man of god was.

9:11 and as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, is the seer here?
9:12 and they answered them, and said, he is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 as soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him,
 
 ___________________________
 
 before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him.

9:14 and they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 now the lord had told samuel in his ear a day before saul came,
saying, 9:16 to morrow about this time i will send thee a man out of
the land of benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
philistines: for i have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me.

9:17 and when samuel saw saul, the lord said unto him, behold the man
whom i spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

9:18 then saul drew near to samuel in the gate, and said, tell
 
 ___________________________
 
 me, i
pray thee, where the seer's house is.

9:19 and samuel answered saul, and said, i am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
i will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 and as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. and on whom is all the desire of
israel? is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?  9:21 and
saul answered and said, am not i a benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of israel? and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?  9:22 and
samuel took saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons.

9:23 and samuel said unto the cook, bring the portion which i gave
thee, of which i said unto thee, set it by thee.

 
 ___________________________
 

9:24 and the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before saul. and samuel said, behold that which is left!
set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since i said, i have invited the people. so saul did eat with
samuel that day.

9:25 and when they were come down from the high place into the city,
samuel communed with saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 and they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that samuel called saul to the top of the house, saying, up, that
i may send thee away. and saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and samuel, abroad.

9:27 and as they were going down to the end of the city, samuel said
to saul, bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that i may shew thee the word of god.

10:1 then samuel took 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
samuel, god gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 and when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the spirit of god came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, what is this that is come unto the son of kish? is saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 and one of the same place answered and
said, but who is their father? therefore it became a proverb, is saul
also among the prophets?  10:13 and when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 and saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, whither went
ye?  and he said, to seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to samuel.

10:15 and saul's uncle said, tell me, i pray thee, what samuel said
unto yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u.

10:16 and saul said unto his uncle, he told us plainly that the asses
were found. but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 and samuel called the people together unto the lord to mizpeh;
10:18 and said unto the children of israel, thus saith the lord god of
israel, i brought up israel out of egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 and ye have this day rejected your god,

 
 ___________________________
 
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us.
now therefore present yourselves before the lord by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 and when samuel had caused all the tribes of israel to come
near, the tribe of benjamin was taken.

10:21 when he had caused the tribe of benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of matri was taken, and saul the son of kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 therefore they enquired of the lord further, if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered, behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 and they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath
chosen, that there is none like him 
 
 ___________________________
 
among all the people? and all the
people shouted, and said, god save the king.

10:25 then samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the lord. and samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 and saul also went home to gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts god had touched.

10:27 but the children of belial said, how shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought no presents. but he held his peace.

11:1 then nahash the ammonite came up, and encamped against
jabeshgilead: and all the men of jabesh said unto nahash, make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

11:2 and nahash the ammonite answered them, on this condition will i
make a covenant 
 
 ___________________________
 
with you, that i may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all israel.

11:3 and the elders of jabesh said unto him, give us seven days'
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 then came the messengers to gibeah of saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul
said, what aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the
tidings of the men of jabesh.

11:6 and the spirit of god came upon saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 and he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, whosoever cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. a
 
 ___________________________
 
 israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of judah thirty thousand.

11:9 and they said unto the messengers that came, thus shall ye say
unto the men of jabeshgilead, to morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. and the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of jabesh; and they were glad.

11:10 therefore the men of jabesh said, to morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 and it was so on the morrow, that saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together.

11:12 and the people said unto samuel, who is he that said, shall saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 and saul said, there shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the lord hath wrought
 
 ___________________________
 
 salvation in israel.

11:14 then said samuel to the people, come, and let us go to gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 and all the people went to gilgal; and there they made saul king
before the lord in gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the lord; and there saul and all the men of
israel rejoiced greatly.

12:1 and samuel said unto all israel, behold, i have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 and now, behold, the king walketh before you: and i am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and i have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day.

12:3 behold, here i am: witness against me before the lord, and before
his anointed: whose ox have i taken? or whose ass have
 
 ___________________________
 
or the lord will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because it hath pleased the lord to make you his people.

12:23 moreover as for me, god forbid that i should sin against the
lord in ceasing to pray for you: but i will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 only fear the lord, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

12:25 but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
israel, 13:2 saul chose him three thousand men of israel; whereof two
thousand were with saul in michmash and in mount bethel, and a
thousand were with jonathan in gibeah of benjamin: and the rest of the
people he sent every man to his tent.

13:3 and jonathan smote the garrison of the philistines that was in
geba, and the philistines heard of it. and saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, let the hebrews hear.


 
 ___________________________
 
13:4 and all israel heard say that saul had smitten a garrison of the
philistines, and that israel also was had in abomination with the
philistines. and the people were called together after saul to gilgal.

13:5 and the philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in michmash, eastward from bethaven.

13:6 when the men of israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 and so
 
 ___________________________
 
me of the hebrews went over jordan to the land of gad and
gilead. as for saul, he was yet in gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling.

13:8 and he tarried seven days, according to the set time that samuel
had appointed: but samuel came not to gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him.

13:9 and saul said, bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. and he offered the burnt offering.

13:10 and it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, samuel came; and saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him.

13:11 and samuel said, what hast thou done? and saul said, because i
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the philistines gathered
themselves togeth
 
 ___________________________
 
er at michmash; 13:12 therefore said i, the
philistines will come down now upon me to gilgal, and i have not made
supplication unto the lord: i forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 and samuel said to saul, thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the lord thy god, which he commanded thee: for
now would the lord have established thy kingdom upon israel for ever.

13:14 but now thy kingdom shall not continue: the lord hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the lord hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
lord commanded thee.

13:15 and samuel arose, and gat him up from gilgal unto gibeah of
benjamin. and s
 
 ___________________________
 
aul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men.

13:16 and saul, and jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, abode in gibeah of benjamin: but the philistines encamped
in michmash.

13:17 and the spoilers came out of the camp of the philistines in
three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to
ophrah, unto the land of shual: 13:18 and another company turned the
way to bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of zeboim toward the wilderness.

13:19 now there was
 
 ___________________________
 
f israel:
for the philistines said, lest the hebrews make them swords or spears:
13:20 but all the israelites went down to the philistines, to sharpen
every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

13:21 yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

13:22 so it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
saul and jonathan: but with saul and with jonathan his son was there
found.

13:23 and the garrison of the philistines went out to the passage of
michmash.

14:1 now it came to pass upon a day, that jonathan the son of saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour, come, and let us go over
to the philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. but he told
not his father.

14:2 and saul tarried in the uttermost part of gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in migron: and the peop
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
his armourbearer after him: and they fell before jonathan; and his
armourbearer slew after him.

14:14 and that first slaughter, which jonathan and his armourbearer
made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow.

14:15 and there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all
the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

14:16 and the watchmen of saul in gibeah of benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another.

14:17 then said saul unto the people that were with him, number now,
and see who is gone from us. and when they had numbered, behold,
jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

14:18 and saul said unto ahiah, bring hither the ark of god. for the
ark of god was at that time with the children of israel.

14:19 and it came to pass, while saul talked unto the priest, that
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
noise that was in the host of the philistines went on and increased:
and saul said unto the priest, withdraw thine hand.

14:20 and saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

14:21 moreover the hebrews that were with the philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
about, even they also turned to be with the israelites that were with
saul and jonathan.

14:22 likewise all the men of israel which had hid themselves in mount
ephra
 
 ___________________________
 
im, when they heard that the philistines fled, even they also
followed hard after them in the battle.

14:23 so the lord saved israel that day: and the battle passed over
unto bethaven.

14:24 and the men of israel were distressed that day: for saul had
adjured the people, saying, cursed be the man that eateth any food
until evening, that i may be avenged on mine enemies. so none of the
people tasted any food.

14:25 and all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey
upon the ground.

14:26 and when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
the oath.

14:27 but jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath: wherefor
 
 ___________________________
 
le of this honey.

14:30 how much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the philistines?  14:31 and they
smote the philistines that day from michmash to aijalon: and the
people were very faint.

14:32 and the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them
with the blood.

14:33 then they told saul, saying, behold, the people sin against the
lord, in that they eat with the blood. and he said, ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

14:34 and saul said, disperse yourselves among the people, and say
unto them, bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the lord in eating
with the blood.

and all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 and saul built a
 
 ___________________________
 
n altar unto the lord: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the lord.

14:36 and saul said, let us go down after the philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. and they said, do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. then said
the priest, let us draw near hither unto god.

14:37 and saul asked counsel of god, shall i go down after the
philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of israel? but he
answered him not that day.

14:38 and saul said, draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

14:39 for, as the lord liveth, which saveth israel, though it be in
jonathan my son, he shall surely die. but there was not a man among
all the people that answered him.

14:40 then said he unto all israel, be ye on on
 
 ___________________________
 
e side, and i and
jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the people said unto
saul, do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 therefore saul said unto the lord god of israel, give a perfect
lot.

and saul and jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

14:42 and saul said, cast lots between me and jonathan my son. and
jonathan was taken.

14:43 then saul said to jonathan, tell me what thou hast done. and
jonathan told him, and said, i did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, i must die.

14:44 and saul answered, god do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, jonathan.

14:45 and the people said unto saul, shall jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in israel? god forbid: as the lord
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with g
 
 ___________________________
 
od this day. so the people rescued jonathan,
that he died not.

14:46 then saul went up from following the philistines: and the
philistines went to their own place.

14:47 so saul took the kingdom over israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against moab, and against the children of
ammon, and against edom, and against the kings of zobah, and against
the philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

14:48 and he gathered an host, and smote the amalekites, and delivered
israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

14:49 now the sons of saul were jonathan, and ishui, and melchishua:
and the names of his two daughters we
 
 ___________________________
 
re these; the name of the
firstborn merab, and the name of the younger michal: 14:50 and the
name of saul's wife was ahinoam, the daughter of ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was abner, the son of ner, saul's uncle.

14:51 and kish was the father of saul; and ner the father of abner was
the son of abiel.

14:52 and there was sore war against the philistines all the days of
saul: and when saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 samuel also said unto saul, the lord sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the lord.

15:2 thus saith the lord of hosts, i remember that which amalek did to
israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
egypt.

15:3 now go and smite amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both 
 
 ___________________________
 
man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 and saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in
telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of judah.

15:5 and saul came to a city of amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

15:6 and saul said unto the kenites, go, depart, get you down from
among the amalekites, lest i destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kindness to all the children of israel, when they came up out of
egypt. so the kenites departed from among the amalekites.

15:7 and saul smote the amalekites from havilah until thou comest to
shur, that is over against egypt.

15:8 and he took agag the king of the amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

15:9 but saul and t
 
 ___________________________
 
he people spared agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

15:10 then came the word of the lord unto samuel, saying, 15:11 it
repenteth me that i have set up saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. and it
grieved samuel; and he cried unto the lord all night.

15:12 and when samuel rose early to meet saul in the morning, it was
told samuel, saying, saul came to carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to gilgal.

15:13 and samuel came to saul: and saul said unto him, blessed be thou
of the lord: i have performed the commandment of the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
.

15:14 and samuel said, what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which i hear?  15:15 and saul
said, they have brought them from the amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
lord thy god; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 then samuel said unto saul, stay, and i will tell thee what the
lord hath said to me this night. and he said unto him, say on.

15:17 and samuel said, when thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of israel, and the lord anointed
thee king over israel?  15:18 and the lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, go and utterly destroy the sinners the amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the lord, but
dids
 
 ___________________________
 
t fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
15:20 and saul said unto samuel, yea, i have obeyed the voice of the
lord, and have gone the way which the lord sent me, and have brought
agag the king of amalek, and have utterly destroyed the amalekites.

15:21 but the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the lord thy god in gilgal.

15:22 and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the lord? beh
 
 ___________________________
 
old,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. because thou hast rejected the word of the
lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 and saul said unto samuel, i have sinned: for i have
transgressed the commandment of the lord, and thy words: because i
feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

15:25 now therefore, i pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord.

15:26 and samuel said unto saul, i will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the lord, and the lord hath rejected thee
from being king over israel.

15:27 and as samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upo
 
 ___________________________
 


15:28 and samuel said unto him, the lord hath rent the kingdom of
israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 and also the strength of israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 then he said, i have sinned: yet honour me now, i pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before israel, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord thy god.

15:31 so samuel turned again after saul; and saul worshipped the lord.

15:32 then said samuel, bring ye hither to me agag the king of the
amalekites. and agag came unto him delicately. and agag said, surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 and samuel said, as the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. and samuel hewed agag in
pieces before the lord in gilgal.

15:34 then samuel went to ramah; and saul went up to his house to
gibeah of saul.

15:35 and samuel came no more to
 
 ___________________________
 
 see saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless samuel mourned for saul: and the lord repented that he
had made saul king over israel.

16:1 and the lord said unto samuel, how long wilt thou mourn for saul,
seeing i have rejected him from reigning over israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, i will send thee to jesse the bethlehemite: for i
have provided me a king among his sons.

16:2 and samuel said, how can i go? if saul hear it, he will kill me.
and the lord said, take an heifer with thee, and say, i am come to
sacrifice to the lord.

16:3 and call jesse to the sacrifice, and i will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom i name unto thee.

16:4 and samuel did that which the lord spake, and came to bethlehem.
and the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, comest
thou peaceably?  16:5 and he said, peaceably: i am come to sacrifice
unto the lord: sanctify your
 
 ___________________________
 
o jesse, send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 and he sent, and brought him in. now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 then samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. so samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord departed from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.

16:15 and saul's servants said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 and saul said unto his servants, provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring h
 
 ___________________________
 
im to me.

16:18 then answered one of the servants, and said, behold, i have seen
a son of jesse the bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the lord is with him.

16:19 wherefore saul sent messengers unto jesse, and said, send me
david thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 and jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by david his son unto saul.

16:21 and david came to saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 and saul sent to jesse, saying, let david, i pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from god was upon
saul, that david took an harp, and played with his hand: so saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

17:1 now the philistines gathered together their armies 
 
 ___________________________
 
to battle, and
were gathered together at shochoh, which belongeth to judah, and
pitched between shochoh and azekah, in ephesdammim.

17:2 and saul and the men of israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of elah, and set the battle in array against the
philistines.

17:3 and the philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them.

17:4 and there went out a champion out of the camp of the philistines,
named goliath, of gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

17:5 and he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
 
 ___________________________
 
ail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass.

17:6 and he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders.

17:7 and the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his
spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him.

17:8 and he stood and cried unto the armies of israel, and said unto
them, why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not i a
philistine, and ye servants to saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 if he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if i prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us.

17:10 and the philistine said, i defy the armies of israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 when saul and all israel heard those words of the philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

17:12 now david was the son of th
 
 ___________________________
 
at ephrathite of bethlehemjudah,
whose name was jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of saul.

17:13 and the three eldest sons of jesse went and followed saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
eliab the firstborn, and next unto him abinadab, and the third
shammah.

17:14 and david was the youngest: and the three eldest followed saul.

17:15 but david went and returned from saul to feed his father's sheep
at bethlehem.

17:16 and the philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.

17:17 and jesse said unto david his son, take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 and carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 now saul, and they, and all the men of israel, were in the
valley
 
 ___________________________
 
y camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? i know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 and david said, what have i now done? is there not a cause?
17:30 and he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

17:31 and when the words were heard which david spake, they rehearsed
them before saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 and david said to saul, let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this philistine.

17:33 and saul said to david, thou art not able to go against this
philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth.

17:34 and david said unto saul, thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 and i went out after him, and smote hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, i caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living god.

17:37 david said moreover, the lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this philistine. and saul said unto david, go, and the
lord be with thee.

17:38 and saul armed david with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 and david girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. and david said unto saul, i cannot go
with these; for i have not proved them. and david put them off him.

17:40 and he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them 
 
 ___________________________
 
:52 and the men of israel and of judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of ekron.

and the wounded of the philistines fell down by the way to shaaraim,
even unto gath, and unto ekron.

17:53 and the children of israel returned from chasing after the
philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

17:54 and david took the head of the philistine, and brought it to
jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

17:55 and when saul saw david go forth against the philistine, he said
unto abner, the captain of the host, abner, whose son is this youth?
and abner said, as thy soul liveth, o king, i cannot tell.

17:56 and the king said, enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

17:57 and as david returned from the slaughter of the philistine,
abner took him, and brought him before saul with the head of the
philistine in his hand.

17:58 and saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man? and
david answered, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 am the son of thy servant jesse the bethlehemite.

18:1 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
saul, that the soul of jonathan was knit with the soul of david, and
jonathan loved him as his own soul.

18:2 and saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father's house.

18:3 then jonathan and david made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul.

18:4 and jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to david, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

18:5 and david went out whithersoever saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the p
 
 ___________________________
 
eople, and also in the sight of
saul's servants.

18:6 and it came to pass as they came, when david was returned from
the slaughter of the philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of israel, singing and dancing, to meet king saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 and the women answered one another as they played, and said, saul
hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands.

18:8 and saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, they have ascribed unto david ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 and saul eyed david from that day and forward.

18:10 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from god
came upon saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and david
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
saul's hand.

18:11 and saul cast 
 
 ___________________________
 
the javelin; for he said, i will smite david even
to the wall with it. and david avoided out of his presence twice.

18:12 and saul was afraid of david, because the lord was with him, and
was departed from saul.

18:13 therefore saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

18:14 and david behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the lord
was with him.

18:15 wherefore when saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him.

18:16 but all israel and judah loved david, because he went out and
came in before them.

18:17 and saul said to david, behold my elder daughter merab, her will
i give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the lord's
battles.

for saul said, let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
philistines be upon him.

18:18 and david said unto saul, who am i? and what is my life, or my
father's famil
 
 ___________________________
 
y in israel, that i should be son in law to the king?
18:19 but it came to pass at the time when merab saul's daughter
should have been given to david, that she was given unto adriel the
meholathite to wife.

18:20 and michal saul's daughter loved david: and they told saul, and
the thing pleased him.

18:21 and saul said, i will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the philistines may be against him.
wherefore saul said to david, thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain.

18:22 and saul commanded his servants, saying, commune with david
secretly, and say, behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

18:23 and saul's servants spake those words in the ears of david. and
david said, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
seeing that i am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?  18:24 and the
servant
 
 ___________________________
 
s of saul told him, saying, on this manner spake david.

18:25 and saul said, thus shall ye say to david, the king desireth not
any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the philistines, to be avenged
of the king's enemies. but saul thought to make david fall by the hand
of the philistines.

18:26 and when his servants told david these words, it pleased david
well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

18:27 wherefore david arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
philistines two hundred men; and david brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. and saul gave him michal his daughter to wife.

18:28 and saul saw and kne
 
 ___________________________
 
w that the lord was with david, and that
michal saul's daughter loved him.

18:29 and saul was yet the more afraid of david; and saul became
david's enemy continually.

18:30 then the princes of the philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that david behaved himself more wisely
than all the servants of saul; so that his name was much set by.

19:1 and saul spake to jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill david.

19:2 but jonathan saul's son delighted much in david: and jonathan
told david, saying, saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, i pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 and i will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and i will commune
with my father of thee; and what i see, that i will tell thee.

19:4 and jonathan spake good of david unto saul his father, and said
unto him, let not the king sin against his s
 
 ___________________________
 
ervant, against david;
because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 for he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the philistine, and the lord wrought a great salvation for
all israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay david without a cause?  19:6
and saul hearkened unto the voice of jonathan: and saul sware, as the
lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 and jonathan called david, and jonathan shewed him all those
things.

and jonathan brought david to saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past.

19:8 and there was war again: and david went out, and fought with the
philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 and the evil spirit from the lord was upon saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and david played with h
 
 ___________________________
 
is hand.

19:10 and saul sought to smite david even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slipped away out of saul's presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and david fled, and escaped that night.

19:11 saul also sent messengers unto david's house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and michal david's wife told him, saying,
if thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 so michal let david down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 and michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

19:14 and when saul sent messengers to take david, she said, he is
sic
 
 ___________________________
 
k.

19:15 and saul sent the messengers again to see david, saying, bring
him up to me in the bed, that i may slay him.

19:16 and when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

19:17 and saul said unto michal, why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? and michal answered saul, he
said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?  19:18 so david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it was told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as appointed
over them, the spirit of god was upon the messengers of saul, and they
 
 ___________________________
 

also prophesied.

19:21 and when it was told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. and saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, behold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
samuel in like manner, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan,
what have i done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 and david sware moreover, and said, thy father certainly knoweth
th
 
 ___________________________
 
d liveth.

20:22 but if i say thus unto the young man, behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the lord hath sent thee away.

20:23 and as touching the matter which thou and i have spoken of,
behold, the lord be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 so david hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 and the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and jonathan arose, and abner sat by saul's side,
and david's place was empty.

20:26 nevertheless saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

20:27 and it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that david's place was empty: and saul said unto jonathan
his son, wherefore cometh not the son of jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day?  20:28 and jonathan answered saul, david
earnestly asked leave of me to go to bethleh
 
 ___________________________
 
em: 20:29 and he said, let
me go, i pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if i have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, i pray thee, and see my
brethren. therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

20:30 then saul's anger was kindled against jonathan, and he said unto
him, thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not i know that
thou hast chosen the son of jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother's nakedness?  20:31 for as long as the son of
jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 and jonathan answered saul his father, and said unto him,
wherefore shall h
 
 ___________________________
 
e be slain? what hath he done?  20:33 and saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay david.

20:34 so jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for david,
because his father had done him shame.

20:35 and it came to pass in the morning, that jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with david, and a little lad with him.

20:36 and he said unto his lad, run, find out now the arrows
 
 ___________________________
 
nd david answered the priest, and said unto him, of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since i came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

21:6 so the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the lord, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

21:7 now a certain man of the servants of saul was there that day,
detained before the lord; and his name was doeg, an edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to saul.

21:8 and david said unto ahimelech, and is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for i have neither brought my sword nor my
weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.

21:9 and the priest said, the sword of goliath the philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod: 
 
 ___________________________
 
if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. and david said, there is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 and david arose and fled that day for fear of saul, and went to
achish the king of gath.

21:11 and the servants of achish said unto him, is not this david the
king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances,
saying, saul hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands?
21:12 and david laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid
of achish the king of gath.

21:13 and he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let
his spittle fall down upon his beard.

21:14 then said achish unto his servants, lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefore then have ye brought him to me?  21:15 have i need of mad
men, that ye have broug
 
 ___________________________
 


22:3 and david went thence to mizpeh of moab: and he said unto the
king of moab, let my father and my mother, i pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till i know what god will do for me.

22:4 and he brought them before the king of moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that david was in the hold.

22:5 and the prophet gad said unto david, abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of judah. then david departed, and
came into the forest of hareth.

22:6 when saul heard that david was discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now saul abode in gibeah under a tree in ramah, having his
spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;) 22:7
then saul said unto his servants that stood about him, hear now, ye
benjamites; will the son of jesse give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds; 22:8 that all of you have conspired against me, and there is
none that sheweth me th
 
 ___________________________
 
at my son hath made a league with the son of
jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto
me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait,
as at this day?  22:9 then answered doeg the edomite, which was set
over the servants of saul, and said, i saw the son of jesse coming to
nob, to ahimelech the son of ahitub.

22:10 and he enquired of the lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
gave him the sword of goliath the philistine.

22:11 then the king sent to call ahimelech the priest, the son of
ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 and saul said, hear now, thou son of ahitub. and he answered,
here i am, my lord.

22:13 and saul said unto h
 
 ___________________________
 
and fall upon the priests.
and doeg the edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 and nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

22:20 and one of the sons of ahimelech the son of ahitub, named
abiathar, escaped, and fled after david.

22:21 and abiathar shewed david that saul had slain the lord's
priests.

22:22 and david said unto abiathar, i knew it that day, when doeg the
edomite was there, that he would surely tell saul: i have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

22:23 abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 then they told david, saying, behold, the philistines fight
against keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 therefore david enq
 
 ___________________________
 
 enquired of the lord yet again. and
the lord answered him and said, arise, go down to keilah; for i will
deliver the philistines into thine hand.

23:5 so david and his men went to keilah, and fought with the
philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. so david saved the inhabitants of keilah.

23:6 and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to
david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 and it was told saul that david was come to keilah. and saul
said, god hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

23:8 and saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
keilah, to besiege david and his men.

23:9 and david knew that saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod.

23:10 then said david, o lord god of israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that saul seeketh
 
 ___________________________
 
 to come to keilah, to destroy the
city for my sake.

23:11 will the men of keilah deliver me up into his hand? will saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? o lord god of israel, i beseech
thee, tell thy servant. and the lord said, he will come down.

23:12 then said david, will the men of keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of saul? and the lord said, they will deliver thee up.

23:13 then david and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. and it
was told saul that david was escaped from keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 and david abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of ziph. and saul sought him every
day, but god delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 and david saw that saul was come
 
 ___________________________
 
 out to seek his life: and david
was in the wilderness of ziph in a wood.

23:16 and jonathan saul's son arose, and went to david into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in god.

23:17 and he said unto him, fear not: for the hand of saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over israel, and i shall
be next unto thee; and that also saul my father knoweth.

23:18 and they two made a covenant before the lord: and david abode in
the wood, and jonathan went to his house.

23:19 then came up the ziphites to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not
david hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
hachilah, which is on the south of jeshimon?  23:20 now therefore, o
king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.

23:21 and saul s
 
 ___________________________
 
 me.

23:22 go, i pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth very subtilly.

23:23 see therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and i will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that i will search him out throughout all the thousands of
judah.

23:24 and they arose, and went to ziph before saul: but david and his
men were in the wilderness of maon, in the plain on the south of
jeshimon.

23:25 saul also and his men went to seek him. and they told david;
wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
maon. and when saul heard that, he pursued after david in the
wilderness of maon.

23:26 and saul went on this side of the mountain, and david and his
men on that side of the mountain: and david made haste to get away for
fear of saul; for saul and his men co
 
 ___________________________
 
mpassed david and his men round
about to take them.

23:27 but there came a messenger unto saul, saying, haste thee, and
come; for the philistines have invaded the land.

23:28 wherefore saul returned from pursuing after david, and went
against the philistines: therefore they called that place
selahammahlekoth.

23:29 and david went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at
engedi.

24:1 and it came to pass, when saul was returned from following the
philistines, that it was told him, saying, behold, david is in the
wilderness of engedi.

24:2 then saul took three thousand chosen men out of all israel, and
went to seek david and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

24:3 and he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
saul went in to cover his feet: and david and his men remained in the
sides of the cave.

24:4 and the men of david said unto him, behold the day of which the
lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd said unto thee, behold, i will deliver thine enemy into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. then
david arose, and cut off the skirt of saul's robe privily.

24:5 and it came to pass afterward, that david's heart smote him,
because he had cut off saul's skirt.

24:6 and he said unto his men, the lord forbid that i should do this
thing unto my master, the lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the lord.

24:7 so david stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them
not to rise against saul. but saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on his way.

24:8 david also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
after saul, saying, my lord the king. and when saul looked behind
 
 ___________________________
 
 him,
david stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

24:9 and david said to saul, wherefore hearest thou men's words,
saying, behold, david seeketh thy hurt?  24:10 behold, this day thine
eyes have seen how that the lord had delivered thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and i said, i will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
he is the lord's anointed.

24:11 moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand: for in that i cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee
not, know thou
 
 ___________________________
 
e: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 as saith the proverb of the ancients, wickedness proceedeth from
the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 after whom is the king of israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 the lord therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

24:16 and it came to pass, when david had made an end of speaking
these words unto saul, that saul said, is this thy voice, my son
david? and saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

24:17 and he said to david, thou art more righteous than i: for thou
hast rewarded me good, whereas i have rewarded thee evil.

24:18 and thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 for if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?
wherefore the lord reward thee good for that 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 and now, behold, i know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 swear now therefore unto me by the lord, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father's house.

24:22 and david sware unto saul. and saul went home; but david and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 and samuel died; and all the israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at ramah. and david
arose, and went down to the wilderness of paran.

25:2 and there was a man in maon, whose possessions were in carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in carmel.

25:3 now the name of the man was nabal; and the n
 
 ___________________________
 
g, david sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 and she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and
said, behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.

25:42 and abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five
damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers
of david, and became his wife.

25:43 david also took ahinoam of jezreel; and they were also both of
them his wives.

25:44 but saul had given michal his daughter, david's wife, to phalti
the son of laish, which was of gallim.

26:1 and the ziphites came unto saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david
hide himself in the hill of hachilah, which is before jeshimon?  26:2
then saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of ziph, having three
thousand chosen men of israel with him, to seek david in the
wilderness of ziph.

26:3 and saul pitched in the hill of hachilah, which is before
jeshimon, by the way. but david abode
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the wilderness, and he saw
that saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 david therefore sent out spies, and understood that saul was come
in very deed.

26:5 and david arose, and came to the place where saul had pitched:
and david beheld the place where saul lay, and abner the son of ner,
the captain of his host: and saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, i will go down with
thee.

26:7 so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 then said
 
 ___________________________
 
: for who can stretch
forth his hand against the lord's anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
david said furthermore, as the lord liveth, the lord shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 the lord forbid that i should stretch forth mine hand against
the lord's anointed: but, i pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 so david took the spear and the cruse of water from saul's
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from
the lord was fallen upon them.

26:13 then david went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space being between them: 26:14 and david
cried to the people, and to abner the son of ner, saying, answerest
thou not, abner? then abner answered and said, who art thou that
criest to the king?  26:15 and david said to abner, 
 
 ___________________________
 
art not thou a
valiant man? and who is like to thee in israel? wherefore then hast
thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in
to destroy the king thy lord.

26:16 this thing is not good that thou hast done. as the lord liveth,
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the lord's
anointed.

and now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at his bolster.

26:17 and saul knew david's voice, and said, is this thy voice, my son
david? and david said, it is my voice, my lord, o king.

26:18 and he said, wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant?  for what have i done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
now therefore, i pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. if the lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the lord; for they have driven me 
 
 ___________________________
 
out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the lord, saying, go, serve other gods.

26:20 now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the lord: for the king of israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 then said saul, i have sinned: return, my son david: for i will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, i have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 and david answered and said, behold the king's spear! and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 the lord render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness; for the lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but i
would not stretch forth mine hand against the lord's anointed
 
 ___________________________
 
.

26:24 and, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the lord, and let him
deliver me out of all tribulation.

26:25 then saul said to david, blessed be thou, my son david: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. so david
went on his way, and saul returned to his place.

27:1 and david said in his heart, i shall now perish one day by the
hand of saul: there is nothing better for me than that i should
speedily escape into the land of the philistines; and saul shall
despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of israel: so shall i
escape out of his hand.

27:2 and david arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him unto achish, the son of maoch, king of gath.

27:3 and david dwelt with achish at gath, he and his men, every man
with his household, even david with his two wives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d abigail the carmelitess, nabal's wife.

27:4 and it was told saul that david was fled to gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 and david said unto achish, if i have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that i may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee?  27:6 then achish gave him ziklag that day: wherefore ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of judah unto this day.

27:7 and the time that david dwelt in the country of the philistines
was a full year and four mo
 
 ___________________________
 
pass in those days, that the philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with israel. and achish
said unto david, know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 and david said to achish, surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. and achish said to david, therefore will i make thee keeper of
mine head for ever.

28:3 now samuel was dead, and all israel had lamented him, and buried
him in ramah, even in his own city. and saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 and the philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
pitched in shunem: and saul gathered all israel together, and they
pitched in gilboa.

28:5 and when saul saw the host of the philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart greatly trembled.

28:6 and when saul enquired of the lord, the lord answered him not,
neither by dreams, nor by urim, nor by prophets.

28:7 then said saul unto his ser
 
 ___________________________
 
vants, seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, that i may go to her, and enquire of her. and his
servants said to him, behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
spirit at endor.

28:8 and saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he
went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and
he said, i pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
me him up, whom i shall name unto thee.

28:9 and the woman said unto him, behold, thou knowest what saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
life, to cause me to die?  28:10 and saul sware to h
 
 ___________________________
 
er by the lord,
saying, as the lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 then said the woman, whom shall i bring up unto thee? and he
said, bring me up samuel.

28:12 and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art saul.

28:13 and the king said unto her, be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and the woman said unto saul, i saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 and he said unto her, what form is he of? and she said, an old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. and saul perceived
that it was samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself.

28:15 and samuel said to saul, why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? and saul answered, i am sore distressed; for the philistines
make war against me, and god is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prop
 
 ___________________________
 
lord hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
david: 28:18 because thou obeyedst not the voice of the lord, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon amalek, therefore hath the lord done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 moreover the lord will also deliver israel with thee into the
hand of the philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the lord also shall deliver the host of israel into the hand of
the philistines.

28:20 then saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of samuel: and there was no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 and the woman came unto saul, and saw that he was sore troubled,
and said unto him, behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and i
have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 now therefore, i pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
 
 ___________________________
 
and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

28:23 but he refused, and said, i will not eat. but his servants,
together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their
voice. so he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

28:24 and the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 and she brought it before saul, and before his
servants; and they did eat. then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 now the philistines gathered together all their armies to aphek:
and the israelites pitched by a fountain which is in jezreel.

29:2 and the lords of the philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but david and his men passed on in the rereward with
achish.

29:3 then said the princes of the philistines, what do these hebrews
here?  and achish said unto the princes of the philist
 
 ___________________________
 
ines, is not
this david, the servant of saul the king of israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and i have found no fault in him
since he fell unto me unto this day?  29:4 and the princes of the
philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the philistines
said unto him, make this fellow return, that he may go again to his
place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith
should he reconcile himself unto his master? s
 
 ___________________________
 
hould it not be with the
heads of these men?  29:5 is not this david, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, saul slew his thousands, and david his ten
thousands?  29:6 then achish called david, and said unto him, surely,
as the lord liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for i have not
found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

29:7 wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not
the lords of the philistines.

29:8 and david said unto achish, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
es of the
jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the kenites,
30:30 and to them which were in hormah, and to them which were in
chorashan, and to them which were in athach, 30:31 and to them which
were in hebron, and to all the places where david himself and his men
were wont to haunt.

31:1 now the philistines fought against israel: and the men of israel
fled from before the philistines, and fell down slain in mount gilboa.

31:2 and the philistines followed hard upon saul and upon his sons;
and the philistines slew jonathan, and abinadab, and melchishua,
saul's sons.

31:3 and the battle went sore against saul, and the archers hit him;
and he was sore wounded of the archers.

31:4 then said saul unto his armourbearer, draw thy sword, and thrust
me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me
through, and abuse me. but his armourbearer would not; for he was sore
afraid. therefore saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

31:5 and when hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s armourbearer saw that saul was dead, he fell
likewise upon his sword, and died with him.

31:6 so saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all
his men, that same day together.

31:7 and when the men of israel that were on the other side of the
valley, and they that were on the other side jordan, saw that the men
of israel fled, and that saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the
cities, and fled; and the philistines came and dwelt in them.

31:8 and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found saul and his three sons fallen in
mount gilboa.

31:9 and they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent
into the land of the philistines round about, to publish it in the
house of their idols, and among the people.

31:10 and they put his armour in the house of ashta
 
 ___________________________
 
roth: and they
fastened his body to the wall of bethshan.

31:11 and when the inhabitants of jabeshgilead heard of that which the
philistines had done to saul; 31:12 all the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of saul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of bethshan, and came to jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 and they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at
jabesh, and fasted seven days.




the second book of samuel

otherwise called:

the second book of the kings


1:1 now it came to pass after the death of saul, when david was
returned from the slaughter of the amalekites, and david had abode two
days in ziklag; 1:2 it came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold
 
 ___________________________
 
, a man came out of the camp from saul with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to david, that he
fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 and david said unto him, from whence comest thou? and he said unto
him, out of the camp of israel am i escaped.

1:4 and david said unto him, how went the matter? i pray thee, tell
me.

and he answered, that the people are fled from the battle, and many of
the people also are fallen and dead; and saul and jonathan his son are
dead also.

1:5 and david said unto the young man that told him, how knowest thou
that saul and jonathan his son be dead?  1:6 and the young man that
told him said, as i happened by chance upon mount gilboa, behold, saul
leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed
hard after him.

1:7 and when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. and
i answered, here am i.

1:8 and he said unto me, who art thou? and i answered him, i am
 
 ___________________________
 
hee, upon me, and slay me:
for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

1:10 so i stood upon him, and slew him, because i was sure that he
could not live after that he was fallen: and i took the crown that was
upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought
them hither unto my lord.

1:11 then david took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise
all the men that were with him: 1:12 and they mourned, and wept, and
fasted until even, for saul, and for jonathan his son, and for the
people of the lord, and for the house of israel; because they were
fallen by the sword.

1:13 and david said unto the young man that told him, whence art thou?
and he answered, i am the son of a stranger, an amalekite.

1:14 and david said unto him, how wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the lord's anointed?  1:15 and david
called one of the young men, and said, go near, and fall upon him. and
he smote him that he died.

 
 ___________________________
 

1:16 and david said unto him, thy blood be upon thy head; for thy
mouth hath testified against thee, saying, i have slain the lord's
anointed.

1:17 and david lamented with this lamentation over saul and over
jonathan his son: 1:18 (also he bade them teach the children of judah
the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of jasher.)
1:19 the beauty of israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
mighty fallen!  1:20 tell it not in gath, publish it not in the
streets of askelon; lest the daughters of the philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

1:21 ye mountains of gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain, upon you, nor fiel
 
 ___________________________
 
ds of offerings: for there the shield of the
mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of saul, as though he had not
been anointed with oil.

1:22 from the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow
of jonathan turned not back, and the sword of saul returned not empty.

1:23 saul and jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
were stronger than lions.

1:24 ye daughters of israel, weep over saul, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your
apparel.

1:25 how are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! o jonathan,
thou wast slain in thine high places.

1:26 i am distressed for thee, my brother jonathan: very pleasant hast
thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women.

1:27 how are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!  2:1
and it came to pass after this, that david enquired of the l
 
 ___________________________
 
 up. and david said, whither shall i go up? and he
said, unto hebron.

2:2 so david went up thither, and his two wives also, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail nabal's wife the carmelite.

2:3 and his men that were with him did david bring up, every man with
his household: and they dwelt in the cities of hebron.

2:4 and the men of judah came, and there they anointed david king over
the house of judah. and they told david, saying, that the men of
jabeshgilead were they that buried saul.

2:5 and david sent messengers unto the men of jabeshgilead, and said
unto them, blessed be ye of the lord, that ye have shewed this
kindness unto your lord, even unto saul, and have buried him.

2:6 and now the lord shew kindness and truth unto you: and i also will
requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

2:7 therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant:
for your master saul is dead, and also the house of judah have
anointed me king over them.
 
 ___________________________
 


2:8 but abner the son of ner, captain of saul's host, took ishbosheth
the son of saul, and brought him over to mahanaim; 2:9 and made him
king over gilead, and over the ashurites, and over jezreel, and over
ephraim, and over benjamin, and over all israel.

2:10 ishbosheth saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign
over israel, and reigned two years. but the house of judah followed
david.

2:11 and the time that david was king in hebron over the house of
judah was seven years and six months.

2:12 and abner the son of ner, and the servants of ishbosheth the son
of saul, went out from mahanaim to gibeon.

2:13 and joab the son of zeruiah, and the servants of david, went out,
and met together by the pool of gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
th
 
 ___________________________
 
e one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 and abner said to joab, let the young men now arise, and play
before us. and joab said, let them arise.

2:15 then there arose and went over by number twelve of benjamin,
which pertained to ishbosheth the son of saul, and twelve of the
servants of david.

2:16 and they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
place was called helkathhazzurim, which is in gibeon.

2:17 and there was a very sore battle that day; and abner was beaten,
and the men of israel, before the servants of david.

2:18 and there were three sons of zeruiah there, joab, and abishai,
and asahel: and asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

 
 ___________________________
 
urned from following abner: and when he had gathered
all the people together, there lacked of david's servants nineteen men
and asahel.

2:31 but the servants of david had smitten of benjamin, and of abner's
men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

2:32 and they took up asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in bethlehem. and joab and his men went all night,
and they came to hebron at break of day.

3:1 now there was long war between the house of saul and the house of
david: but david waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of saul
waxed weaker and weaker.

3:2 and unto david were sons born in hebron: and his firstborn was
amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; 3:3 and his second, chileab, of
abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite; and the third, absalom the
son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur; 3:4 and the
fourth, adonijah the son of haggith; and the fifth, shephatiah the son
of abital; 3:5 and the sixth, ithream, b
 
 ___________________________
 
y eglah david's wife. these
were born to david in hebron.

3:6 and it came to pass, while there was war between the house of saul
and the house of david, that abner made himself strong for the house
of saul.

3:7 and saul had a concubine, whose name was rizpah, the daughter of
aiah: and ishbosheth said to abner, wherefore hast thou gone in unto
my father's concubine?  3:8 then was abner very wroth for the words of
ishbosheth, and said, am i a dog's head, which against judah do shew
kindness this day unto the house of saul thy father, to his brethren,
and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of
david, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this
woman?  3:9 so do god to ab
 
 ___________________________
 
ner, and more also, except, as the lord
hath sworn to david, even so i do to him; 3:10 to translate the
kingdom from the house of saul, and to set up the throne of david over
israel and over judah, from dan even to beersheba.

3:11 and he could not answer abner a word again, because he feared
him.

3:12 and abner sent messengers to david on his behalf, saying, whose
is the land? saying also, make thy league with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all israel unto thee.

3:13 and he said, well; i will make a league with thee: but one thing
i require of thee, that is, thou shalt not see my face
 
 ___________________________
 
, except thou
first bring michal saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

3:14 and david sent messengers to ishbosheth saul's son, saying,
deliver me my wife michal, which i espoused to me for an hundred
foreskins of the philistines.

3:15 and ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
phaltiel the son of laish.

3:16 and her husband went with her along weeping behind her to
bahurim.

then said abner unto him, go, return. and he returned.

3:17 and abner had communication with the elders of israel, saying, ye
sought for david in times past to be king over you: 3:18 now then do
it: for th
 
 ___________________________
 
sed them: as
whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

3:37 for all the people and all israel understood that day that it was
not of the king to slay abner the son of ner.

3:38 and the king said unto his servants, know ye not that there is a
prince and a great man fallen this day in israel?  3:39 and i am this
day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of zeruiah be
too hard for me: the lord shall reward the doer of evil according to
his wickedness.

4:1 and when saul's son heard that abner was dead in hebron, his hands
were feeble, and all the israelites were troubled.

4:2 and saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name
of the one was baanah, and the name of the other rechab, the sons of
rimmon a beerothite, of the children of benjamin: (for beeroth also
was reckoned to benjamin.

4:3 and the beerothites fled to gittaim, and were sojourners there
until this day.)  4:4 and jonathan, saul's son, had a son that was
lame of his feet.
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was five years old when the tidings came of saul
and jonathan out of jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and
it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became
lame. and his name was mephibosheth.

4:5 and the sons of rimmon the beerothite, rechab and baanah, went,
and came about the heat of the day to the house of ishbosheth, who lay
on a bed at noon.

4:6 and they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
rechab and ba
 
 ___________________________
 
anah his brother escaped.

4:7 for when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and
took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

4:8 and they brought the head of ishbosheth unto david to hebron, and
said to the king, behold the head of ishbosheth the son of saul thine
enemy, which sought thy life; and the lord hath avenged my lord the
king this day of saul, and of his seed.

4:9 and david answered rechab and baanah his brother, the sons of
rimmon the beerothite, and said unto them, as the lord liveth, who
hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, 4:10 when one told me,
saying, behold, saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, i
took hold of him, and slew him in ziklag, who thought that i would
have given him a reward for his tidings: 4:11 how much more, when
wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his

 
 ___________________________
 
bed? shall i not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and
take you away from the earth?  4:12 and david commanded his young men,
and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged
them up over the pool in hebron. but they took the head of ishbosheth,
and buried it in the sepulchre of abner in hebron.

5:1 then came all the tribes of israel to david unto hebron, and
spake, saying, behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

5:2 also in time past, when saul was king over us, thou wast he that
leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord said to thee, thou
shalt feed my people israel, and thou shalt be a captain over israel.

5:3 so all the elders of israel came to the king to hebron; and king
david made a league with them in hebron before the lord: and they
anointed david king over israel.

5:4 david was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years.

5:5 in hebron he reigned over judah seven years and six mo
 
 ___________________________
 
rk of god from the house
of obededom into the city of david with gladness.

6:13 and it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the lord had
gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

6:14 and david danced before the lord with all his might; and david
was girded with a linen ephod.

6:15 so david and all the house of israel brought up the ark of the
lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 and as the ark of the lord came into the city of david, michal
saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king david leaping
and dancing before the lord; and she despised him in her heart.

6:17 and they brought in the ark of the lord, and set it in his place,
in the midst of the tabernacle that david had pitched for it: and
david offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the lord.

6:18 and as soon as david had made an end of offering burnt offerings
and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the lord of
hosts.

6:19 an
 
 ___________________________
 
d he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude
of israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread,
and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. so all the people
departed every one to his house.

6:20 then david returned to bless his household. and michal the
daughter of saul came out to meet david, and said, how glorious was
the king of israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of
the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly
uncovereth himself!  6:21 and david said unto michal, it was before
the lord, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me ruler over the people of the lord, over israel:
therefore will i play before the lord.

6:22 and i will yet be more vile than thus, and will be bas
 
 ___________________________
 
e in mine
own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them
shall i be had in honour.

6:23 therefore michal the daughter of saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 and it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the lord
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 7:2 that the king
said unto nathan the prophet, see now, i dwell in an house of cedar,
but the ark of god dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 and nathan said to the king, go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the lord is with thee.

7:4 and it came to pass that night, that the word of the lord came
unto nathan, saying, 7:5 go
 
 ___________________________
 
s be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, i will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy bowels, and i will establish his kingdom.

7:13 he shall build an house for my name, and i will stablish the
throne of his kingdom for ever.

7:14 i will be his father, and he shall be my son. if he commit
iniquity, i will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 but my mercy shall not depart away from
him, as i took it from saul, whom i put away before thee.

7:16 and thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

7:17 according to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

7:18 then went king david in, and sat before the lord, and he said,
who am i, o lord god? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  7:19 and this was yet a small thing in thy sight, o lord
god; but thou hast spoken 
 
 ___________________________
 
igned over all israel; and david executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.

8:16 and joab the son of zeruiah was over the host; and jehoshaphat
the son of ahilud was recorder; 8:17 and zadok the son of ahitub, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, were the priests; and seraiah was the
scribe; 8:18 and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over both the
cherethites and the pelethites; and david's sons were chief rulers.

9:1 and david said, is there yet any that is left of the house of
saul, that i may shew him kindness for jonathan's sake?  9:2 and there
was of the house of saul a servant whose name was ziba. and when they
had called him unto david, the king said unto him, art thou ziba?  and
he said, thy servant is he.

9:3 and the king said, is there not yet any of the house of saul, that
i may shew the kindness of god unto him? and ziba said unto the king,
jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

9:4 and the king said unto him, where is he? and ziba said u
 
 ___________________________
 
nto the
king, behold, he is in the house of machir, the son of ammiel, in
lodebar.

9:5 then king david sent, and fetched him out of the house of machir,
the son of ammiel, from lodebar.

9:6 now when mephibosheth, the son of jonathan, the son of saul, was
come unto david, he fell on his face, and did reverence. and david
said, mephibosheth. and he answered, behold thy servant!  9:7 and
david said unto him, fear not: for i will surely shew thee kindness
for jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of
saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.

9:8 and he bowed himself, and said, what is thy servant, that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as i am?  9:9 then the king called
to ziba,
 
 ___________________________
 
 saul's servant, and said unto him, i have given unto thy
master's son all that pertained to saul and to all his house.

9:10 thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the
land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's
son may have food to eat: but mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat
bread alway at my table. now ziba had fifteen sons and twenty
servants.

9:11 then said ziba unto the king, according to all that my lord the
king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. as for
mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table
 
 ___________________________
 
took the poor man's lamb, and dressed
it for the man that was come to him.

12:5 and david's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he
said to nathan, as the lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing
shall surely die: 12:6 and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

12:7 and nathan said to david, thou art the man. thus saith the lord
god of israel, i anointed thee king over israel, and i delivered thee
out of the hand of saul; 12:8 and i gave thee thy master's house, and
thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of israel
and of judah; and if that had been too little, i would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the lord, to do
evil in his sight? thou hast killed uriah the hittite with the sword,
and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the
sword of the children of ammon.

12:10 now therefore the sw
 
 ___________________________
 
ink.

16:3 and the king said, and where is thy master's son? and ziba said
unto the king, behold, he abideth at jerusalem: for he said, to day
shall the house of israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

16:4 then said the king to ziba, behold, thine are all that pertained
unto mephibosheth. and ziba said, i humbly beseech thee that i may
find grace in thy sight, my lord, o king.

16:5 and when king david came to bahurim, behold, thence came out a
man of the family of the house of saul, whose name was shimei, the son
of gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

16:6 and he cast stones at david, and at all the servants of king
david: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right
hand and on his left.

16:7 and thus said shimei when he cursed, come out, come out, thou
bloody man, and thou man of belial: 16:8 the lord hath returned upon
thee all the blood of the house of saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the lord hath delivered the king
 
 ___________________________
 
l the men of judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 so the king returned, and came to jordan. and judah came to
gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over jordan.

19:16 and shimei the son of gera, a benjamite, which was of bahurim,
hasted and came down with the men of judah to meet king david.

19:17 and there were a thousand men of benjamin with him, and ziba the
servant of the house of saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty
servants with him; and they went over jordan before the king.

19:18 and there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's
household, and to do what he thought good. and shimei the son of gera
fell down before the king, as he was come over jordan; 19:19 and said
unto the king, let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do
thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my
lord the king went out of jerusalem, that the king s
 
 ___________________________
 
1 but abishai the son of zeruiah answered and said, shall not
shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the lord's
anointed?  19:22 and david said, what have i to do with you, ye sons
of zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in israel? for do not i know
that i am this day king over israel?  19:23 therefore the king said
unto shimei, thou shalt not die. and the king sware unto him.

19:24 and mephibosheth the son of saul came down to meet the king, and
had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in
peace.

19:25 and it came to pass, when he was come to jerusalem to meet the
king, that the king said unto him, wherefore wentest not thou with me,
mephibosheth?  19:26 and he answered, my lord, o king, my servant
deceived me: for thy servant said, i will saddle me an ass, that i may
ride thereon, and go to the king; 
 
 ___________________________
 
:23 now joab was over all the host of israel: and benaiah the son of
jehoiada was over the cherethites and over the pelethites: 20:24 and
adoram was over the tribute: and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 and sheva was scribe: and zadok and abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 and ira also the jairite was a chief ruler about david.

21:1 then there was a famine in the days of david three years, year
after year; and david enquired of the lord. and the lord answered, it
is for saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the gibeonites.

21:2 and the king called the gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
gibeonites were not of the children of israel, but of the remnant of
the amorites; and the children of israel had sworn unto them: and saul
sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of israel and judah.)
21:3 wherefore david said unto the gibeonites, what shall i do for
you?  and wherewith shall i make the atonement, that ye may bless the
inheritance of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord?  21:4 and the gibeonites said unto him, we
will have no silver nor gold of saul, nor of his house; neither for us
shalt thou kill any man in israel. and he said, what ye shall say,
that will i do for you.

21:5 and they answered the king, the man that consumed us, and that
devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any
of the coasts of israel, 21:6 let seven men of his sons be delivered
unto us, and we will hang them up unto the lord in gibeah of saul,
whom the lord did choose. and the king said, i will give them.

21:7 but the king spared mephibosheth, the son of jonathan the son of
saul, because of the lord's oath that was between them, between david
and jonathan the son of saul.

21:8 but the king took the two sons of rizpah the daughter of aiah,
whom she bare unto saul, armoni and mephibosheth; and the five sons of
michal the daughter of saul, whom she brought up for adriel the son of
barzillai the meholathite: 21:9 and he deli
 
 ___________________________
 
rd:
and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

21:10 and rizpah the daughter of aiah took sackcloth, and spread it
for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water
dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the
air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

21:11 and it was told david what rizpah the daughter of aiah, the
concubine of saul, had done.

21:12 and david went and took the bones of saul and the bones of
jonathan his son from the men of jabeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of bethshan, where the philistines had hanged them,
when the philistines had slain saul in gilboa: 21:13 and he brought up
from thence the bones of saul and the bones of jonathan his son; and
they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

21:14 and the bones of saul and jonathan his son buried they in the
country of benja
 
 ___________________________
 
had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six
toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

21:21 and when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimeah the
brother of david slew him.

21:22 these four were born to the giant in gath, and fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of his servants.

22:1 and david spake unto the lord the words of this song in the day
that the lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,
and out of the hand of saul: 22:2 and he said, the lord is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 the god of my rock; in him
will i trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

22:4 i will call on the lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall i
be saved from mine enemies.

22:5 when the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men
made me afraid; 22:6 the sorrows of hell compassed me about; the
snares of death
 
 ___________________________
 
assyria carried away captive: he was
prince of the reubenites.

5:7 and his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their
generations was reckoned, were the chief, jeiel, and zechariah, 5:8
and bela the son of azaz, the son of shema, the son of joel, who dwelt
in aroer, even unto nebo and baalmeon: 5:9 and eastward he inhabited
unto the entering in of the wilderness from the river euphrates:
because their cattle were multiplied in the land of gilead.

5:10 and in the days of saul they made war with the hagarites, who
fell by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the
east land of gilead.

5:11 and the children of gad dwelt over against them, in the land of
bashan unto salcah: 5:12 joel the chief, and shapham the next, and
jaanai, and shaphat in bashan.

5:13 and their brethren of the house of their fathers were, michael,
and meshullam, and sheba, and jorai, and jachan, and zia, and heber,
seven.

5:14 these are the children of abihail the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ah, and eliah, and zichri,
the sons of jeroham.

8:28 these were heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief men.

these dwelt in jerusalem.

8:29 and at gibeon dwelt the father of gibeon; whose wife's name was
maachah: 8:30 and his firstborn son abdon, and zur, and kish, and
baal, and nadab, 8:31 and gedor, and ahio, and zacher.

8:32 and mikloth begat shimeah. and these also dwelt with their
brethren in jerusalem, over against them.

8:33 and ner begat kish, and kish begat saul, and saul begat jonathan,
and malchishua, and abinadab, and eshbaal.

8:34 and the son of jonathan was meribbaal; and meribbaal begat micah.

8:35 and the sons of micah were, pithon, and melech, and tarea, and
ahaz.

8:36 and ahaz begat jehoadah; and jehoadah begat alemeth, and
azmaveth, and zimri; and zimri begat moza, 8:37 and moza begat binea:
rapha was his son, eleasah his son, azel his son: 8:38 and azel had
six sons, whose names are these, azrikam, bocheru, and ishmael, and
sh
 
 ___________________________
 
34 these chief fathers of the levites were chief throughout their
generations; these dwelt at jerusalem.

9:35 and in gibeon dwelt the father of gibeon, jehiel, whose wife's
name was maachah: 9:36 and his firstborn son abdon, then zur, and
kish, and baal, and ner, and nadab.

9:37 and gedor, and ahio, and zechariah, and mikloth.

9:38 and mikloth begat shimeam. and they also dwelt with their
brethren at jerusalem, over against their brethren.

9:39 and ner begat kish; and kish begat saul; and saul begat jonathan,
and malchishua, and abinadab, and eshbaal.

9:40 and the son of jonathan was meribbaal: and meribbaal begat micah.

9:41 and the sons of micah were, pithon, and melech, and tahrea, and
ahaz.

9:42 and ahaz begat jarah; and jarah begat alemeth, and azmaveth, and
zimri; and zimri begat moza; 9:43 and moza begat binea; and rephaiah
his son, eleasah his son, azel his son.

9:44 and azel had six sons, whose names are these, azrikam, bocheru,
and ishmael, and sh
 
 ___________________________
 
eariah, and obadiah, and hanan: these were the sons
of azel.

10:1 now the philistines fought against israel; and the men of israel
fled from before the philistines, and fell down slain in mount gilboa.

10:2 and the philistines followed hard after saul, and after his sons;
and the philistines slew jonathan, and abinadab, and malchishua, the
sons of saul.

10:3 and the battle went sore against saul, and the archers hit him,
and he was wounded of the archers.

10:4 then said saul to his armourbearer, draw thy sword, and thrust me
through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. but his
armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. so saul took a sword,
and fell upon it.

10:5 and when his armourbearer saw that saul was dead, he fell
likewise on the sword, and died.

10:6 so saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died
together.

10:7 and when all the men of israel that were in the valley saw that
they fled, and that saul and his sons
 
 ___________________________
 
 were dead, then they forsook
their cities, and fled: and the philistines came and dwelt in them.

10:8 and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found saul and his sons fallen in mount
gilboa.

10:9 and when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his
armour, and sent into the land of the philistines round about, to
carry tidings unto their idols, and to the people.

10:10 and they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened
his head in the temple of dagon.

10:11 and when all jabeshgilead heard all that the philistines had
done to saul, 10:12 they arose, all the valiant men, and took away the
body of saul, and the b
 
 ___________________________
 
odies of his sons, and brought them to jabesh,
and buried their bones under the oak in jabesh, and fasted seven days.

10:13 so saul died for his transgression which he committed against
the lord, even against the word of the lord, which he kept not, and
also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire
of it; 10:14 and enquired not of the lord: therefore he slew him, and
turned the kingdom unto david the son of jesse.

11:1 then all israel gathered themselves to david unto hebron, saying,
behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

11:2 and moreover in time past, even when saul was king, thou wast h
 
 ___________________________
 
f the reubenites, and
thirty with him, 11:43 hanan the son of maachah, and joshaphat the
mithnite, 11:44 uzzia the ashterathite, shama and jehiel the sons of
hothan the aroerite, 11:45 jediael the son of shimri, and joha his
brother, the tizite, 11:46 eliel the mahavite, and jeribai, and
joshaviah, the sons of elnaam, and ithmah the moabite, 11:47 eliel,
and obed, and jasiel the mesobaite.

12:1 now these are they that came to david to ziklag, while he yet
kept himself close because of saul the son of kish: and they were
among the mighty men, helpers of the war.

12:2 they were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and
the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of
saul's brethren of benjamin.

12:3 the chief was ahiezer, then joash, the sons of shemaah the
gibeathite; and jeziel, and pelet, the sons of azmaveth; and berachah,
and jehu the antothite.

12:4 and ismaiah the gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and
over the thirty; 
 
 ___________________________
 
o mine enemies, seeing
there is no wrong in mine hands, the god of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it.

12:18 then the spirit came upon amasai, who was chief of the captains,
and he said, thine are we, david, and on thy side, thou son of jesse:
peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy god
helpeth thee.

then david received them, and made them captains of the band.

12:19 and there fell some of manasseh to david, when he came with the
philistines against saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the
lords of the philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, he
will fall to his master saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

12:20 as he went to ziklag, there fell to him of manasseh, adnah, and
jozabad, and jediael, and michael, and jozabad, and elihu, and
zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of manasseh.

12:21 and they helped david against the band of the rovers: for they
were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the h
 
 ___________________________
 
ost.

12:22 for at that time day by day there came to david to help him,
until it was a great host, like the host of god.

12:23 and these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to
the war, and came to david to hebron, to turn the kingdom of saul to
him, according to the word of the lord.

12:24 the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

12:25 of the children of simeon, mighty men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 of the children of levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 and jehoiada was the leader of the aaronites, and with him were
three thousand and seven hundred; 12:28 and zadok, a young man mighty
of valour, and of his f
 
 ___________________________
 
ather's house twenty and two captains.

12:29 and of the children of benjamin, the kindred of saul, three
thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
the house of saul.

12:30 and of the children of ephraim twenty thousand and eight
hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their
fathers.

12:31 and of the half tribe of manasseh eighteen thousand, which were
expressed by name, to come and make david king.

12:32 and of the children of issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what israel ought to do; the heads
of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their
commandment.

12:33 of zeb
 
 ___________________________
 
captains of thousands and hundreds,
and with every leader.

13:2 and david said unto all the congregation of israel, if it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the lord our god, let us send abroad
unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of
israel, and with them also to the priests and levites which are in
their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:
13:3 and let us bring again the ark of our god to us: for we enquired
not at it in the days of saul.

13:4 and all the congregation said that they would do so: for the
thing was right in the eyes of all the people.

13:5 so david gathered all israel together, from shihor of egypt even
unto the entering of hemath, to bring the ark of god from
kirjathjearim.

13:6 and david went up, and all israel, to baalah, that is, to
kirjathjearim, which belonged to judah, to bring up thence the ark of
god the lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is
called on it.

13:7 and the
 
 ___________________________
 
obe of fine linen, and all the
levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and chenaniah the master
of the song with the singers: david also had upon him an ephod of
linen.

15:28 thus all israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the lord
with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and
with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.

15:29 and it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the lord came
to the city of david, that michal, the daughter of saul looking out at
a window saw king david dancing and playing: and she despised him in
her heart.

16:1 so they brought the ark of god, and set it in the midst of the
tent that david had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices
and peace offerings before god.

16:2 and when david had made an end of offering the burnt offerings
and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the
lord.

16:3 and he dealt to every one of israel, both man and woman, to every
one a l
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his brethren by eliezer; rehabiah his son, and jeshaiah his
son, and joram his son, and zichri his son, and shelomith his son.

26:26 which shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.

26:28 and all that samuel the seer, and saul the son of kish, and
abner the son of ner, and joab the son of zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 of the izharites, chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 and of the hebronites, hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
israel on this side jordan westward in all the business of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 their language, and to the jews
according to their writing, and according to their language.

8:10 and he wrote in the king ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the
king's ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on
mules, camels, and young dromedaries: 8:11 wherein the king granted
the jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and
to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to cause to perish,
all the power of the people and province that would assault them, both
little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, 8:12
upon one day in all the provinces of king ahasuerus, namely, upon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month adar.

8:13 the copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people, and that the jews should be
ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.

8:14 so the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being
hastened 
 
 ___________________________
 
k of oreb: and as his rod was
upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of egypt.

10:27 and it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be
taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

10:28 he is come to aiath, he is passed to migron; at michmash he hath
laid up his carriages: 10:29 they are gone over the passage: they have
taken up their lodging at geba; ramah is afraid; gibeah of saul is
fled.

10:30 lift up thy voice, o daughter of gallim: cause it to be heard
unto laish, o poor anathoth.

10:31 madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of gebim gather themselves
to flee.

10:32 as yet shall he remain at nob that day: he shall shake his hand
against the mount of the daughter of zion, the hill of jerusalem.

10:33 behold, the lord, the lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with
terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the
haughty shall be humbled.
