wo nations are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serve the younger.

25:24 and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there
were twins in her womb.

25:25 and the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and
they called his name esau.

25:26 and after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
esau's heel; and his name was called jacob: and isaac was threescore
years old when she bare them.

25:27 and the boys grew: and esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field; and jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

25:28 and isaac loved esau, because he did eat of his venison: but
rebekah loved jacob.

25:29 and jacob sod pottage: and esau came from the field, and he was
faint: 25:30 and esau said to jacob, feed me, i pray thee, with that
same red pottage; for i am faint: therefore was his name called edom.

25:31 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd jacob said, sell me this day thy birthright.

25:32 and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit
shall this birthright do to me?  25:33 and jacob said, swear to me
this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
jacob.

25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus esau despised his
birthright.

26:1 and there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that
was in the days of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the
philistines unto gerar.

26:2 and the lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into egypt;
dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this
land, and i will be with thee, and will bless thee; 
 
 ___________________________
 
, here am i.

27:2 and he said, behold now, i am old, i know not the day of my
death: 27:3 now therefore take, i pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver
and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4
and make me savoury meat, such as i love, and bring it to me, that i
may eat; that my soul may bless thee before i die.

27:5 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau his son. and esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

27:6 and rebekah spake unto jacob her son, saying, behold, i heard thy
father speak unto esau thy brother, saying, 27:7 bring me venison, and
make me savoury meat, that i may eat, and bless thee before the lord
before my death.

27:8 now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which i
command thee.

27:9 go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats; and i will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as
he loveth: 27:10 and thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may
eat, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and that he may bless thee before his death.

27:11 and jacob said to rebekah his mother, behold, esau my brother is
a hairy man, and i am a smooth man: 27:12 my father peradventure will
feel me, and i shall seem to him as a deceiver; and i shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing.

27:13 and his mother said unto him, upon me be thy curse, my son: only
obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

27:14 and he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and
his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.

27:15 and rebekah took go
 
 ___________________________
 
odly raiment of her eldest son esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon jacob her younger son:
27:16 and she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his neck: 27:17 and she gave the savoury meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob.

27:18 and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said,
here am i; who art thou, my son?  27:19 and jacob said unto his
father, i am esau thy first born; i have done according as thou badest
me: arise, i pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

27:20 and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? and he said, because the lord thy god brought it
to me.

27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, i pray thee, that i may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son esau or not.

27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac his father
 
 ___________________________
 
; and he felt him, and
said, the voice is jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of esau.

27:23 and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother esau's hands: so he blessed him.

27:24 and he said, art thou my very son esau? and he said, i am.

27:25 and he said, bring it near to me, and i will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 and his father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me,
my
 
 ___________________________
 
sed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefore god
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 let people serve thee, and nations bow
down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of
blessing jacob, and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
isaac his father, that esau his brother came in from his hunting.

27:31 and he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

27:32 and isaac his father said unto him, who art thou? and he said, i
am thy son, thy firstborn esau.

27:33 and isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, who? where is he
that hath ta
 
 ___________________________
 
ken venison, and brought it me, and i have eaten of all
before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be
blessed.

27:34 and when esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, bless me,
even me also, o my father.

27:35 and he said, thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away
thy blessing.

27:36 and he said, is not he rightly named jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and,
behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said, hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me?  27:37 and isaac answered and said unto
esau, behold, i have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have i
given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have i sustained
him: and what shall i do now unto thee, my son?  27:38 and esau said
unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even

 
 ___________________________
 
me also, o my father. and esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

27:39 and isaac his father answered and said unto him, behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven
from above; 27:40 and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve
thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the
dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

27:41 and esau hated jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him: and esau said in his heart, the days of mourning
for my father are at hand; then will i slay my brother jacob.

27:42 and these words of esau her elder son were told to rebekah: and
she sent and called jacob her younger son, and said unto him, behold,
thy brother esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to
kill thee.

27:43 now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban
my brother to haran; 27:44
 
 ___________________________
 
 and tarry with him a few days, until thy
brother's fury turn away; 27:45 until thy brother's anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then i will
send, and fetch thee from thence: why should i be deprived also of you
both in one day?  27:46 and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my
life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the
daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac called jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply

 
 ___________________________
 
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee
the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him away to
padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
he gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughers of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau seeing that the
daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father; 28:9 then went esau
unto ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had mahalath the
daughter of ishmael abraham's son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ife.

28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran.

28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending
and descending on it.

28:13 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord
go
 
 ___________________________
 
to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i
will not leave thee, until i have done that which i have spoken to
thee of.

28:16 and jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, surely the lord
is in this place; and i knew it not.

28:17 and he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! this is
none other but the house of god, and this is the gate of heaven.

28:18 and jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that
he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil
upon the top of it.

28:19 and he called the name of that place bethel: but the name of
that city was called luz at th
 
 ___________________________
 
e first.

28:20 and jacob vowed a vow, saying, if god will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that i go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, 28:21 so that i come again to my father's house in
peace; then shall the lord be my god: 28:22 and this stone, which i
have set for a pillar, shall be god's house: and of all that thou
shalt give me i will surely give the tenth unto thee.

29:1 then jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east.

29:2 and he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they
watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

29:3 and thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the
stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone
again upon the well's mouth in his place.

29:4 and jacob said unto them, my bre
 
 ___________________________
 

and, behold, rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.

29:7 and he said, lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the
cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and
feed them.

29:8 and they said, we cannot, until all the flocks be gathered
together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we
water the sheep.

29:9 and while he yet spake with them, rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she kept them.

29:10 and it came to pass, when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban
his mother's brother, and the sheep of laban his mother's brother,
that jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and
watered the flock of laban his mother's brother.

29:11 and jacob kissed rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.

29:12 and jacob told rachel that he was her father's brother, and that
he was rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.

29:13 and it came to pass, when laban heard the tidings of jacob his
siste
 
 ___________________________
 
r's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed
him, and brought him to his house. and he told laban all these things.

29:14 and laban said to him, surely thou art my bone and my flesh. and
he abode with him the space of a month.

29:15 and laban said unto jacob, because thou art my brother,
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy
wages be?  29:16 and laban had two daughters: the name of the elder
was leah, and the name of the younger was rachel.

29:17 leah was tender eyed; but rachel was beautiful and well
favoured.

29:18 and jacob loved rachel; and said, i will serve thee seven years
for rachel thy younger daughter.

29:19 and laban said, it is better that i give her to thee, than that
i should give her to 
 
 ___________________________
 
another man: abide with me.

29:20 and jacob served seven years for rachel; and they seemed unto
him but a few days, for the love he had to her.

29:21 and jacob said unto laban, give me my wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that i may go in unto her.

29:22 and laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a
feast.

29:23 and it came to pass in the evening, that he took leah his
daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

29:24 and laban gave unto his daughter leah zilpah his maid for an
handmaid.

29:25 and it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was leah:
and he said to laban, what is this thou hast do
 
 ___________________________
 
ne unto me? did not i
serve with thee for rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
29:26 and laban said, it must not be so done in our country, to give
the younger before the firstborn.

29:27 fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service
which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.

29:28 and jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him rachel
his daughter to wife also.

29:29 and laban gave to rachel his daughter bilhah his handmaid to be
her maid.

29:30 and he went in also unto rachel, and he loved also rachel more
than leah, and served with him yet seven other years.

29:31 and when the lord saw that leah was hated, he opened her womb:
but rachel was barren.

29:32 and leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
reuben: for she said, surely the lord h
 
 ___________________________
 
nd said, because the
lord hath heard i was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also:
and she called his name simeon.

29:34 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, now this time
will my husband be joined unto me, because i have born him three sons:
therefore was his name called levi.

29:35 and she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, now will
i praise the lord: therefore she called his name judah; and left
bearing.

30:1 and when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children, rachel
envied her sister; and said unto jacob, give me children, or else i
die.

30:2 and jacob's anger was kindled against rachel: and he said, am i
in god's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 and she said, behold my maid bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shall bear upon my knees, that i may also have children by her.

30:4 and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in
unto her.

30:5 and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a so
 
 ___________________________
 
n.

30:6 and rachel said, god hath judged me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name dan.

30:7 and bilhah rachel's maid conceived again, and bare jacob a second
son.

30:8 and rachel said, with great wrestlings have i wrestled with my
sister, and i have prevailed: and she called his name naphtali.

30:9 when leah saw that she had left bearing, she took zilpah her
maid, and gave her jacob to wife.

30:10 and zilpah leah's maid bare jacob a son.

30:11 and leah said, a troop cometh: and she called his name gad.

30:12 and zilpah leah's maid bare jacob a second son.

30:13 and leah said, happy am i, for the daughters will call me
blessed: and she called his name asher.

30:14 and reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother leah. then
rachel said to leah, give me, i pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

30:15 and she said unto her, is it a small matter tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t thou hast taken
my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? and
rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's
mandrakes.

30:16 and jacob came out of the field in the evening, and leah went
out to meet him, and said, thou must come in unto me; for surely i
have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. and he lay with her that
night.

30:17 and god hearkened unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob
the fifth son.

30:18 and leah said, god hath given me my hire, because i have given
my maiden to my husband: and she called his name issachar.

30:19 and leah conceived again, and bare jacob the sixth son.

30:20 and leah said, god hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, because i have born him six sons: and she
called his name zebulun.

30:21 and afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name dinah.

30:22 and god remembered rachel, and god hear
 
 ___________________________
 
kened to her, and opened
her womb.

30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away
my reproach: 30:24 and she called his name joseph; and said, the lord
shall add to me another son.

30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob
said unto laban, send me away, that i may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 give me my wives and my children, for whom i have served thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my service which i have done thee.

30:27 and laban said unto him, i pray thee, if i have found favour in
thine eyes, tarry: for i have learned by experience that the lord hath
blessed me for thy sake.

30:28 and he said, appoint me thy wages, and i will give it.

30:29 and he said unto him, thou k
 
 ___________________________
 
nowest how i have served thee, and
how thy cattle was with me.

30:30 for it was little which thou hadst before i came, and it is now
increased unto a multitude; and the lord hath blessed thee since my
coming: and now when shall i provide for mine own house also?  30:31
and he said, what shall i give thee? and jacob said, thou shalt not
give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, i will again
feed and keep thy flock.

30:32 i will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence
all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among
the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such
shall be my hire.

30:33 so shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it
shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled
and spo
 
 ___________________________
 
tted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be
counted stolen with me.

30:34 and laban said, behold, i would it might be according to thy
word.

30:35 and he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and
every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the
sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.

30:36 and he set three days' journey betwixt himself and jacob: and
jacob fed the rest of laban's flocks.

30:37 and jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
appear which was in the rods.

30:38 and he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that
they should conceive when they came to drink.

30:39 and the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth
cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spo
 
 ___________________________
 
tted.

30:40 and jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the
flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of
laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto
laban's cattle.

30:41 and it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did
conceive, that jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in
the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.

30:42 but when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the
feebler were laban's, and the stronger jacob's.

30:43 and the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

31:1 and he heard the words of laban's sons, saying, jacob hath taken
away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's
hath he gotte
 
 ___________________________
 
n all this glory.

31:2 and jacob beheld the countenance of laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.

31:3 and the lord said unto jacob, return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and i will be with thee.

31:4 and jacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field unto his
flock, 31:5 and said unto them, i see your father's countenance, that
it is not toward me as before; but the god of my father hath been with
me.

31:6 and ye know that with all my power i have served your father.

31:7 and your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;
but god suffered him not to hurt me.

31:8 if he said thus, the speckled shall be thy wages; then all the
cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the ringstraked shall be
thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

31:9 thus god hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given
them to me.

31:10 and it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that
i lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which
leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

31:11 and the angel of god spake unto me in a dream, saying, jacob:
and i said, here am i.

31:12 and he said, lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which
leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for i
have seen all that laban doeth unto thee.

31:13 i am the god of bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this
land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.

31:14 and rachel and leah answered and said unto him, is there yet any
portion or inheritance for
 
 ___________________________
 
 us in our father's house?  31:15 are we not
counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured
also our money.

31:16 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever god hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 then jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
padanaram, for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan.

31:19 and laban went to shear his sheep: and rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.

31:20 and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

31:21 so he fled with all that he had; and h
 
 ___________________________
 
e rose up, and passed over
the river, and set his face toward the mount gilead.

31:22 and it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled.

31:23 and he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount gilead.

31:24 and god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:25 then laban overtook jacob. now jacob had pitched his tent in the
mount: and laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of gilead.

31:26 and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives
taken with the sword?  31:27 wherefore didst thou flee away secretly,
and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that i might have sent
thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and 
 
 ___________________________
 
my daughters? thou
hast now done foolishly in so doing.

31:29 it is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the god of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that
thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:30 and now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my
gods?  31:31 and jacob answered and said to laban, because i was
afraid: for i said, peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.

31:32 with whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before
our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
for jacob knew not that rachel had stolen them.

31:33 and laban went into jacob's tent, and into leah's tent, and into
the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. then went he out
of leah's tent, and entered into 
 
 ___________________________
 
rachel's tent.

31:34 now rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
furniture, and sat upon them. and laban searched all the tent, but
found them not.

31:35 and she said to her father, let it not displease my lord that i
cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. and he
searched but found not the images.

31:36 and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered
and said to laban, what is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast
so hotly pursued after me?  31:37 whereas thou hast searched all my
stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here
before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us
both.

31:38 this twenty years have i been with thee; thy ewes and thy she
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have i not
eaten.

31:39 that which was torn of beasts i brought not u
 
 ___________________________
 

night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, i and thou; and
let it be for a witness between me and thee.

31:45 and jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

31:46 and jacob said unto his brethren, gather stones; and they took
stones, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

31:47 and laban called it jegarsahadutha: but jacob called it galeed.

31:48 and laban said, this heap is a witness between me and thee this
day.

therefore was the name of it called galeed; 31:49 and mizpah; for he
said, the lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another.

31:50 if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him.

32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, this is god's host: and he
called the name of that place mahanaim.

32:3 and jacob sent messenger
 
 ___________________________
 
s before him to esau his brother unto the
land of seir, the country of edom.

32:4 and he commanded them, saying, thus shall ye speak unto my lord
esau; thy servant jacob saith thus, i have sojourned with laban, and
stayed there until now: 32:5 and i have oxen, and asses, flocks, and
menservants, and womenservants: and i have sent to tell my lord, that
i may find grace in thy sight.

32:6 and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy
brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return un
 
 ___________________________
 
 camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls,
twenty she asses, and ten foals.

32:16 and he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove
by themselves; and said unto his servants, pass over before me, and
put a space betwixt drove and drove.

32:17 and he commanded the foremost, saying, when esau my brother
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, whose art thou? and whither
goest thou? and whose are these before thee?  32:18 then thou shalt
say, they be thy servant jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord
esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

32:19 and so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that
followed the droves, saying, on this manner shall ye speak unto esau,
when ye find him.

32:20 and say ye moreover, behold, thy servant jacob is behind us. for
he said, i will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and
afterward i will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.

32:21 so went the present over before him: an
 
 ___________________________
 
d himself lodged that
night in the company.

32:22 and he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford jabbok.

32:23 and he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.

32:24 and jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day.

32:25 and when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of jacob's thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him.

32:26 and he said, let me go, for the day breaketh. and he said, i
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27 and he said unto him, what is thy name? and he said, jacob.

32:28 and he said, thy name shall be called no more jacob, but israel:
for as a prince hast thou power with god and with men, and hast
prevailed.

32:29 and jacob asked him, and said, tell me, i pray thee, thy name.
and he said, wherefore is it that thou 
 
 ___________________________
 
dost ask after my name? and he
blessed him there.

32:30 and jacob called the name of the place peniel: for i have seen
god face to face, and my life is preserved.

32:31 and as he passed over penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halted upon his thigh.

32:32 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because
he touched the hollow of jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

33:1 and jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, esau came,
and with him four hundred men. and he divided the children unto leah,
and unto rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

33:2 and he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and leah
and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost.

33:3 and he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,

 
 ___________________________
 

hath graciously given thy servant.

33:6 then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
bowed themselves.

33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bowed themselves.

33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met? and
he said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 and esau said, i have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 and jacob said, nay, i pray thee, if now i have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore i have
seen thy face, as though i had seen the face of god, and thou wast
pleased with me.

33:11 take, i pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because
god hath dealt graciously with me, and because i have enough. and he
urged him, and he took it.

33:12 and he said, let us take our journey, and let us go, and i will
go before thee.

33:13 and he said unto him,
 
 ___________________________
 

should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

33:14 let my lord, i pray thee, pass over before his servant: and i
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and
the children be able to endure, until i come unto my lord unto seir.

33:15 and esau said, let me now leave with thee some of the folk that
are with me. and he said, what needeth it? let me find grace in the
sight of my lord.

33:16 so esau returned that day on his way unto seir.

33:17 and jacob journeyed to succoth, and built him an house, and made
booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called
succoth.

33:18 and jacob came to shalem, a city of shechem, which is in the
land of canaan, when he came from padanaram; and pitched his tent
before the city.

33:19 and he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent,
at the hand of the children of hamor, shechem's father, for an hundred
pieces of money.

33:20 and he erected there an altar, and calle
 
 ___________________________
 
d it eleloheisrael.

34:1 and dinah the daughter of leah, which she bare unto jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land.

34:2 and when shechem the son of hamor the hivite, prince of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

34:3 and his soul clave unto dinah the daughter of jacob, and he loved
the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.

34:4 and shechem spake unto his father hamor, saying, get me this
damsel to wife.

34:5 and jacob heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter: now his
sons were with his cattle in the field: and jacob held his peace until
they were come.

34:6 and hamor the father of shechem went out unto jacob to commune
with him.

34:7 and the sons of jacob came out of the field when they heard it:
and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had
wrought folly in israel in lying with jacob's daughter: which thing
ought not to be done.

34:8 and hamor communed with them, sayi
 
 ___________________________
 
us, and give your daughters unto us,
and take our daughters unto you.

34:10 and ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you;
dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.

34:11 and shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me i will give.

34:12 ask me never so much dowry and gift, and i will give according
as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

34:13 and the sons of jacob answered shechem and hamor his father
deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled dinah their sister:
34:14 and they said unto them, we cannot do this thing, to give our
sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
34:15 but in this will we consent unto you: if ye will be as we be,
that every male of you be circumcised; 34:16 then will we give our
daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will
dwell with you, and we will become one peop
 
 ___________________________
 
le.

34:17 but if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will
we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

34:18 and their words pleased hamor, and shechem hamor's son.

34:19 and the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
delight in jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the
house of his father.

34:20 and hamor and shechem his son came unto the gate of their city,
and communed with the men of their city, saying, 34:21 these men are
peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade
therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us
take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our
daughters.

34:22 only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us
 
 ___________________________
 
one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised.

34:23 shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us.

34:24 and unto hamor and unto shechem his son hearkened all that went
out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that
went out of the gate of his city.

34:25 and it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that
two of the sons of jacob, simeon and levi, dinah's brethren, took each
man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.

34:26 and they slew hamor and shechem his son with the edge of the
sword, and took dinah out of shechem's house, and went out.

34:27 the sons of jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister.

34:28 they took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
which was in the city, and that which was in the field, 34:29 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
all
their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they
captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

34:30 and jacob said to simeon and levi, ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the canaanites
and the perizzites: and i being few in number, they shall gather
themselves together against me, and slay me; and i shall be destroyed,
i and my house.

34:31 and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
35:1 and god said unto jacob, arise, go up to bethel, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto god, that appeared unto thee when thou
fledde
 
 ___________________________
 
st from the face of esau thy brother.

35:2 then jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with
him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and
change your garments: 35:3 and let us arise, and go up to bethel; and
i will make there an altar unto god, who answered me in the day of my
distress, and was with me in the way which i went.

35:4 and they gave unto jacob all the strange gods which were in their
hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and jacob hid
them under the oak which was by shechem.

35:5 and they journeyed: and the terror of god was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of
jacob.

35:6 so jacob came to luz, which is in the land of canaan, that is,
bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

35:7 and he built there an altar, and called the place elbethel:
becaus
 
 ___________________________
 
e there god appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his
brother.

35:8 but deborah rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called allonbachuth.

35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave
abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will i give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

35:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to ephrath: and rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

35:17 and it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

35:18 and it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she
died) that she called his name benoni: but his father called him
benjamin.

35:19 and rac
 
 ___________________________
 
hel died, and was buried in the way to ephrath, which is
bethlehem.

35:20 and jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
rachel's grave unto this day.

35:21 and israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of
edar.

35:22 and it came to pass, when israel dwelt in that land, that reuben
went and lay with bilhah his father's concubine: and israel heard it.
now the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben,
jacob's firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
sons of bilhah, rachel's handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
sons of zilpah, leah's handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the days of isaac were an hun
 
 ___________________________
 
dred and fourscore years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people, being old and full of days: and his sons esau and jacob buried
him.

36:1 now these are the generations of esau, who is edom.

36:2 esau took his wives of the daughters of canaan; adah the daughter
of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter
of zibeon the hivite; 36:3 and bashemath ishmael's daughter, sister of
nebajoth.

36:4 and adah bare to esau eliphaz; and bashemath bare reuel; 36:5 and
aholibamah bare jeush, and jaalam, and korah: these are the sons of
esau, which were born unto him in the land of canaan.
 
 ___________________________
 


36:6 and esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all
the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all
his substance, which he had got in the land of canaan; and went into
the country from the face of his brother jacob.

36:7 for their riches were more than that they might dwell together;
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because
of their cattle.

36:8 thus dwelt esau in mount seir: esau is edom.

36:9 and these are the generations of esau the father of the edomites
in mount seir: 36:10 these are the names of esau's sons; eliphaz the
son of adah the wife of esau, reuel the son of bashemath the wife of
esau.

36:11 and the sons of eliphaz were teman, omar, zepho, and gat
 
 ___________________________
 

mehetabel, the daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

36:40 and these are the names of the dukes that came of esau,
according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36:41 duke aholibamah, duke elah,
duke pinon, 36:42 duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 36:43 duke
magdiel, duke iram: these be the dukes of edom, according to their
habitations in the land of their possession: he is esau the father of
the edomites.

37:1 and jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in
the land of canaan.

37:2 these are the generations of jacob. joseph, being seventeen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
sons of bilhah, and with the sons of zilpah, his father's wives: and
joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

37:3 now israel loved joseph more than all his children, because he
was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

37:4 and whe
 
 ___________________________
 
30 and he returned unto his brethren, and said, the child is not;
and i, whither shall i go?  37:31 and they took joseph's coat, and
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood; 37:32 and
they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their
father; and said, this have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
coat or no.

37:33 and he knew it, and said, it is my son's coat; an evil beast
hath devoured him; joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

37:34 and jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.

37:35 and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, for i will go down into
the grave unto my son mourning. thus his father wept for him.

37:36 and the midianites sold him into egypt unto potiphar, an officer
of pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

38:1 and it came to pass at that time, that judah went down from his
brethren, and turn
 
 ___________________________
 
read.

41:55 and when all the land of egypt was famished, the people cried to
pharaoh for bread: and pharaoh said unto all the egyptians, go unto
joseph; what he saith to you, do.

41:56 and the famine was over all the face of the earth: and joseph
opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyptians; and the
famine waxed sore in the land of egypt.

41:57 and all countries came into egypt to joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

42:1 now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt, jacob said unto
his sons, why do ye look one upon another?  42:2 and he said, behold,
i have heard that there is corn in egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

42:3 and joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt.

42:4 but benjamin, joseph's brother, jacob sent not with his brethren;
for he said, lest peradventure mischief befall him.

42:5 and the sons of israel came to buy corn among those 
 
 ___________________________
 
ion
for the way: and thus did he unto them.

42:26 and they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

42:27 and as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in
the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

42:28 and he said unto his brethren, my money is restored; and, lo, it
is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, what is this that god hath done unto us?  42:29
and they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan, and
told him all that befell unto them; saying, 42:30 the man, who is the
lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the
country.

42:31 and we said unto him, we are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 we
be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest
is this day with our father in the land of canaan.

42:33 and the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, hereby shall
i know that ye are true men; leave o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne of your brethren here with me,
and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone: 42:34
and bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall i know that ye are
no spies, but that ye are true men: so will i deliver you your
brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

42:35 and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold,
every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and
their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

42:36 and jacob their father said unto them, me have ye bereaved of my
children: joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin
away: all these things are against me.

42:37 and reuben spake unto his father, saying, slay my two sons, if i
bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and i will bring him
to thee again.

42:38 and he said, my son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in
the which ye go, then shall y
 
 ___________________________
 
ve each man changes of raiment; but to
benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of
raiment.

45:23 and to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden
with the good things of egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and
bread and meat for his father by the way.

45:24 so he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said
unto them, see that ye fall not out by the way.

45:25 and they went up out of egypt, and came into the land of canaan
unto jacob their father, 45:26 and told him, saying, joseph is yet
alive, and he is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took his journey with al
 
 ___________________________
 
l that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down
into egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will
go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried
jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the
wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him.

46:6 and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his
seed with him: 46:7 his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his
daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with
him into egypt.

46:8 and these are the names of the ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ildren of israel, which came
into egypt, jacob and his sons: reuben, jacob's firstborn.

46:9 and the sons of reuben; hanoch, and phallu, and hezron, and
carmi.

46:10 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman.

46:11 and the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

46:12 and the sons of judah; er, and onan, and shelah, and pharez, and
zarah: but er and onan died in the land of canaan. and the sons of
pharez were hezron and hamul.

46:13 and the sons of issachar; tola, and phuv
 
 ___________________________
 
ah, and job, and
shimron.

46:14 and the sons of zebulun; sered, and elon, and jahleel.

46:15 these be the sons of leah, which she bare unto jacob in
padanaram, with his daughter dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty and three.

46:16 and the sons of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri,
and arodi, and areli.

46:17 and the sons of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah,
and serah their sister: and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel.

46:18 these are the sons of zilpah, whom laban gave to leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto jacob, even sixteen souls.

46:19 the sons of r
 
 ___________________________
 
achel jacob's wife; joseph, and benjamin.

46:20 and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and
ephraim, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare
unto him.

46:21 and the sons of benjamin were belah, and becher, and ashbel,
gera, and naaman, ehi, and rosh, muppim, and huppim, and ard.

46:22 these are the sons of rachel, which were born to jacob: all the
souls were fourteen.

46:23 and the sons of dan; hushim.

46:24 and the sons of naphtali; jahzeel, and guni, and jezer, and
shillem.

46:25 these are the sons of bilhah, which laban gave unto rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto jacob: all the souls were seven.

46:26 all the souls that came with jacob into egypt, which came out of
his loins, besides jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore
and six; 46:27 and the sons of joseph, which were born him in egy
 
 ___________________________
 
pt,
were two souls: all the souls of the house of jacob, which came into
egypt, were threescore and ten.

46:28 and he sent judah before him unto joseph, to direct his face
unto goshen; and they came into the land of goshen.

46:29 and joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet israel
his father, to goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on
his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

46:30 and israel said unto joseph, now let me die, since i have seen
thy face, because thou art yet alive.

46:31 and joseph said un
 
 ___________________________
 
for their flocks; for the
famine is sore in the land of canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let
thy servants dwell in the land of goshen.

47:5 and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thy father and thy
brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 the land of egypt is before thee; in
the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

47:7 and joseph brought in jacob his father, and set him before
pharaoh: and jacob blessed pharaoh.

47:8 and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou?  47:9 and jacob
said unto pharaoh, the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of
my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

47:10 and jacob blessed pharaoh, and went out from before pharaoh.

47:11 and joseph placed his
 
 ___________________________
 
r food for your little ones.

47:25 and they said, thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in
the sight of my lord, and we will be pharaoh's servants.

47:26 and joseph made it a law over the land of egypt unto this day,
that pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priests only, which became not pharaoh's.

47:27 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt, in the country of goshen;
and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly.

47:28 and jacob lived in the land of egypt seventeen years: so the
whole age of jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

47:29 and the time drew nigh that israel must die: and he called his
son joseph, and said unto him, if now i have found grace in thy sight,
put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly
with me; bury me not, i pray thee, in egypt: 47:30 but i will lie with
my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of egypt, and bury me in their
buryingplace. and he said, i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll do as thou hast said.

47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.

48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told joseph,
behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons,
manasseh and ephraim.

48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thy son joseph cometh unto
thee: and israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighty appeared unto me at luz
in the land of canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold,
i will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and i will make of thee
a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee
for an everlasting possession.

48:5 and now thy two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto
thee in the land of egypt before i came unto thee into egypt, are
mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 an
 
 ___________________________
 
s seed shall
become a multitude of nations.

48:20 and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall israel
bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set
ephraim before manasseh.

48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, i die: but god shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 and jacob called unto his sons, and said, gather yourselves
together, that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last
days.

49:2 gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of jacob; and
hearken unto israel your father.

49:3 reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my
strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power: 49:4
unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to
thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up t
 
 ___________________________
 
o my couch.

49:5 simeon and levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations.

49:6 o my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly,
mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man,
and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.

49:7 cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it
was cruel: i will divide them in jacob, and scatter them in israel.

49:8 judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall
be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down
before thee.

49:9 judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall
rouse him up?  49:10 the sceptre shall not depart from judah, nor a
lawgiver from between his feet, until shiloh come; and unto him shall
the gathering of the peopl
 
 ___________________________
 
p shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.

49:20 out of asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

49:22 joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 the archers have sorely
grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 but his bow abode
in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty god of jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of
israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thy father, who shall help thee; and
by the almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 the blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that was separat
 
 ___________________________
 
rs in the cave that is in the
field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 in the cave that is in the field of
machpelah, which is before mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah.

49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 and joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.

50:2 and joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father: and the physicians embalmed israel.

50:3 and forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the
days of those which are embalmed: and the egyptians mourned for him
threescore and te
 
 ___________________________
 
le
ones.

and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebu
 
 ___________________________
 
lun, and
benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher.

1:5 and all the souls that came out of the loins of jacob were seventy
souls: for joseph was in egypt already.

1:6 and joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land
was filled with them.

1:8 now there arose up a new king over egypt, which knew not joseph.

1:9 and he said unto his people, behold, the people of the children of
israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 come on, let us deal wisely
 
 ___________________________
 
dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and moses said, i will now turn asid
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters; for i know their sorrows; 3:8 and i am come down to
deliver them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites, and the amorites, and
 
 ___________________________
 
n i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring
you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and the hittites, and the amorites, and the pe
 
 ___________________________
 
to thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into
thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
d this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i
will bring you out from under the burdens of the egypti
 
 ___________________________
 
ans, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who
am of unci
 
 ___________________________
 
 law depart; and he went his way into
his own land.

19:1 in the third month, when the children of israel were gone forth
out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of sinai.

19:2 for they were departed from rephidim, and were come to the desert
of sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there israel camped
before the mount.

19:3 and moses went up unto god, and the lord called unto him out of
the mountain, saying, thus shalt thou say to the house of jacob, and
tell the children of israel; 19:4 ye have seen what i did unto the
egyptians, and how i bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.

these are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of
israel.

19:7 and moses came and ca
 
 ___________________________
 
y book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i consume thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 for the lord had said 
 
 ___________________________
 
s of their fathers
shall they pine away with them.

26:40 if they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 and that i also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 then will i
remember my covenant with jacob, and also my covenant with isaac, and
also my covenant with abraham will i remember; and i will remember the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither 
 
 ___________________________
 
 god met balaam: and he said unto him, i have prepared seven
altars, and i have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 and the lord put a word in balaam's mouth, and said, return unto
balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

23:6 and he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princes of moab.

23:7 and he took up his parable, and said, balak the king of moab hath
brought me from aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, come,
curse me jacob, and come, defy israel.

23:8 how shall i curse, whom god hath not cursed? or how shall i defy,
whom the lord hath not defied?  23:9 for from the top of the rocks i
see him, and from the hills i behold him: lo, the people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

23:10 who can count the dust of jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of israel? let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 and balak said unto balaam, what hast th
 
 ___________________________
 
 moab with him. and balak said unto him, what hath
the lord spoken?  23:18 and he took up his parable, and said, rise up,
balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of zippor: 23:19 god is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?  23:20 behold, i have received commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and i cannot reverse it.

23:21 he hath not beheld iniquity in jacob, neither hath he seen
perverseness in israel: the lord his god is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 god brought them out of egypt; he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.

23:23 surely there is no enchantment against jacob, neither is there
any divination against israel: according to this time it shall be said
of jacob and of israel, what hath god wrought!  23:24 behold, the
people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he sha
 
 ___________________________
 
or enchantments, but he set his
face toward the wilderness.

24:2 and balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw israel abiding in his
tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of god came upon him.

24:3 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:4 he hath said,
which heard the words of god, which saw the vision of the almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open: 24:5 how goodly are
thy tents, o jacob, and thy tabernacles, o israel!  24:6 as the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the
trees of lign aloes which the lord hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters.

24:7 he shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be
in many waters, and his king shall be higher than agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.

24:8 god brought him forth out of egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enem
 
 ___________________________
 
ore, and i will advertise thee what this people shall do to
thy people in the latter days.

24:15 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor
hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:16 he hath
said, which heard the words of god, and knew the knowledge of the most
high, which saw the vision of the almighty, falling into a trance, but
having his eyes open: 24:17 i shall see him, but not now: i shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a star out of jacob, and a
sceptre shall rise out of israel, and shall smite the corners of moab,
and destroy all the children of sheth.

24:18 and edom shall be a possession, seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 out of jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.

24:20 and when he looked on amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that

 
 ___________________________
 
athers, when i sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 surely none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholly followed the lord.

32:13 and the lord's anger was kindled against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, was consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the lord t
 
 ___________________________
 
ke unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, and jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and i spake unto you at that time, saying, i am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take you wise men, and un
 
 ___________________________
 
thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thy god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 then beware lest thou forget the lord, which brought
thee forth out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thy god, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.

6:14 ye shall n
 
 ___________________________
 
cast them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness the lord
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the lord doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the lord thy god doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thy fathers,
abraham, isaac, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thy god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thy god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angry with you to have destroyed
 
 ___________________________
 
:24 ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that i knew
you.

9:25 thus i fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights, as
i fell down at the first; because the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 i prayed therefore unto the lord, and said, o lord god, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 remember thy servants, abraham, isaac, and jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, because the
lord was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 at that time the lord said unto me, hew the
 
 ___________________________
 
h all the
men of israel, 29:11 your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy
god, and into his oath, which the lord thy god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you only do i make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us this day before the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or f
 
 ___________________________
 
r
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto t
 
 ___________________________
 
ish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee?  32:7 remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

32:8 when the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of adam, he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of israel.

32:9 for the lord's portion is his people; jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 he found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye.

32:11 as an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 so the lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him.

32:13 he made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of th
 
 ___________________________
 
herewith moses the man of god blessed
the children of israel before his death.

33:2 and he said, the lord came from sinai, and rose up from seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of jacob.

33:5 and he was king in jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of israel were gathered together.

33:6 let reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.

33:7 and this is the blessing of judah: and he said, hear, lord, the
voice of judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be
sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.

33:8 and of levi he said, let thy thummim and thy urim be with thy
holy one, whom thou didst prove at massah,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and with whom thou didst
strive at the waters of meribah; 33:9 who said unto his father and to
his mother, i have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept thy covenant.

33:10 they shall teach jacob thy judgments, and israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar.

33:11 bless, lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 and of benjamin he said, the beloved of the lord shall dwell in
safety by him; and the lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders.

33:13 and of joseph
 
 ___________________________
 
le to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

33:25 thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 there is none like unto the god of jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

33:27 the eternal god is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, destroy them.

33:28 israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 happy art thou, o israel: who is like unto thee, o people saved
by the lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 and moses went up from the plains of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shewed him all the land of g
 
 ___________________________
 
ilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the city of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i will give it unto thy
seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 so moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 and t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cried unto the lord, he put darkness between you
and the egyptians,
 
 ___________________________
 
d ten years
old.

24:30 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathserah, which is in mount ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of gaash.

24:31 and israel served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived joshua, and which had known all the
works of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bones of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buried they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the sons of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
ephraim.




the book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children
of israel asked the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
canaanites first, to fight against
 
 ___________________________
 


12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, he is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, it is the lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of sisera, captain of the host of hazor, and into the hand of the
philistines, and into the hand of the king of moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 and they cried unto the lord, and said, we have sinned, because
we have forsaken th
 
 ___________________________
 
o hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast
delivered me from the violent man.

22:50 therefore i will give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the
heathen, and i will sing praises unto thy name.

22:51 he is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, unto david, and to his seed for evermore.

23:1 now these be the last words of david. david the son of jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the god
of jacob, and the sweet psalmist of israel, said, 23:2 the spirit of
the lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

23:3 the god of israel said, the rock of israel spake to me, he that
ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of god.

23:4 and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of
the earth by clear shining after rain.

23:5 although my house be not so with god; yet he hath made with me a
 
 ___________________________
 
till the blood gushed out upon them.

18:29 and it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there
was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.

18:30 and elijah said unto all the people, come near unto me. and all
the people came near unto him. and he repaired the altar of the lord
that was broken down.

18:31 and elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the
tribes of the sons of jacob, unto whom the word of the lord came,
saying, israel shall be thy name: 18:32 and with the stones he built
an altar in the name of the lord: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.

18:33 and he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
laid him on the wood, and said, fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 and he said, do it the second time. and they did it the second
time.
 
 ___________________________
 
n of the year.

13:21 and it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of
elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

13:22 but hazael king of syria oppressed israel all the days of
jehoahaz.

13:23 and the lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with abraham,
isaac, and jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from his presence as yet.

13:24 so hazael king of syria died; and benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.

13:25 and jehoash the son of jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
benhadad the son of hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of jehoahaz his father by war. three times did joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of israel.

14:1 in the second year of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel
reigned amaziah the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the lord, and made unto themselves of the lowest
of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the
houses of the high places.

17:33 they feared the lord, and served their own gods, after the
manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.

17:34 unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not
the lord, neither do they after their statutes, or after their
ordinances, or after the law and commandment which the lord commanded
the children of jacob, whom he named israel; 17:35 with whom the lord
had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, ye shall not fear other
gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to
them: 17:36 but the lord, who brought you up out of the land of egypt
with great power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him
shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

17:37 and the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the
commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall ob
 
 ___________________________
 
brethren.

16:8 give thanks unto the lord, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people.

16:9 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

16:10 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.

16:11 seek the lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth; 16:13 o ye seed of israel his servant,
ye children of jacob, his chosen ones.

16:14 he is the lord our god; his judgments are in all the earth.

16:15 be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; 16:16 even of the covenant which
he made with abraham, and of his oath unto isaac; 16:17 and hath
confirmed the same to jacob for a law, and to israel for an
everlasting covenant, 16:18 saying, unto thee will i give the land of
canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 when ye were but few, even
a few,
 
 ___________________________
 
ide, they are all together become filthy:
there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

14:4 have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread, and call not upon the lord.

14:5 there were they in great fear: for god is in the generation of
the righteous.

14:6 ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the lord is his
refuge.

14:7 oh that the salvation of israel were come out of zion! when the
lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, jacob shall rejoice,
and israel shall be glad.



15:1 lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy
holy hill?

15:2 he that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and
speaketh the truth in his heart.

15:3 he that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his
neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.

15:4 in whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them
that fear the lord. he that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth
 
 ___________________________
 
 of them
there is great reward.

19:12 who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults.

19:13 keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not
have dominion over me: then shall i be upright, and i shall be
innocent from the great transgression.

19:14 let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be
acceptable in thy sight, o lord, my strength, and my redeemer.



20:1 the lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the god of
jacob defend thee;

20:2 send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
zion;

20:3 remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice;
selah.

20:4 grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy
counsel.

20:5 we will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our god we
will set up our banners: the lord fulfil all thy petitions.

20:6 now know i that the lord saveth his anointed; he will hear him
from his holy heaven with the saving strength of h
 
 ___________________________
 
22:18 they part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

22:19 but be not thou far from me, o lord: o my strength, haste thee
to help me.

22:20 deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the
dog.

22:21 save me from the lion's mouth: for thou hast heard me from the
horns of the unicorns.

22:22 i will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the
congregation will i praise thee.

22:23 ye that fear the lord, praise him; all ye the seed of jacob,
glorify him; and fear him, all ye the seed of israel.

22:24 for he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried
unto him, he heard.

22:25 my praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: i will pay
my vows before them that fear him.

22:26 the meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the lord
that seek him: your heart shall live for ever.

22:27 all the ends of the world shall remember and
 
 ___________________________
 
they that dwell therein.

24:2 for he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the
floods.

24:3 who shall ascend into the hill of the lord? or who shall stand in
his holy place?

24:4 he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

24:5 he shall receive the blessing from the lord, and righteousness
from the god of his salvation.

24:6 this is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face,
o jacob. selah.

24:7 lift up your heads, o ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glory shall come in.

24:8 who is this king of glory? the lord strong and mighty, the lord
mighty in battle.

24:9 lift up your heads, o ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glory shall come in.

24:10 who is this king of glory? the lord of hosts, he is the king of
glory. selah.



25:1 unto thee, o lord, do i lift up my soul.

25:2 o my god, i t
 
 ___________________________
 
o god, our fathers have told us,
what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old.

44:2 how thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst
them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.

44:3 for they got not the land in possession by their own sword,
neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine
arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour
unto them.

44:4 thou art my king, o god: command deliverances for jacob.

44:5 through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will
we tread them under that rise up against us.

44:6 for i will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

44:7 but thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to
shame that hated us.

44:8 in god we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever.

selah.

44:9 but thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth
with our armies.

44:10 thou makest us to turn back from
 
 ___________________________
 
sea;

46:3 though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. selah.

46:4 there is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of
god, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most high.

46:5 god is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: god shall
help her, and that right early.

46:6 the heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice,
the earth melted.

46:7 the lord of hosts is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.

46:8 come, behold the works of the lord, what desolations he hath made
in the earth.

46:9 he maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh
the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in
the fire.

46:10 be still, and know that i am god: i will be exalted among the
heathen, i will be exalted in the earth.

46:11 the lord of hosts is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.



47:1 o clap your hands, all ye people
 
 ___________________________
 
; shout unto god with the voice
of triumph.

47:2 for the lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all
the earth.

47:3 he shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our
feet.

47:4 he shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of jacob
whom he loved. selah.

47:5 god is gone up with a shout, the lord with the sound of a
trumpet.

47:6 sing praises to god, sing praises: sing praises unto our king,
sing praises.

47:7 for god is the king of all the earth: sing ye praises with
understanding.

47:8 god reigneth over the heathen: god sitteth upon the throne of his
holiness.

47:9 the princes of the people are gathered together, even the people
of the god of abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto god:
he
 
 ___________________________
 
altogether become
filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

53:4 have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people
as they eat bread: they have not called upon god.

53:5 there were they in great fear, where no fear was: for god hath
scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put
them to shame, because god hath despised them.

53:6 oh that the salvation of israel were come out of zion! when god
bringeth back the captivity of his people, jacob shall rejoice, and
israel shall be glad.



54:1 save me, o god, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.

54:2 hear my prayer, o god; give ear to the words of my mouth.

54:3 for strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after
my soul: they have not set god before them. selah.

54:4 behold, god is mine helper: the lord is with them that uphold my
soul.

54:5 he shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy
truth.

54:6 i will freely sacrifice unto th
 
 ___________________________
 
n thee: for god is my
defence.

59:10 the god of my mercy shall prevent me: god shall let me see my
desire upon mine enemies.

59:11 slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power;
and bring them down, o lord our shield.

59:12 for the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them
even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they
speak.

59:13 consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and
let them know that god ruleth in jacob unto the ends of the earth.
selah.

59:14 and at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a
dog, and go round about the city.

59:15 let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
satisfied.

59:16 but i will sing of thy power; yea, i will sing aloud of thy
mercy in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the
day of my trouble.

59:17 unto thee, o my strength, will i sing: for god is my defence,
and the god of my mercy.



60:1 
 
 ___________________________
 
n on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

75:6 for promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor from the south.

75:7 but god is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up
another.

75:8 for in the hand of the lord there is a cup, and the wine is red;
it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs
thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink
them.

75:9 but i will declare for ever; i will sing praises to the god of
jacob.

75:10 all the horns of the wicked also will i cut off; but the horns
of the righteous shall be exalted.



76:1 in judah is god known: his name is great in israel.

76:2 in salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in zion.

76:3 there brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword,
and the battle. selah.

76:4 thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.

76:5 the stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and
none of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 men of might have found their hands.

76:6 at thy rebuke, o god of jacob, both the chariot and horse are
cast into a dead sleep.

76:7 thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight
when once thou art angry?

76:8 thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth
feared, and was still,

76:9 when god arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth.
selah.

76:10 surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of
wrath shalt thou restrain.

76:11 vow, and pay unto the lord your god: let all that be round abou
 
 ___________________________
 
d, this is my infirmity: but i will remember the years
of the right hand of the most high.

77:11 i will remember the works of the lord: surely i will remember
thy wonders of old.

77:12 i will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

77:13 thy way, o god, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as
our god?

77:14 thou art the god that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy
strength among the people.

77:15 thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of jacob
and joseph. selah.

77:16 the waters saw thee, o god, the waters saw thee; they were
afraid: the depths also were troubled.

77:17 the clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
arrows also went abroad.

77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings
lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.

77:19 thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

77:20 thou leddest thy people like a flock by the 
 
 ___________________________
 
hand of moses and
aaron.



78:1 give ear, o my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words
of my mouth.

78:2 i will open my mouth in a parable: i will utter dark sayings of
old:

78:3 which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.

78:4 we will not hide them from their children, shewing to the
generation to come the praises of the lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he hath done.

78:5 for he established a testimony in jacob, and appointed a law in
israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them
known to their children:

78:6 that the generation to come might know them, even the children
which should be born; who should arise and declare them to their
children:

78:7 that they might set their hope in god, and not forget the works
of god, but keep his commandments:

78:8 and might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious
generation; a generation that set not their heart arigh
 
 ___________________________
 
8:17 and they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most high
in the wilderness.

78:18 and they tempted god in their heart by asking meat for their
lust.

78:19 yea, they spake against god; they said, can god furnish a table
in the wilderness?

78:20 behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for
his people?

78:21 therefore the lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was
kindled against jacob, and anger also came up against israel;

78:22 because they believed not in god, and trusted not in his
salvation:

78:23 though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the
doors of heaven,

78:24 and had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them
of the corn of heaven.

78:25 man did eat angels' food: he sent them meat to the full.

78:26 he caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power
he brought in the south wind.

78:27 he rained flesh al
 
 ___________________________
 
he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a
perpetual reproach.

78:67 moreover he refused the tabernacle of joseph, and chose not the
tribe of ephraim:

78:68 but chose the tribe of judah, the mount zion which he loved.

78:69 and he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth
which he hath established for ever.

78:70 he chose david also his servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds:

78:71 from following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed
jacob his people, and israel his inheritance.

78:72 so he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.



79:1 o god, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy
temple have they defiled; they have laid jerusalem on heaps.

79:2 the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto
the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of
the earth.

79:3 their blood have they shed like water round abou
 
 ___________________________
 
t jerusalem; and
there was none to bury them.

79:4 we are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision
to them that are round about us.

79:5 how long, lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy
burn like fire?

79:6 pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

79:7 for they have devoured jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

79:8 o remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender
mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.

79:9 help us, o god of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and
deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake.

79:10 wherefore should the heathen say, where is their god? let him be
known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of
thy servants which is shed.

79:11 let the sighing of the
 
 ___________________________
 
est strong for thyself.

80:16 it is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the
rebuke of thy countenance.

80:17 let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of
man whom thou madest strong for thyself.

80:18 so will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call
upon thy name.

80:19 turn us again, o lord god of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and
we shall be saved.



81:1 sing aloud unto god our strength: make a joyful noise unto the
god of jacob.

81:2 take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp
with the psaltery.

81:3 blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on
our solemn feast day.

81:4 for this was a statute for israel, and a law of the god of jacob.

81:5 this he ordained in joseph for a testimony, when he went out
through the land of egypt: where i heard a language that i understood
not.

81:6 i removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered
from the pots.

81
 
 ___________________________
 
ung, even thine altars, o lord of
hosts, my king, and my god.

84:4 blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still
praising thee. selah.

84:5 blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are
the ways of them.

84:6 who passing through the valley of baca make it a well; the rain
also filleth the pools.

84:7 they go from strength to strength, every one of them in zion
appeareth before god.

84:8 o lord god of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, o god of jacob.
selah.

84:9 behold, o god our shield, and look upon the face of thine
anointed.

84:10 for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. i had rather
be a doorkeeper in the house of my god, than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.

84:11 for the lord god is a sun and shield: the lord will give grace
and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.

84:12 o lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.



85:1 lord, thou hast been favourab
 
 ___________________________
 
le unto thy land: thou hast brought
back the captivity of jacob.

85:2 thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered
all their sin. selah.

85:3 thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from
the fierceness of thine anger.

85:4 turn us, o god of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us
to cease.

85:5 wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine
anger to all generations?

85:6 wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in
thee?

85:7 shew us thy mercy, o lord, and
 
 ___________________________
 
thou, o lord, art a god full of compassion, and gracious,
long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

86:16 o turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto
thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

86:17 shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: because thou, lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.



87:1 his foundation is in the holy mountains.

87:2 the lord loveth the gates of zion more than all the dwellings of
jacob.

87:3 glorious things are spoken of thee, o city of god. selah.

87:4 i will make mention of rahab and babylon to them that know me:
behold philistia, and tyre, with ethiopia; this man was born there.

87:5 and of zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her:
and the highest himself shall establish her.

87:6 the lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this
man was born there. selah.

87:7 as well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there:
 
 ___________________________
 
w thyself.

94:2 lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the
proud.

94:3 lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph?

94:4 how long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the
workers of iniquity boast themselves?

94:5 they break in pieces thy people, o lord, and afflict thine
heritage.

94:6 they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

94:7 yet they say, the lord shall not see, neither shall the god of
jacob regard it.

94:8 understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will
ye be wise?

94:9 he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the
eye, shall he not see?

94:10 he that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?

94:11 the lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

94:12 blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, o lord, and teachest
him out of thy law;

94:13 that thou mayest give 
 
 ___________________________
 
re the lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.



99:1 the lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the lord, and he answered them.

99:7 he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, o lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our 
 
 ___________________________
 




105:1 o give thanks unto the lord; call upon his name: make known his
deeds among the people.

105:2 sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

105:3 glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.

105:4 seek the lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

105:5 remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth;

105:6 o ye seed of abraham his servant, ye children of jacob his
chosen.

105:7 he is the lord our god: his judgments are in all the earth.

105:8 he hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

105:9 which covenant he made with abraham, and his oath unto isaac;

105:10 and confirmed the same unto jacob for a law, and to israel for
an everlasting covenant:

105:11 saying, unto thee will i give the land of canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when they were but a few men in number; 
 
 ___________________________
 
he sent a man before them, even joseph, who was sold for a
servant:

105:18 whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:

105:19 until the time that his word came: the word of the lord tried
him.

105:20 the king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 he made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

105:22 to bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators
wisdom.

105:23 israel also came into egypt; and jacob sojourned in the land of
ham.

105:24 and he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger
than their enemies.

105:25 he turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.

105:26 he sent moses his servant; and aaron whom he had chosen.

105:27 they shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
ham.

105:28 he sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not
against his word.

105:29 he turned their waters into blood, and slew the
 
 ___________________________
 
.

113:5 who is like unto the lord our god, who dwelleth on high,

113:6 who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven,
and in the earth!

113:7 he raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy
out of the dunghill;

113:8 that he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his
people.

113:9 he maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
mother of children. praise ye the lord.



114:1 when israel went out of egypt, the house of jacob from a people
of strange language;

114:2 judah was his sanctuary, and israel his dominion.

114:3 the sea saw it, and fled: jordan was driven back.

114:4 the mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like
lambs.

114:5 what ailed thee, o thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou jordan,
that thou wast driven back?

114:6 ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills,
like lambs?

114:7 tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the lord, at the
presence of the go
 
 ___________________________
 
d of jacob;

114:8 which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a
fountain of waters.



115:1 not unto us, o lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory,
for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.

115:2 wherefore should the heathen say, where is now their god?

115:3 but our god is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath
pleased.

115:4 their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

115:5 they have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they
 
 ___________________________
 
srael from all his iniquities.



131:1 lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do i
exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.

131:2 surely i have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is
weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

131:3 let israel hope in the lord from henceforth and for ever.



132:1 lord, remember david, and all his afflictions:

132:2 how he sware unto the lord, and vowed unto the mighty god of
jacob;

132:3 surely i will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go
up into my bed;

132:4 i will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

132:5 until i find out a place for the lord, an habitation for the
mighty god of jacob.

132:6 lo, we heard of it at ephratah: we found it in the fields of the
wood.

132:7 we will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his
footstool.

132:8 arise, o lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.

132:9 let
 
 ___________________________
 

night stand in the house of the lord.

134:2 lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the lord.

134:3 the lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of zion.



135:1 praise ye the lord. praise ye the name of the lord; praise him,
o ye servants of the lord.

135:2 ye that stand in the house of the lord, in the courts of the
house of our god.

135:3 praise the lord; for the lord is good: sing praises unto his
name; for it is pleasant.

135:4 for the lord hath chosen jacob unto himself, and israel for his
peculiar treasure.

135:5 for i know that the lord is great, and that our lord is above
all gods.

135:6 whatsoever the lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in
earth, in the seas, and all deep places.

135:7 he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he
maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his
treasuries.

135:8 who smote the firstborn of egypt, both of man and beast.

135:9 who sent tokens and wonders 
 
 ___________________________
 
1 my mouth shall speak the praise of the lord: and let all flesh
bless his holy name for ever and ever.



146:1 praise ye the lord. praise the lord, o my soul.

146:2 while i live will i praise the lord: i will sing praises unto my
god while i have any being.

146:3 put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help.

146:4 his breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very
day his thoughts perish.

146:5 happy is he that hath the god of jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the lord his god:

146:6 which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is:
which keepeth truth for ever:

146:7 which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to
the hungry. the lord looseth the prisoners:

146:8 the lord openeth the eyes of the blind: the lord raiseth them
that are bowed down: the lord loveth the righteous:

146:9 the lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless
and widow: but the way of the
 
 ___________________________
 
thy children within thee.

147:14 he maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.

147:15 he sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth
very swiftly.

147:16 he giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like
ashes.

147:17 he casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his
cold?

147:18 he sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind
to blow, and the waters flow.

147:19 he sheweth his word unto jacob, his statutes and his judgments
unto israel.

147:20 he hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments,
they have not known them. praise ye the lord.



148:1 praise ye the lord. praise ye the lord from the heavens: praise
him in the heights.

148:2 praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.

148:3 praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light.

148:4 praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above
the heavens.

14
 
 ___________________________
 
 it as a spark,
and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

2:1 the word that isaiah the son of amoz saw concerning judah and
jerusalem.

2:2 and it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

2:3 and many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the lord, to the house of the god of jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

2:4 and he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

2:5 o house of jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
lord.

2:6 therefore thou h
 
 ___________________________
 
ast forsaken thy people the house of jacob,
because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like
the philistines, and they please themselves in the children of
strangers.

2:7 their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is
there any end of their chariots: 2:8 their land also is full of idols;
they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
have made: 2:9 and the mean man boweth down, and the great man
h
 
 ___________________________
 
of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread.

8:14 and he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and
for a rock of offence to both the houses of israel, for a gin and for
a snare to the inhabitants of jerusalem.

8:15 and many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and
be snared, and be taken.

8:16 bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

8:17 and i will wait upon the lord, that hideth his face from the
house of jacob, and i will look for him.

8:18 behold, i and the children whom the lord hath given me are for
signs and for wonders in israel from the lord of hosts, which dwelleth
in mount zion.

8:19 and when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should
not a people seek unto their god? for the living to the dead?  8:20 to
the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no ligh
 
 ___________________________
 
d is born, unto us a son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
wonderful, counsellor, the mighty god, the everlasting father, the
prince of peace.

9:7 of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of david, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. the zeal of the lord of hosts will perform this.

9:8 the lord sent a word into jacob, and it hath lighted upon israel.

9:9 and all the people shall know, even ephraim and the inhabitant of
samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, 9:10 the bricks
are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into cedars.

9:11 therefore the lord shall set up the adversaries of rezin against
him, and join his enemies together; 9:12 the syrians before, and the
philistines behind; and they shall devour israel with op
 
 ___________________________
 
e light of israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one
for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in
one day; 10:18 and shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.

10:19 and the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

10:20 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
israel, and such as are escaped of the house of jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the lord, the
holy one of israel, in truth.

10:21 the remnant shall return, even the remnant of jacob, unto the
mighty god.

10:22 for though thy people israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow
with righteousness.

10:23 for the lord god of hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined, in the midst of all the land.

10:24 therefore thus sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ation: neither shall the arabian pitch tent there;
neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

13:21 but wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and
satyrs shall dance there.

13:22 and the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to
come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

14:1 for the lord will have mercy on jacob, and will yet choose
israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be
joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of jacob.

14:2 and the people shall take them, and bring them to their place:
and the house of israel shall possess them in the land of the lord for
servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose
captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

14:3 and it shall come to pass in the day that the lord shall give
th
 
 ___________________________
 
eble.

17:1 the burden of damascus. behold, damascus is taken away from being
a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

17:2 the cities of aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which
shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

17:3 the fortress also shall cease from ephraim, and the kingdom from
damascus, and the remnant of syria: they shall be as the glory of the
children of israel, saith the lord of hosts.

17:4 and in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of jacob
shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.

17:5 and it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
ears in the valley of rephaim.

17:6 yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an
olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the lord
god of israel.

17:7 at that day shall a man loo
 
 ___________________________
 
 slay the dragon that is in the sea.

27:2 in that day sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine.

27:3 i the lord do keep it; i will water it every moment: lest any
hurt it, i will keep it night and day.

27:4 fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me
in battle? i would go through them, i would burn them together.

27:5 or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with
me; and he shall make peace with me.

27:6 he shall cause them that come of jacob to take root: israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

27:7 hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he
slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?  27:8
in measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he
stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.

27:9 by this therefore shall the iniquity of jacob be purged; and this
is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones
of t
 
 ___________________________
 
of darkness.

29:19 the meek also shall increase their joy in the lord, and the poor
among men shall rejoice in the holy one of israel.

29:20 for the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: 29:21 that make
a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

29:22 therefore thus saith the lord, who redeemed abraham, concerning
the house of jacob, jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his
face now wax pale.

29:23 but when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the
midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one
of jacob, and shall fear the god of israel.

29:24 they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and
they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

30:1 woe to the rebellious children, saith the lord, that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but
 
 ___________________________
 
ea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also
blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble.

40:25 to whom then will ye liken me, or shall i be equal? saith the
holy one.

40:26 lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power;
not one faileth.

40:27 why sayest thou, o jacob, and speakest, o israel, my way is hid
from the lord, and my judgment is passed over from my god?  40:28 hast
thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting god, the
lord, the creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is
weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

40:29 he giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength.

40:30 even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall: 40:31 but the
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord, the first, and with the last; i am he.

41:5 the isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid,
drew near, and came.

41:6 they helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
brother, be of good courage.

41:7 so the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, it is ready for the
sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 but thou, israel, art my servant, jacob whom i have chosen, the
seed of abraham my friend.

41:9 thou whom i have taken from the ends of the earth, and called
thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my
servant; i have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 fear thou not; for i am with thee: be not dismayed; for i am thy
god: i will strengthen thee; yea, i will help thee; yea, i will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
be
ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish.

41:12 thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of nought.

41:13 for i the lord thy god will hold thy right hand, saying unto
thee, fear not; i will help thee.

41:14 fear not, thou worm jacob, and ye men of israel; i will help
thee, saith the lord, and thy redeemer, the holy one of israel.

41:15 behold, i will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
make the hills as chaff.

41:16 thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the lord, and
shalt glory in the holy one of israel.

41:17 when the poor and needy seek wate
 
 ___________________________
 
ss a pool of water, and the dry
land springs of water.

41:19 i will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and
the myrtle, and the oil tree; i will set in the desert the fir tree,
and the pine, and the box tree together: 41:20 that they may see, and
know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the lord
hath done this, and the holy one of israel hath created it.

41:21 produce your cause, saith the lord; bring forth your strong
reasons, saith the king of jacob.

41:22 let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let
them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them,
and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

41:23 shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,
and behold it together.

41:24 behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an
abomination is he that chooseth you.

41:25 i have raise
 
 ___________________________
 
things, but thou observest not; opening
the ears, but he heareth not.

42:21 the lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
magnify the law, and make it honourable.

42:22 but this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a
prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, restore.

42:23 who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?  42:24 who gave jacob for a spoil, and israel to
the robbers? did not the lord, he against whom we have sinned? for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his
law.

42:25 therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

43:1 but now thus saith the lord that created thee, o jacob, and he
that formed thee, o israel, fear not: for i have redee
 
 ___________________________
 
er consider the things
of old.

43:19 behold, i will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall
ye not know it? i will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers
in the desert.

43:20 the beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the
owls: because i give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

43:21 this people have i formed for myself; they shall shew forth my
praise.

43:22 but thou hast not called upon me, o jacob; but thou hast been
weary of me, o israel.

43:23 thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt
offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. i have
not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with
incense.

43:24 thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.

43:25 i, even i, am he that blottet
 
 ___________________________
 
h out thy transgressions for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

43:26 put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that
thou mayest be justified.

43:27 thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
against me.

43:28 therefore i have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have
given jacob to the curse, and israel to reproaches.

44:1 yet now hear, o jacob my servant; and israel, whom i have chosen:
44:2 thus saith the lord that made thee, and formed thee from the
womb, which will help thee; fear not, o jacob, my servant; and thou,
jesurun, whom i have chosen.

44:3 for i will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: i will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring: 44:4 and they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the water courses.

44:5 one shall say, i am the lord's;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and another shall call himself by
the name of jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
lord, and surname himself by the name of israel.

44:6 thus saith the lord the king of israel, and his redeemer the lord
of hosts; i am the first, and i am the last; and beside me there is no
god.

44:7 and who, as i, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in
order for me, since i appointed the ancient people? and the things
that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

44:8 fear ye not, neither be afraid: have no
 
 ___________________________
 
.

44:19 and none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge
nor understanding to say, i have burned part of it in the fire; yea,
also i have baked bread upon the coals thereof; i have roasted flesh,
and eaten it: and shall i make the residue thereof an abomination?
shall i fall down to the stock of a tree?  44:20 he feedeth on ashes:
a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?  44:21 remember
these, o jacob and israel; for thou art my servant: i have formed
thee; thou art my servant: o israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of
me.

44:22 i have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and,
as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for i have redeemed thee.

44:23 sing, o ye heavens; for the lord hath done it: shout, ye lower
parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, o forest,
and every tree therein: for the lord hath redeemed jacob, and
glorified himself in israel.

 
 ___________________________
 
i
have holden, to subdue nations before him; and i will loose the loins
of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall
not be shut; 45:2 i will go before thee, and make the crooked places
straight: i will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder
the bars of iron: 45:3 and i will give thee the treasures of darkness,
and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that i, the
lord, which call thee by thy name, am the god of israel.

45:4 for jacob my servant's sake, and israel mine elect, i have even
called thee by thy name: i have surnamed thee, though thou hast not
known me.

45:5 i am the lord, and there is none else, there is no god beside me:
i girded thee, though thou hast not known me: 45:6 that they may know
from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none
beside me. i am the lord, and there is none else.

45:7 i form the light, and create darkness: i make peace, and create
evil: i the lord do all these
 
 ___________________________
 
n together that are makers of idols.

45:17 but israel shall be saved in the lord with an everlasting
salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

45:18 for thus saith the lord that created the heavens; god himself
that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created
it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: i am the lord; and there
is none else.

45:19 i have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: i
said not unto the seed of jacob, seek ye me in vain: i the lord speak
righteousness, i declare things that are right.

45:20 assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are
escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

45:21 tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel
together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it
from that time?  have not i the lord? and there is no god else beside
me
 
 ___________________________
 
rength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed
against him shall be ashamed.

45:25 in the lord shall all the seed of israel be justified, and shall
glory.

46:1 bel boweth down, nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts,
and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a
burden to the weary beast.

46:2 they stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the
burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.

46:3 hearken unto me, o house of jacob, and all the remnant of the
house of israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are
carried from the womb: 46:4 and even to your old age i am he; and even
to hoar hairs will i carry you: i have made, and i will bear; even i
will carry, and will deliver you.

46:5 to whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that
we may be like?  46:6 they lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, y
 
 ___________________________
 
 monthly prognosticators, stand up,
and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

47:14 behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they
shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall
not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

47:15 thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even
thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his
quarter; none shall save thee.

48:1 hear ye this, o house of jacob, which are called by the name of
israel, and are come forth out of the waters of judah, which swear by
the name of the lord, and make mention of the god of israel, but not
in truth, nor in righteousness.

48:2 for they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves
upon the god of israel; the lord of hosts is his name.

48:3 i have declared the former things from the beginning; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and i shewed them; i did them suddenly,
and they came to pass.

 
 ___________________________
 
knew that thou wouldest deal
very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

48:9 for my name's sake will i defer mine anger, and for my praise
will i refrain for thee, that i cut thee not off.

48:10 behold, i have refined thee, but not with silver; i have chosen
thee in the furnace of affliction.

48:11 for mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will i do it: for how
should my name be polluted? and i will not give my glory unto another.

48:12 hearken unto me, o jacob and israel, my called; i am he; i am
the first, i also am the last.

48:13 mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my
right hand hath spanned the heavens: when i call unto them, they stand
up together.

48:14 all ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
declared these things? the lord hath loved him: he will do his
pleasure on babylon, and his arm shall be on the chaldeans.

48:15 i, even i, have spoken; yea, i have called him: i have brought
him, a
 
 ___________________________
 
48:18 o that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:
48:19 thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy
bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off
nor destroyed from before me.

48:20 go ye forth of babylon, flee ye from the chaldeans, with a voice
of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the
earth; say ye, the lord hath redeemed his servant jacob.

48:21 and they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he
caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock
also, and the waters gushed out.

48:22 there is no peace, saith the lord, unto the wicked.

49:1 listen, o isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; the
lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath
he made mention of my name.

49:2 and he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
his hand hath he 
 
 ___________________________
 
hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver
hath he hid me; 49:3 and said unto me, thou art my servant, o israel,
in whom i will be glorified.

49:4 then i said, i have laboured in vain, i have spent my strength
for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the lord, and
my work with my god.

49:5 and now, saith the lord that formed me from the womb to be his
servant, to bring jacob again to him, though israel be not gathered,
yet shall i be glorious in the eyes of the lord, and my god shall be
my strength.

49:6 and he said, it is a light thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of jacob, and to restore the preserved
of israel: i will also give thee for a light to the gentiles, that
thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

49:7 thus saith the lord, the redeemer of israel, and his holy one, to
him whom man despiseth, to him wh
 
 ___________________________
 
he mighty, or the lawful captive
delivered?  49:25 but thus saith the lord, even the captives of the
mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered: for i will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and
i will save thy children.

49:26 and i will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and
they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and
all flesh shall know that i the lord am thy saviour and thy redeemer,
the mighty one of jacob.

50:1 thus saith the lord, where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, whom i have put away? or which of my creditors is it to
whom i have sold you?  behold, for your iniquities have ye sold
yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

50:2 wherefore, when i came, was there no man? when i called, was
there none to answer? is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot
redeem? or have i no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke i dry up
the sea, i make the rivers
 
 ___________________________
 
ill lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

57:19 i create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, saith the lord; and i will heal him.

57:20 but the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

57:21 there is no peace, saith my god, to the wicked.

58:1 cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew
my people their transgression, and the house of jacob their sins.

58:2 yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their god:
they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in
approaching to god.

58:3 wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore
have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? behold, in
the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

58:4 behold, ye fast for strife and debate, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 called, the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to
dwell in.

58:13 if thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of
the lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: 58:14
then shalt thou delight thyself in the lord; and i will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritage of jacob thy father: for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.

59:1 behold, the lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: 59:2 but your iniquities
have separated between you and your god, and your sins have hid his
face from you, that he will not hear.

59:3 for your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered
perverseness.

59:4 none calleth for justice, nor any plea
 
 ___________________________
 
g, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.

59:18 according to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his
adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay
recompence.

59:19 so shall they fear the name of the lord from the west, and his
glory from the rising of the sun. when the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the spirit of the lord shall lift up a standard against him.

59:20 and the redeemer shall come to zion, and unto them that turn
from transgression in jacob, saith the lord.

59:21 as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the lord; my
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which i have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the lord, from
henceforth and for ever.

60:1 arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the lord is
risen upon thee.

60:2 for, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people: b
 
 ___________________________
 
ll they that despised thee shall bow themselves down
at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee; the city of the
lord, the zion of the holy one of israel.

60:15 whereas thou has been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
through thee, i will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
generations.

60:16 thou shalt also suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt suck
the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that i the lord am thy
saviour and thy redeemer, the mighty one of jacob.

60:17 for brass i will bring gold, and for iron i will bring silver,
and for wood brass, and for stones iron: i will also make thy officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

60:18 violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls
salvation, and thy gates praise.

60:19 the sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the lord shall be
unto thee an 
 
 ___________________________
 
recompense into their bosom, 65:7 your
iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the
lord, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me
upon the hills: therefore will i measure their former work into their
bosom.

65:8 thus saith the lord, as the new wine is found in the cluster, and
one saith, destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will i do for
my servants' sakes, that i may not destroy them all.

65:9 and i will bring forth a seed out of jacob, and out of judah an
inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
servants shall dwell there.

65:10 and sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of achor a
place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.

65:11 but ye are they that forsake the lord, that forget my holy
mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the
drink offering unto that number.

65:12 therefore will i number you to the sword, and ye shall a
 
 ___________________________
 
o deliver thee.

2:1 moreover the word of the lord came to me, saying, 2:2 go and cry
in the ears of jerusalem, saying, thus saith the lord; i remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.

2:3 israel was holiness unto the lord, and the firstfruits of his
increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them,
saith the lord.

2:4 hear ye the word of the lord, o house of jacob, and all the
families of the house of israel: 2:5 thus saith the lord, what
iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from
me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?  2:6 neither
said they, where is the lord that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts
and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death,
through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?
2:7 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
s and thy fig trees: they shall
impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

5:18 nevertheless in those days, saith the lord, i will not make a
full end with you.

5:19 and it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, wherefore doeth the
lord our god all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them,
like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so
shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not your's.

5:20 declare this in the house of jacob, and publish it in judah,
saying, 5:21 hear now this, o foolish people, and without
understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear
not: 5:22 fear ye not me? saith the lord: will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a
perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof
toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can
they not pass over it?  5:23 but this people hath a revolting 
 
 ___________________________
 
his voice, there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures.

10:14 every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is
confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them.

10:15 they are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

10:16 the portion of jacob is not like them: for he is the former of
all things; and israel is the rod of his inheritance: the lord of
hosts is his name.

10:17 gather up thy wares out of the land, o inhabitant of the
fortress.

10:18 for thus saith the lord, behold, i will sling out the
inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress them, that
they may find it so.

10:19 woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous; but i said, truly
this is a grief, and i must bear it.

10:20 my tabernacle is spoi
 
 ___________________________
 
hold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion
out of the north country, to make the cities of judah desolate, and a
den of dragons.

10:23 o lord, i know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not
in man that walketh to direct his steps.

10:24 o lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing.

10:25 pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up jacob,
and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation
desolate.

11:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord saying, 11:2 hear ye
the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of judah, and to
the inhabitants of jerusalem; 11:3 and say thou unto them, thus saith
the lord god of israel; cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words
of this covenant, 11:4 which i commanded your fathers in the day that
i brought them forth out of the land of egypt, from the iron furn
 
 ___________________________
 
thers,
and they shall possess it.

30:4 and these are the words that the lord spake concerning israel and
concerning judah.

30:5 for thus saith the lord; we have heard a voice of trembling, of
fear, and not of peace.

30:6 ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child?
wherefore do i see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman
in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?  30:7 alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of
jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

30:8 for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord of hosts,
that i will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy
bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him: 30:9 but
they shall serve the lord their god, and david their king, whom i will
raise up unto them.

30:10 therefore fear thou not, o my servant jacob, saith the lord;
neither be dismayed, o israel: for, lo, i will save thee from afar,
and thy seed f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom the land of their captivity; and jacob shall return,
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

30:11 for i am with thee, saith the lord, to save thee: though i make
a full end of all nations whither i have scattered thee, yet i will
not make a full end of thee: but i will correct thee in measure, and
will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

30:12 for thus saith the lord, thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound
is grievous.

30:13 there is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up:
 
 ___________________________
 
thee.

30:16 therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all
thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and
they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee
will i give for a prey.

30:17 for i will restore health unto thee, and i will heal thee of thy
wounds, saith the lord; because they called thee an outcast, saying,
this is zion, whom no man seeketh after.

30:18 thus saith the lord; behold, i will bring again the captivity of
jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city
shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after
the manner thereof.

30:19 and out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them
that make merry: and i will multiply them, and they shall not be few;
i will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.

30:20 their children also shall be as aforetime, and their
congregation shall be established before me, and i will punish all
that oppress th
 
 ___________________________
 
will build thee, and thou shalt be built, o virgin of
israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go
forth in the dances of them that make merry.

31:5 thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of samaria: the
planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

31:6 for there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount
ephraim shall cry, arise ye, and let us go up to zion unto the lord
our god.

31:7 for thus saith the lord; sing with gladness for jacob, and shout
among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, o
lord, save thy people, the remnant of israel.

31:8 behold, i will bring them from the north country, and gather them
from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame,
the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a
great company shall return thither.

31:9 they shall come with weeping, and with supplications will i lead
them: i will cause them to walk by the rivers of wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ters in a straight
way, wherein they shall not stumble: for i am a father to israel, and
ephraim is my firstborn.

31:10 hear the word of the lord, o ye nations, and declare it in the
isles afar off, and say, he that scattered israel will gather him, and
keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

31:11 for the lord hath redeemed jacob, and ransomed him from the hand
of him that was stronger than he.

31:12 therefore they shall come and sing in the height of zion, and
shall flow together to the goodness of the lord, for wheat, and for
wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and
their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any
more at all.

31:13 then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and
old together: for i will turn their mourning into joy, and wi
 
 ___________________________
 
evites that minister unto me.

33:23 moreover the word of the lord came to jeremiah, saying, 33:24
considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two
families which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
before them.

33:25 thus saith the lord; if my covenant be not with day and night,
and if i have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 33:26
then will i cast away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for i will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; go and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the north.

46:25 the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saith; behold, i will
punish the multitude of no, and pharaoh, and egypt, with their gods,
and their kings; even pharaoh, and all them that trust in him: 46:26
and i will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives,
and into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and into the hand
of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days
of old, saith the lord.

46:27 but fear not thou, o my servant jacob, and be not dismayed, o
israel: for, behold, i will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from
the land of their captivity; and jacob shall return, and be in rest
and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

46:28 fear thou not, o jacob my servant, saith the lord: for i am with
thee; for i will make a full end of all the nations whither i have
driven thee: but i will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee
in measure; yet will i not leave thee wholly unpunished.

47:1 the word 
 
 ___________________________
 
eth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures.

51:17 every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is
confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them.

51:18 they are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

51:19 the portion of jacob is not like them; for he is the former of
all things: and israel is the rod of his inheritance: the lord of
hosts is his name.

51:20 thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will i
break in pieces the nations, and with thee will i destroy kingdoms;
51:21 and with thee will i break in pieces the horse and his rider;
and with thee will i break in pieces the chariot and his rider; 51:22
with thee also will i break in pieces man and woman; and with thee
will i break in pie
 
 ___________________________
 
 under foot all my mighty men in the midst
of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men:
the lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of judah, as in a
winepress.

1:16 for these things i weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with
water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from
me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

1:17 zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:
the lord hath commanded concerning jacob, that his adversaries should
be round about him: jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

1:18 the lord is righteous; for i have rebelled against his
commandment: hear, i pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my
virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

1:19 i called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine
elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to
relieve their souls.

1:20 behold, o lord; for i am in distress: my bow
 
 ___________________________
 
bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall
be like unto me.

1:22 let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as
thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are
many, and my heart is faint.

2:1 how hath the lord covered the daughter of zion with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of israel,
and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!  2:2 the
lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of jacob, and hath not
pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter of judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath
polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.

2:3 he hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of israel: he
hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned
against jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.

2:4 he hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand
as an adversary, and slew 
 
 ___________________________
 
0:2 then came the word of the lord unto me, saying, 20:3 son of man,
speak unto the elders of israel, and say unto them, thus saith the
lord god; are ye come to enquire of me? as i live, saith the lord god,
i will not be enquired of by you.

20:4 wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause
them to know the abominations of their fathers: 20:5 and say unto
them, thus saith the lord god; in the day when i chose israel, and
lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of jacob, and made
myself known unto them in the land of egypt, when i lifted up mine
hand unto them, saying, i am the lord your god; 20:6 in the day that i
lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of
egypt into a land that i had espied for them, flowing with milk and
honey, which is the glory of all lands: 20:7 then said i unto them,
cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not
yourselves with the idols of egypt: i am the lord your god.

20:8 but th
 
 ___________________________
 
d they shall know that i am the lord.

28:24 and there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that
despised them; and they shall know that i am the lord god.

28:25 thus saith the lord god; when i shall have gathered the house of
israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be
sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
in their land that i have given to my servant jacob.

28:26 and they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when i have
executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them;
and they shall know that i am the lord their god.

29:1 in the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 29:2 son of man, set
thy face against pharaoh king of egypt, and prophesy against him, and
against all egyp
 
 ___________________________
 
lves any more with their idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions: but i will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and i will be their god.

37:24 and david my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
my statutes, and do them.

37:25 and they shall dwell in the land that i have given unto jacob my
servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children
for ever: and my servant david shall be their prince for ever.

37:26 moreover i will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be
an everlasting covenant with them: and i will place them, and multiply
them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

37:27 my tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, i will be their god,
and they 
 
 ___________________________
 
r god
from that day and forward.

39:23 and the heathen shall know that the house of israel went into
captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me,
therefore hid i my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

39:24 according to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions have i done unto them, and hid my face from them.

39:25 therefore thus saith the lord god; now will i bring again the
captivity of jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of israel, and
will be jealous for my holy name; 39:26 after that they have borne
their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed
against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them
afraid.

39:27 when i have brought them again from the people, and gathered
them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the
sight of many nations; 39:28 then shall they know that i am the lord
their god, which caused
 
 ___________________________
 
 us.

10:9 o israel, thou hast sinned from the days of gibeah: there they
stood: the battle in gibeah against the children of iniquity did not
overtake them.

10:10 it is in my desire that i should chastise them; and the people
shall be gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in
their two furrows.

10:11 and ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread
out the corn; but i passed over upon her fair neck: i will make
ephraim to ride; judah shall plow, and jacob shall break his clods.

10:12 sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your
fallow ground: for it is time to seek the lord, till he come and rain
righteousness upon you.

10:13 ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have
eaten the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the
multitude of thy mighty men.

10:14 therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy
fortresses shall be spoiled, as shalman spoiled betharbel in the d
 
 ___________________________
 
ove out of
the land of assyria: and i will place them in their houses, saith the
lord.

11:12 ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of israel
with deceit: but judah yet ruleth with god, and is faithful with the
saints.

12:1 ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he
daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with
the assyrians, and oil is carried into egypt.

12:2 the lord hath also a controversy with judah, and will punish
jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he
recompense him.

12:3 he took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength
he had power with god: 12:4 yea, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in
bethel, and there he spake with us; 12:5 even the lord god of hosts;
the lord is his memorial.

12:6 therefore turn thou to thy god: keep mercy and judgment and wait
on thy god continually.

12:7 he is a merchan
 
 ___________________________
 
they shall find none iniquity in me that
were sin.

12:9 and i that am the lord thy god from the land of egypt will yet
make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.

12:10 i have also spoken by the prophets, and i have multiplied
visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets.

12:11 is there iniquity in gilead? surely they are vanity: they
sacrifice bullocks in gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the
furrows of the fields.

12:12 and jacob fled into the country of syria, and israel served for
a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.

12:13 and by a prophet the lord brought israel out of egypt, and by a
prophet was he preserved.

12:14 ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall he
leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall his lord return unto
him.

13:1 when ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in israel; but
when he offended in baal, he died.

13:2 and now they sin more and more, and have
 
 ___________________________
 
iolence and robbery in their palaces.

3:11 therefore thus saith the lord god; an adversary there shall be
even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength from
thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

3:12 thus saith the lord; as the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of
the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of
israel be taken out that dwell in samaria in the corner of a bed, and
in damascus in a couch.

3:13 hear ye, and testify in the house of jacob, saith the lord god,
the god of hosts, 3:14 that in the day that i shall visit the
transgressions of israel upon him i will also visit the altars of
bethel: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground.

3:15 and i will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the
houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end,
saith the lord.

4:1 hear this word, ye kine of bashan, that are in the mountain of
samaria, which oppress the poor, whic
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the stall; 6:5 that chant to the sound of the
viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like david; 6:6
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of joseph.

6:7 therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed.

6:8 the lord god hath sworn by himself, saith the lord the god of
hosts, i abhor the excellency of jacob, and hate his palaces:
therefore will i deliver up the city with all that is therein.

6:9 and it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house,
that they shall die.

6:10 and a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to
bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is
by the sides of the house, is there yet any with thee? and he shall
say, no. then shall he say, hold thy tongue: for we may not make
mention of the name of the lord.

6:1
 
 ___________________________
 
e of israel, saith the
lord the god of hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in
of hemath unto the river of the wilderness.

7:1 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth;
and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.

7:2 and it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the
grass of the land, then i said, o lord god, forgive, i beseech thee:
by whom shall jacob arise? for he is small.

7:3 the lord repented for this: it shall not be, saith the lord.

7:4 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me: and, behold, the lord god
called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat
up a part.

7:5 then said i, o lord god, cease, i beseech thee: by whom shall
jacob arise? for he is small.

7:6 the lord repented for this: this also shall not be, saith the lord
god.

7:7 thus he shewed me: and, behold, the lord stood upon a wall made 
 
 ___________________________
 
hey
shall cast them forth with silence.

8:4 hear this, o ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor
of the land to fail, 8:5 saying, when will the new moon be gone, that
we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making
the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by
deceit?  8:6 that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?  8:7 the lord
hath sworn by the excellency of jacob, surely i will never forget any
of their works.

8:8 shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall
be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of egypt.

8:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord god, that i
will cause the sun to go down at noon, and i will darken the earth in
the clear day: 8:10 and i will turn your feasts into mourning, and all
your songs into lamentation; and i will 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that calleth for the waters of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth: the lord is his name.

9:7 are ye not as children of the ethiopians unto me, o children of
israel? saith the lord. have not i brought up israel out of the land
of egypt? and the philistines from caphtor, and the syrians from kir?
9:8 behold, the eyes of the lord god are upon the sinful kingdom, and
i will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that i will
not utterly destroy the house of jacob, saith the lord.

9:9 for, lo, i will command, and i will sift the house of israel among
all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.

9:10 all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say,
the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

9:11 in that day will i raise up the tabernacle of david that is
fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and i will raise up his
ruins, and i will build it as in the days of old: 9:1
 
 ___________________________
 
to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have deceived
thee, and prevailed against thee; that they eat thy bread have laid a
wound under thee: there is none understanding in him.

1:8 shall i not in that day, saith the lord, even destroy the wise men
out of edom, and understanding out of the mount of esau?  1:9 and thy
mighty men, o teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of
the mount of esau may be cut off by slaughter.

1:10 for thy violence against thy brother jacob shame shall cover
thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.

1:11 in the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that
the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered
into his gates, and cast lots upon jerusalem, even thou wast as one of
them.

1:12 but thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in
the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have
rejoiced over the children of judah in the day of their destruction;
neither 
 
 ___________________________
 
e of his that did remain
in the day of distress.

1:15 for the day of the lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou
hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon
thine own head.

1:16 for as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the
heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall
swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.

1:17 but upon mount zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness; and the house of jacob shall possess their possessions.

1:18 and the house of jacob shall be a fire, and the house of joseph a
flame, and the house of esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
them, and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the
house of esau; for the lord hath spoken it.

1:19 and they of the south shall possess the mount of esau; and they
of the plain the philistines: and they shall possess the fields of
ephraim, and the fields of samaria: and benjamin shall possess gilead.
 
 ___________________________
 
rning samaria and jerusalem.

1:2 hear, all ye people; hearken, o earth, and all that therein is:
and let the lord god be witness against you, the lord from his holy
temple.

1:3 for, behold, the lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come
down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

1:4 and the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall
be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured
down a steep place.

1:5 for the transgression of jacob is all this, and for the sins of
the house of israel. what is the transgression of jacob? is it not
samaria? and what are the high places of judah? are they not
jerusalem?  1:6 therefore i will make samaria as an heap of the field,
and as plantings of a vineyard: and i will pour down the stones
thereof into the valley, and i will discover the foundations thereof.

1:7 and all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and
all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, an
 
 ___________________________
 
day shall one take up a parable against you, and lament
with a doleful lamentation, and say, we be utterly spoiled: he hath
changed the portion of my people: how hath he removed it from me!
turning away he hath divided our fields.

2:5 therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in
the congregation of the lord.

2:6 prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shall not
prophesy to them, that they shall not take shame.

2:7 o thou that art named the house of jacob, is the spirit of the
lord straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him
that walketh uprightly?  2:8 even of late my people is risen up as an
enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by
securely as men averse from war.

2:9 the women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant
houses; from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.

2:10 arise ye, and depart; for this is not your rest: because it is
polluted, it shall destroy
 
 ___________________________
 
 you, even with a sore destruction.

2:11 if a man walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, i
will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be
the prophet of this people.

2:12 i will surely assemble, o jacob, all of thee; i will surely
gather the remnant of israel; i will put them together as the sheep of
bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great
noise by reason of the multitude of men.

2:13 the breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have
passed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shall
pass before them, and the lord on the head of them.

3:1 and i said, hear, i pray you, o heads of jacob, and ye princes of
the house of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ey even prepare war against him.

3:6 therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and
the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark
over them.

3:7 then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea,
they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of god.

3:8 but truly i am full of power by the spirit of the lord, and of
judgment, and of might, to declare unto jacob his transgression, and
to israel his sin.

3:9 hear this, i pray you, ye heads of the house of jacob, and princes
of the house of israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

3:10 they build up zion with blood, and jerusalem with iniquity.

3:11 the heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach
for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they
lean upon the lord, and say, is not the lord among us? none evil can
come upon us.

3:12 therefore
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and
jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high places of the forest.

4:1 but in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of
the house of the lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall
flow unto it.

4:2 and many nations shall come, and say, come, and let us go up to
the mountain of the lord, and to the house of the god of jacob; and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law
shall go forth of zion, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

4:3 and he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations
afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

4:4 but they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig
tree; and none shall make 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll he be great unto the ends of the earth.

5:5 and this man shall be the peace, when the assyrian shall come into
our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise
against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.

5:6 and they shall waste the land of assyria with the sword, and the
land of nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from
the assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth
within our borders.

5:7 and the remnant of jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a
dew from the lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not
for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.

5:8 and the remnant of jacob shall be among the gentiles in the midst
of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young
lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth
down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

5:9 thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all
thine enemi
 
 ___________________________
 
 holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the lord
our god, and shall fear because of thee.

7:18 who is a god like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not
his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.

7:19 he will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will
subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea.

7:20 thou wilt perform the truth to jacob, and the mercy to abraham,
which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.




nahum


1:1 the burden of nineveh. the book of the vision of nahum the elkoshite.

1:2 god is jealous, and the lord revengeth; the lord revengeth, and is
furious; the lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he
reserveth wrath for his enemies.

1:3 the lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked: the lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in th
 
 ___________________________
 
image and the molten image: i will make thy grave; for thou
art vile.

1:15 behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings, that publisheth peace! o judah, keep thy solemn feasts,
perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he
is utterly cut off.

2:1 he that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the
munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power
mightily.

2:2 for the lord hath turned away the excellency of jacob, as the
excellency of israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and
marred their vine branches.

2:3 the shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in
scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his
preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken.

2:4 the chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one
against another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they
shall run like the lightnings.

2:5 he shall recoun
 
 ___________________________
 
n the lord's house shall be like
the bowls before the altar.

14:21 yea, every pot in jerusalem and in judah shall be holiness unto
the lord of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of
them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the
canaanite in the house of the lord of hosts.




malachi


1:1 the burden of the word of the lord to israel by malachi.

1:2 i have loved you, saith the lord. yet ye say, wherein hast thou
loved us? was not esau jacob's brother? saith the lord: yet i loved
jacob, 1:3 and i hated esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage
waste for the dragons of the wilderness.

1:4 whereas edom saith, we are impoverished, but we will return and
build the desolate places; thus saith the lord of hosts, they shall
build, but i will throw down; and they shall call them, the border of
wickedness, and, the people against whom the lord hath indignation for
ever.

1:5 and your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
e law.

2:10 have we not all one father? hath not one god created us? why do
we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the
covenant of our fathers?  2:11 judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in israel and in jerusalem; for judah hath
profaned the holiness of the lord which he loved, and hath married the
daughter of a strange god.

2:12 the lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the
scholar, out of the tabernacles of jacob, and him that offereth an
offering unto the lord of hosts.

2:13 and this have ye done again, covering the altar of the lord with
tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth
not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your
hand.

2:14 yet ye say, wherefore? because the lord hath been witness between
thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt
treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

2:15 and di
 
 ___________________________
 
of judah and jerusalem be pleasant unto
the lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

3:5 and i will come near to you to judgment; and i will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against
false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his
wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger
from his right, and fear not me, saith the lord of hosts.

3:6 for i am the lord, i change not; therefore ye sons of jacob are
not consumed.

3:7 even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. return unto me, and i will return
unto you, saith the lord of hosts. but ye said, wherein shall we
return?  3:8 will a man rob god? yet ye have robbed me. but ye say,
wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and offerings.

3:9 ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole
nation.

3:10 bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may