rness, and he saw
that saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 david therefore sent out spies, and understood that saul was come
in very deed.

26:5 and david arose, and came to the place where saul had pitched:
and david beheld the place where saul lay, and abner the son of ner,
the captain of his host: and saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, i will go down with
thee.

26:7 so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 then said abishai to david, god hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, i pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and i will
 
 ___________________________
 
ver gilead, and over the ashurites, and over jezreel, and over
ephraim, and over benjamin, and over all israel.

2:10 ishbosheth saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign
over israel, and reigned two years. but the house of judah followed
david.

2:11 and the time that david was king in hebron over the house of
judah was seven years and six months.

2:12 and abner the son of ner, and the servants of ishbosheth the son
of saul, went out from mahanaim to gibeon.

2:13 and joab the son of zeruiah, and the servants of david, went out,
and met together by the pool of gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 and abner said to joab, let the young men now arise, and play
before us. and joab said, let them arise.

2:15 then there arose and went over by number twelve of benjamin,
which pertained to ishbosheth the son of saul, and twelve of the
servants of david.

2:16 and they caught every o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne his fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
place was called helkathhazzurim, which is in gibeon.

2:17 and there was a very sore battle that day; and abner was beaten,
and the men of israel, before the servants of david.

2:18 and there were three sons of zeruiah there, joab, and abishai,
and asahel: and asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

2:19 and asahel pursued after abner; and in going he turned not to the
right hand nor to the left from following abner.

2:20 then abner looked behind him, and said, art thou asahel? and he
answered, i am.

2:21 and abner said to him, turn thee aside to thy right hand or to
thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
armour.

but asahel would not turn aside from following of him.

 
 ___________________________
 

2:22 and abner said again to asahel, turn thee aside from following
me: wherefore should i smite thee to the ground? how then should i
hold up my face to joab thy brother?  2:23 howbeit he refused to turn
aside: wherefore abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him
under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell
down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as
many as came to the place where asahel fell down and died stood still.

2:24 joab also and abishai pursued after abner: and the sun went down
when they were come to the hill of ammah, that lieth before giah by
the way of the wilderness of gibeon.

2:25 and the children of benjamin gathered themselves together after
abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

2:26 then abner called to joab, and said, shall the sword devour for
ever?  knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people re
 
 ___________________________
 
turn from
following their brethren?  2:27 and joab said, as god liveth, unless
thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following his brother.

2:28 so joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and
pursued after israel no more, neither fought they any more.

2:29 and abner and his men walked all that night through the plain,
and passed over jordan, and went through all bithron, and they came to
mahanaim.

2:30 and joab returned from following abner: and when he had gathered
all the people together, there lacked of david's servants nineteen men
and asahel.

2:31 but the servants of david had smitten of benjamin, and of abner's
men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

2:32 and they took up asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in bethlehem. and joab and his men went all night,
and they came to hebron at break of day.

3:1 now there was long war between the house
 
 ___________________________
 
o
israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of benjamin.

3:20 so abner came to david to hebron, and twenty men with him. and
david made abner and the men that were with him a feast.

3:21 and abner said unto david, i will arise and go, and will gather
all israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth.
and david sent abner away; and he went in peace.

3:22 and, behold, the servants of david and joab came from pursuing a
troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but abner was not with
david in hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.

3:23 when joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told
joab, saying, abner the son of ner came to the king, and he hath sent
him away, and he is gone in peace.

3:24 then joab came to the king, and said, what hast thou done?
behold, abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away,
and he is quite g
 
 ___________________________
 
one?  3:25 thou knowest abner the son of ner, that he
came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and
to know all that thou doest.

3:26 and when joab was come out from david, he sent messengers after
abner, which brought him again from the well of sirah: but david knew
it not.

3:27 and when abner was returned to hebron, joab took him aside in the
gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
rib, that he died, for the blood of asahel his brother.

3:28 and afterward when david heard it, he said, i and my kingdom are
guiltless before the lord for ever from the blood of abner the son of
ner: 3:29 let it rest on the head of joab, and on all his father's
house; and let there not fail from the house of joab one that hath an
issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that fall
 
 ___________________________
 
eth
on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

3:30 so joab, and abishai his brother slew abner, because he had slain
their brother asahel at gibeon in the battle.

3:31 and david said to joab, and to all the people that were with him,
rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before
abner. and king david himself followed the bier.

3:32 and they buried abner in hebron: and the king lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of abner; and all the people wept.

3:33 and the king lamented over abner, and said, died abner as a fool
dieth?  3:34 thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters:
as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. and all t
 
 ___________________________
 
and of amalek, and of the spoil of hadadezer, son of
rehob, king of zobah.

8:13 and david gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

8:14 and he put garrisons in edom; throughout all edom put he
garrisons, and all they of edom became david's servants. and the lord
preserved david whithersoever he went.

8:15 and david reigned over all israel; and david executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.

8:16 and joab the son of zeruiah was over the host; and jehoshaphat
the son of ahilud was recorder; 8:17 and zadok the son of ahitub, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, were the priests; and seraiah was the
scribe; 8:18 and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over both the
cherethites and the pelethites; and david's sons were chief rulers.

9:1 and david said, is there yet any that is left of the house of
saul, that i may shew him kindness for jonathan's sake?  9:2 and there
was of the house of saul a se
 
 ___________________________
 
 sent them away.

10:5 when they told it unto david, he sent to meet them, because the
men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, tarry at jericho until
your beards be grown, and then return.

10:6 and when the children of ammon saw that they stank before david,
the children of ammon sent and hired the syrians of bethrehob and the
syrians of zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king maacah a
thousand men, and of ishtob twelve thousand men.

10:7 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

10:8 and the children of ammon came out, and put the battle in array
at the entering in of the gate: and the syrians of zoba, and of rehob,
and ishtob, and maacah, were by themselves in the field.

10:9 when joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before
and behind, he chose of all the choice men of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians: 10:10 and the rest of the people he
delivered into the hand of abishai his brother, t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat he might put them
in array against the children of ammon.

10:11 and he said, if the syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then i will come and help thee.

10:12 be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the cities of our god: and the lord do that which seemeth him
good.

10:13 and joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the
battle against the syrians: and they fled before him.

10:14 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
then fled they also before abishai, and entered into the city. so joab
returned from the children of ammon, and came to jerusalem.

10:15 and when the syrians saw that they were smitten before israel,
they gathered themselves together.

10:16 and hadarezer sent, and brought out the syrians that were beyond
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 israel; and david slew the men of
seven hundred chariots of the syrians, and forty thousand horsemen,
and smote shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

10:19 and when all the kings that were servants to hadarezer saw that
they were smitten before israel, they made peace with israel, and
served them. so the syrians feared to help the children of ammon any
more.

11:1 and it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when
kings go forth to battle, that david sent joab, and his servants with
him, and all israel; and they destroyed the children of ammon, and
besieged rabbah. but david tarried still at jerusalem.

11:2 and it came to pass in an eveningtide, that david arose from off
his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the
roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful
to look upon.

11:3 and david sent and enquired after the woman. and one said, is not
this bathsheba, the daughter of eliam, the wife o
 
 ___________________________
 
f uriah the hittite?
11:4 and david sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto
him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness:
and she returned unto her house.

11:5 and the woman conceived, and sent and told david, and said, i am
with child.

11:6 and david sent to joab, saying, send me uriah the hittite. and
joab sent uriah to david.

11:7 and when uriah was come unto him, david demanded of him how joab
did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

11:8 and david said to uriah, go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.
and uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a
mess of meat from the king.

11:9 but uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the
servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

11:10 and when they had told david, saying, uriah went not down unto
his house, david said unto uriah, camest thou not from thy journey?
why
 
 ___________________________
 
 then didst thou not go down unto thine house?  11:11 and uriah
said unto david, the ark, and israel, and judah, abide in tents; and
my lord joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open
fields; shall i then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to
lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, i will not
do this thing.

11:12 and david said to uriah, tarry here to day also, and to morrow i
will let thee depart. so uriah abode in jerusalem that day, and the
morrow.

11:13 and when david had called him, he did eat and drink before him;
and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his b
 
 ___________________________
 
ed with
the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

11:14 and it came to pass in the morning, that david wrote a letter to
joab, and sent it by the hand of uriah.

11:15 and he wrote in the letter, saying, set ye uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may
be smitten, and die.

11:16 and it came to pass, when joab observed the city, that he
assigned uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

11:17 and the men of the city went out, and fought with joab: and
there fell some of the people of the servants of david; and uriah the
hittite died also.

11:18 then joab sent and told david all the things concerning the war;
11:19 and charged the messenger, saying, when thou hast made an end of
telling the matters of the war unto the king, 11:20 and if so be that
the king's wrath arise, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
he say unto thee, wherefore approached ye
so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall?  11:21 who smote abimelech the son of
jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him
from the wall, that he died in thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then
say thou, thy servant uriah the hittite is dead also.

11:22 so the messenger went, and came and shewed david all that joab
had sent him for.

11:23 and the messenger said unto david, surely the men prevailed
against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them
even unto the entering of the gate.

11:24 and the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and
some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant uriah the hittite
is dead also.

11:25 then david said unto the messenger, thus shalt thou say unto
joab, let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one
as
 
 ___________________________
 
, who can tell whether god will be gracious to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast?
can i bring him back again? i shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 and david comforted bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name solomon:
and the lord loved him.

12:25 and he sent by the hand of nathan the prophet; and he called his
name jedidiah, because of the lord.

12:26 and joab fought against rabbah of the children of ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 and joab sent messengers to david, and said, i have fought
against rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

12:28 now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest i take the city, and it be called
after my name.

12:29 and david gathered all the people together, and went to rabbah,
and fought against it, and took it.

12:30 and he took their king's 
 
 ___________________________
 
he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and
wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

13:37 but absalom fled, and went to talmai, the son of ammihud, king
of geshur. and david mourned for his son every day.

13:38 so absalom fled, and went to geshur, and was there three years.

13:39 and the soul of king david longed to go forth unto absalom: for
he was comforted concerning amnon, seeing he was dead.

14:1 now joab the son of zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was
toward absalom.

14:2 and joab sent to tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and
said unto her, i pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a
woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 14:3 and come to the
king, and speak on this manner unto him. so joab put the words in her
mouth.

14:4 and when the woman of tekoah spake to the king, she fell on 
 
 ___________________________
 
ould destroy me and my son together out of the
inheritance of god.

14:17 then thine handmaid said, the word of my lord the king shall now
be comfortable: for as an angel of god, so is my lord the king to
discern good and bad: therefore the lord thy god will be with thee.

14:18 then the king answered and said unto the woman, hide not from
me, i pray thee, the thing that i shall ask thee. and the woman said,
let my lord the king now speak.

14:19 and the king said, is not the hand of joab with thee in all
this?  and the woman answered and said, as thy soul liveth, my lord
the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant joab, he bade me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 to
fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant joab done this thing:
and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of god, to
know all things that are in the earth.

14:21 and the king sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id unto joab, behold now, i have done this thing:
go therefore, bring the young man absalom again.

14:22 and joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king: and joab said, to day thy servant knoweth that i
have found grace in thy sight, my lord, o king, in that the king hath
fulfilled the request of his servant.

14:23 so joab arose and went to geshur, and brought absalom to
jerusalem.

14:24 and the king said, let him turn to his own house, and let him
not see my face. so absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the
king's face.

14:25 but in all israel there was none to be so much praised as
absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of
his head there was no blemish in him.

14:26 and when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end
that he polled it: because the h
 
 ___________________________
 
air was heavy on him, therefore he
polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels
after the king's weight.

14:27 and unto absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter,
whose name was tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

14:28 so absalom dwelt two full years in jerusalem, and saw not the
king's face.

14:29 therefore absalom sent for joab, to have sent him to the king;
but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time,
he would not come.

14:30 therefore he said unto his servants, see, joab's field is near
mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. and absalom's
servants set the field on fire.

14:31 then joab arose, and came to absalom unto his house, and said
unto him, wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?  14:32 and
absalom answered joab, behold, i sent unto thee, saying, c
 
 ___________________________
 
ome hither,
that i may send thee to the king, to say, wherefore am i come from
geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in
me, let him kill me.

14:33 so joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called
for absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the
ground before the king: and the king kissed absalom.

15:1 and it came to pass after this, that absalom prepared him
chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

15:2 and absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate:
and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the
king for judgment, then absalom called unto him, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
ning light there lacked not one of
them that was not gone over jordan.

17:23 and when ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his
city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died,
and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

17:24 then david came to mahanaim. and absalom passed over jordan, he
and all the men of israel with him.

17:25 and absalom made amasa captain of the host instead of joab:
which amasa was a man's son, whose name was ithra an israelite, that
went in to abigail the daughter of nahash, sister to zeruiah joab's
mother.

17:26 so israel and absalom pitched in the land of gilead.

17:27 and it came to pass, when david was come to mahanaim, that shobi
the son of nahash of rabbah of the children of ammon, and machir the
son of ammiel of lodebar, and barzillai the gileadite of rogelim,
17:28 brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
barley,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
parched pulse, 17:29 and honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of
kine, for david, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for
they said, the people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the
wilderness.

18:1 and david numbered the people that were with him, and set
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them.

18:2 and david sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of
joab, and a third part under the hand of abishai the son of zeruiah,
joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of ittai the gittite.
and the king said unto the people, i will surely go forth with you
myself also.

18:3 but the people answered, thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

18:4 and the
 
 ___________________________
 
 king said unto them, what seemeth you best i will do. and
the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands.

18:5 and the king commanded joab and abishai and ittai, saying, deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with absalom. and all the
people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
absalom.

18:6 so the people went out into the field against israel: and the
battle was in the wood of ephraim; 18:7 where the people of israel
were slain before the servants of david, and there was there a great
slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

18:8 for the battle was there scattered over the face of al
 
 ___________________________
 
l the
country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 and absalom met the servants of david. and absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

18:10 and a certain man saw it, and told joab, and said, behold, i saw
absalom hanged in an oak.

18:11 and joab said unto the man that told him, and, behold, thou
sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
i would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

18:12 and the man said unto joab, though i should receive a thousand
shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would i not put forth mine hand
against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and
abishai and ittai, saying, beware that none touch the young man
absalom.

18:13 otherwise i should h
 
 ___________________________
 
ave wrought falsehood against mine own life:
for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest
have set thyself against me.

18:14 then said joab, i may not tarry thus with thee. and he took
three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of absalom,
while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

18:15 and ten young men that bare joab's armour compassed about and
smote absalom, and slew him.

18:16 and joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
after israel: for joab held back the people.

18:17 and they took absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all israel
fled every one to his tent.

18:18 now absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself
a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, i have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own
name: and it is c
 
 ___________________________
 
alled unto this day, absalom's place.

18:19 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok, let me now run, and bear the
king tidings, how that the lord hath avenged him of his enemies.

18:20 and joab said unto him, thou shalt not bear tidings this day,
but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear
no tidings, because the king's son is dead.

18:21 then said joab to cushi, go tell the king what thou hast seen.
and cushi bowed himself unto joab, and ran.

18:22 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok yet again to joab, but
howsoever, let me, i pray thee, also run after cushi. and joab said,
wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings
ready?  18:23 but howsoever, said he, let me run. and he said unto
him, run. then ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran cushi.

18:24 and david sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to
the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and
loo
 
 ___________________________
 
, me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of ahimaaz the son of zadok. and the king said, he
is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 and ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, all is well. and he
fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said,
blessed be the lord thy god, which hath delivered up the men that
lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 and the king said, is the young man absalom safe? and ahimaaz
answered, when joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, i saw
a great tumult, but i knew not what it was.

18:30 and the king said unto him, turn aside, and stand here. and he
turned aside, and stood still.

18:31 and, behold, cushi came; and cushi said, tidings, my lord the
king: for the lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 and the king said unto cushi, is the young man absalom safe? and
cushi answered, the enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
 
 ___________________________
 

against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 and the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, o my son absalom, my
son, my son absalom! would god i had died for thee, o absalom, my son,
my son!  19:1 and it was told joab, behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for absalom.

19:2 and the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
his son.

19:3 and the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 but the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud
voice, o my son absalom, o absalom, my son, my son!  19:5 and joab
came into the house to th
 
 ___________________________
 
nd to abiathar the priests, saying,
speak unto the elders of judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 and say ye to amasa,
art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? god do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the
room of joab.

19:14 and he bowed the heart of all the men of judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 so the king returned, and came to jordan. and judah came to
gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over jordan.

19:16 and shimei the son of gera, a benjamite, which was of bahurim,
hasted and came down with the men of judah to meet king david.

19:17 and there were a thousand men of benjamin with him,
 
 ___________________________
 
ath, living in widowhood.

20:4 then said the king to amasa, assemble me the men of judah within
three days, and be thou here present.

20:5 so amasa went to assemble the men of judah: but he tarried longer
than the set time which he had appointed him.

20:6 and david said to abishai, now shall sheba the son of bichri do
us more harm than did absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and
pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

20:7 and there went out after him joab's men, and the cherethites, and
the pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of
jerusalem, to pursue after sheba the son of bichri.

20:8 when they were at the great stone which is in gibeon, amasa went
before them. and joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto
him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the
sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

20:9 and joab said to amasa, art thou in health, my brother? and joab
took amasa by t
 
 ___________________________
 
he beard with the right hand to kiss him.

20:10 but amasa took no heed to the sword that was in joab's hand: so
he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to
the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. so joab and abishai
his brother pursued after sheba the son of bichri.

20:11 and one of joab's men stood by him, and said, he that favoureth
joab, and he that is for david, let him go after joab.

20:12 and amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. and
when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed amasa out
of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw
that every one that came by him stood still.

20:13 when he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on
after joab, to pursue after sheba the son of bichri.

20:14 and he went through all the tribes of israel unto abel, and to
bethmaachah, and all the berites: and th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey were gathered together, and
went also after him.

20:15 and they came and besieged him in abel of bethmaachah, and they
cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all
the people that were with joab battered the wall, to throw it down.

20:16 then cried a wise woman out of the city, hear, hear; say, i pray
you, unto joab, come near hither, that i may speak with thee.

20:17 and when he was come near unto her, the woman said, art thou
joab?  and he answered, i am he. then she said unto him, hear the
words of thine handmaid. and he answered, i do hear.

20:18 then she spake, saying, they were wont to speak in old time,
saying, they shall surely ask counsel at abel: and so they ended the
matter.

20:19 i am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in israel: thou
seekest to destroy a city and a mother in israel: why wilt thou
swallow up the inheritance of the lord?  20:20 and joab answered and
said, far be it, far be i
 
 ___________________________
 
t from me, that i should swallow up or
destroy.

20:21 the matter is not so: but a man of mount ephraim, sheba the son
of bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even
against david: deliver him only, and i will depart from the city. and
the woman said unto joab, behold, his head shall be thrown to thee
over the wall.

20:22 then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. and they
cut off the head of sheba the son of bichri, and cast it out to joab.
and he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to
his tent. and joab returned to jerusalem unto the king.

20:23 now joab was over all the host of israel: and benaiah the son of
jehoiada was over the cherethites and over the pelethites: 20:24 and
adoram was over the tribute: and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 and sheva was scribe: and zadok and abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 and ira also the jairite was a chief ruler about david.

21:1 then ther
 
 ___________________________
 
 three mighty men brake through the host of the philistines, and
drew water out of the well of bethlehem, that was by the gate, and
took it, and brought it to david: nevertheless he would not drink
thereof, but poured it out unto the lord.

23:17 and he said, be it far from me, o lord, that i should do this:
is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
therefore he would not drink it. these things did these three mighty
men.

23:18 and abishai, the brother of joab, the son of zeruiah, was chief
among three. and he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and
slew them, and had the name among three.

23:19 was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their
captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.

23:20 and benaiah the son of jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of moab: he
went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
23:21 and he slew a
 
 ___________________________
 
n egyptian, a goodly man: and the egyptian had a
spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked
the spear out of the egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

23:22 these things did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among three mighty men.

23:23 he was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to
the first three. and david set him over his guard.

23:24 asahel the brother of joab was one of the thirty; elhanan the
son of dodo of bethlehem, 23:25 shammah the harodite, elika the
harodite, 23:26 helez the paltite, ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
23:27 abiezer the anethothite, mebunnai the hushathite, 23:28 zalmon
the ahohite, maharai the netophathite, 23:29 heleb the son of baanah,
a netophathite, ittai the son of ribai out of gibeah of the children
of benjamin, 23:30 benaiah the pirathonite, hiddai of the brooks of
gaash, 23:31 abialbon the arbathite, azmaveth t
 
 ___________________________
 
he barhumite, 23:32
eliahba the shaalbonite, of the sons of jashen, jonathan, 23:33
shammah the hararite, ahiam the son of sharar the hararite, 23:34
eliphelet the son of ahasbai, the son of the maachathite, eliam the
son of ahithophel the gilonite, 23:35 hezrai the carmelite, paarai the
arbite, 23:36 igal the son of nathan of zobah, bani the gadite, 23:37
zelek the ammonite, nahari the beerothite, armourbearer to joab the
son of zeruiah, 23:38 ira an ithrite, gareb an ithrite, 23:39 uriah
the hittite: thirty and seven in all.

24:1 and again the anger of the lord was kindled against israel, and
he moved david against them to say, go, number israel and judah.

24:2 for the king said to joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, go now through all the tribes of israel, from dan even to
beersheba, and number ye the people, that i may know the number of the
people.

24:3 and joab said unto the
 
 ___________________________
 
 king, now the lord thy god add unto the
people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
this thing?  24:4 notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against
joab, and against the captains of the host. and joab and the captains
of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the
people of israel.

24:5 and they passed over jordan, and pitched in aroer, on the right
side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of gad, and
toward jazer: 24:6 then they came to gilead, and to the land of
tahtimhodshi; and they came to danjaan, and about to zidon, 24:7 and
came to the strong hold of tyre, and to all the cities of the hivites,
and of the canaanites: and they went out to the s
 
 ___________________________
 
outh of judah, even
to beersheba.

24:8 so when they had gone through all the land, they came to
jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

24:9 and joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the
king: and there were in israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
drew the sword; and the men of judah were five hundred thousand men.

24:10 and david's heart smote him after that he had numbered the
people.

and david said unto the lord, i have sinned greatly in that i have
done: and now, i beseech thee, o lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant; for i have done very foolishly.

24:11 for when david was up in the morning
 
 ___________________________
 
te, and brought her to the king.

1:4 and the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and
ministered to him: but the king knew her not.

1:5 then adonijah the son of haggith exalted himself, saying, i will
be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him.

1:6 and his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, why
hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother
bare him after absalom.

1:7 and he conferred with joab the son of zeruiah, and with abiathar
the priest: and they following adonijah helped him.

1:8 but zadok the priest, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and nathan
the prophet, and shimei, and rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
david, were not with adonijah.

1:9 and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
zoheleth, which is by enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of judah the king's servants: 1:10 but nathan
the prophet, and be
 
 ___________________________
 
ba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. and the
king said, what wouldest thou?  1:17 and she said unto him, my lord,
thou swarest by the lord thy god unto thine handmaid, saying,
assuredly solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne.

1:18 and now, behold, adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 and he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
abiathar the priest, and joab the captain of the host: but solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

1:20 and thou, my lord, o king, the eyes of all israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord
the king after him.

1:21 otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall
sleep with his fathers, that i and my son solomon shall be counted
offenders.

1:22 and, lo, while she yet talked with the king, nathan the prophet
also came in.

1:23 and they told the kin
 
 ___________________________
 
to ride upon king david's mule, and brought him to
gihon.

1:39 and zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed solomon. and they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, god save king solomon.

1:40 and all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 and adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar?  1:42 and while he yet spake, behold, jonathan the son of
abiathar the priest came; and adonijah said unto him, come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 and jonathan answered and said to adonijah, verily our lord king
david hath made solomon king.

1:44 and the king hath sent with him zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, an
 
 ___________________________
 
tutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, if thy children take
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
throne of israel.

2:5 moreover thou knowest also what joab the son of zeruiah did to me,
and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of israel, unto abner
the son of ner, and unto amasa the son of jether, whom he slew, and
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his
feet.

2:6 do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

2:7 but shew kindness unto the sons of barzillai the gileadite, and
let them be
 
 ___________________________
 
t hand.

2:20 then she said, i desire one small petition of thee; i pray thee,
say me not nay. and the king said unto her, ask on, my mother: for i
will not say thee nay.

2:21 and she said, let abishag the shunammite be given to adonijah thy
brother to wife.

2:22 and king solomon answered and said unto his mother, and why dost
thou ask abishag the shunammite for adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for abiathar the
priest, and for joab the son of zeruiah.

2:23 then king solomon sware by the lord, saying, god do so to me, and
more also, if adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 now therefore, as the lord liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of david my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 and king solomon sent by the hand of benaiah the son of jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 and unto a
 
 ___________________________
 
ar the priest said the king, get thee to anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but i will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the lord
god before david my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 so solomon thrust out abiathar from being priest unto the lord;
that he might fulfil the word of the lord, which he spake concerning
the house of eli in shiloh.

2:28 then tidings came to joab: for joab had turned after adonijah,
though he turned not after absalom. and joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 and it was told king solomon that joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. then solomon
sent benaiah the son of jehoiada, saying, go, fall upon him.

2:30 and benaiah came to the tabernacle of the lord, and said unto
him, thus saith the king, come forth. and he said, nay; but i wil
 
 ___________________________
 
l die
here. and benaiah brought the king word again, saying, thus said joab,
and thus he answered me.

2:31 and the king said unto him, do as he hath said, and fall upon
him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood,
which joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.

2:32 and the lord shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell
upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the
sword, my father david not knowing thereof, to wit, abner the son of
ner, captain of the host of israel, and amasa the son of jether,
captain of the host of judah.

2:33 their blood shall therefore return upon the head of joab, and
upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon david, and upon his seed
 
 ___________________________
 
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 notwithstanding in thy days i will not do it for david thy
father's sake: but i will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

11:13 howbeit i will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for david my servant's sake, and for jerusalem's sake
which i have chosen.

11:14 and the lord stirred up an adversary unto solomon, hadad the
edomite: he was of the king's seed in edom.

11:15 for it came to pass, when david was in edom, and joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had
smitten every male in edom; 11:16 (for six months did joab remain
there with all israel, until he had cut off every male in edom:) 11:17
that hadad fled, he and certain edomites of his father's servants with
him, to go into egypt; hadad being yet a little child.

11:18 and they arose out of midian, and came to paran: and they took
men with them out of paran, and they came to egypt, unto pharaoh king
of egypt; which gav
 
 ___________________________
 
e him an house, and appointed him victuals, and
gave him land.

11:19 and hadad found great favour in the sight of pharaoh, so that he
gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of tahpenes
the queen.

11:20 and the sister of tahpenes bare him genubath his son, whom
tahpenes weaned in pharaoh's house: and genubath was in pharaoh's
household among the sons of pharaoh.

11:21 and when hadad heard in egypt that david slept with his fathers,
and that joab the captain of the host was dead, hadad said to pharaoh,
let me depart, that i may go to mine own country.

11:22 then pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered, nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 and god stirred him up another adversary, rezon the son of
eliadah, which fled from his lord hadadezer king of zobah: 11:24 and
he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when dav
 
 ___________________________
 
 him; jerahmeel, and
ram, and chelubai.

2:10 and ram begat amminadab; and amminadab begat nahshon, prince of
the children of judah; 2:11 and nahshon begat salma, and salma begat
boaz, 2:12 and boaz begat obed, and obed begat jesse, 2:13 and jesse
begat his firstborn eliab, and abinadab the second, and shimma the
third, 2:14 nethaneel the fourth, raddai the fifth, 2:15 ozem the
sixth, david the seventh: 2:16 whose sisters were zeruiah, and
abigail. and the sons of zeruiah; abishai, and joab, and asahel,
three.

2:17 and abigail bare amasa: and the father of amasa was jether the
ishmeelite.

2:18 and caleb the son of hezron begat children of azubah his wife,
and of jerioth: her sons are these; jesher, and shobab, and ardon.

2:19 and when azubah was dead, caleb took unto him ephrath, which bare
him hur.

2:20 and hur begat uri, and uri begat bezaleel.

2:21 and afterward hezron went in to the daughter of machir the father
of gilead, whom he married when he was threes
 
 ___________________________
 
leb the son of hur, the firstborn of
ephratah; shobal the father of kirjathjearim.

2:51 salma the father of bethlehem, hareph the father of bethgader.

2:52 and shobal the father of kirjathjearim had sons; haroeh, and half
of the manahethites.

2:53 and the families of kirjathjearim; the ithrites, and the puhites,
and the shumathites, and the mishraites; of them came the zareathites,
and the eshtaulites, 2:54 the sons of salma; bethlehem, and the
netophathites, ataroth, the house of joab, and half of the
manahethites, the zorites.

2:55 and the families of the scribes which dwelt at jabez; the
tirathites, the shimeathites, and suchathites. these are the kenites
that came of hemath, the father of the house of rechab.

3:1 now these were the sons of david, which were born unto him in
hebron; the firstborn amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; the second
daniel, of abigail the carmelitess: 3:2 the third, absalom the son of
maachah the daughter of talmai king of geshur: the
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and that thine hand
might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it
may not grieve me! and god granted him that which he requested.

4:11 and chelub the brother of shuah begat mehir, which was the father
of eshton.

4:12 and eshton begat bethrapha, and paseah, and tehinnah the father
of irnahash. these are the men of rechah.

4:13 and the sons of kenaz; othniel, and seraiah: and the sons of
othniel; hathath.

4:14 and meonothai begat ophrah: and seraiah begat joab, the father of
the valley of charashim; for they were craftsmen.

4:15 and the sons of caleb the son of jephunneh; iru, elah, and naam:
and the sons of elah, even kenaz.

4:16 and the sons of jehaleleel; ziph, and ziphah, tiria, and asareel.

4:17 and the sons of ezra were, jether, and mered, and epher, and
jalon: and she bare miriam, and shammai, and ishbah the father of
eshtemoa.

4:18 and his wife jehudijah bare jered the father of gedor, and heber
the father of socho, and jekut
 
 ___________________________
 
t with them in hebron before the lord; and
they anointed david king over israel, according to the word of the
lord by samuel.

11:4 and david and all israel went to jerusalem, which is jebus; where
the jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

11:5 and the inhabitants of jebus said to david, thou shalt not come
hither. nevertheless david took the castle of zion, which is the city
of david.

11:6 and david said, whosoever smiteth the jebusites first shall be
chief and captain. so joab the son of zeruiah went first up, and was
chief.

11:7 and david dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city
of david.

11:8 and he built the city round about, even from millo round about:
and joab repaired the rest of the city.

11:9 so david waxed greater and greater: for the lord of hosts was
with him.

11:10 these also are the chief of the mighty men whom david had, who
strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all israel,
to make him king, according
 
 ___________________________
 
 philistines, and drew water
out of the well of bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and
brought it to david: but david would not drink of it, but poured it
out to the lord.

11:19 and said, my god forbid it me, that i should do this thing:
shall i drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in
jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it.
therefore he would not drink it.

these things did these three mightiest.

11:20 and abishai the brother of joab, he was chief of the three: for
lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
name among the three.

11:21 of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was
their captain: howbeit he attained not to the first three.

11:22 benaiah the son of jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of
kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of moab:
also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.

11:23 and he slew an egyptian, a man of great s
 
 ___________________________
 
five cubits
high; and in the egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and
he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the
egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

11:24 these things did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighties.

11:25 behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to
the first three: and david set him over his guard.

11:26 also the valiant men of the armies were, asahel the brother of
joab, elhanan the son of dodo of bethlehem, 11:27 shammoth the
harorite, helez the pelonite, 11:28 ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
abiezer the antothite, 11:29 sibbecai the hushathite, ilai the
ahohite, 11:30 maharai the netophathite, heled the son of baanah the
netophathite, 11:31 ithai the son of ribai of gibeah, that pertained
to the children of benjamin, benaiah the pirathonite, 11:32 hurai of
the brooks of gaash, abiel the arbathite, 11:33 azmaveth the
baharumite, eliahba the shaalbon
 
 ___________________________
 
ite, 11:34 the sons of hashem the
gizonite, jonathan the son of shage the hararite, 11:35 ahiam the son
of sacar the hararite, eliphal the son of ur, 11:36 hepher the
mecherathite, ahijah the pelonite, 11:37 hezro the carmelite, naarai
the son of ezbai, 11:38 joel the brother of nathan, mibhar the son of
haggeri, 11:39 zelek the ammonite, naharai the berothite, the
armourbearer of joab the son of zeruiah, 11:40 ira the ithrite, gareb
the ithrite, 11:41 uriah the hittite, zabad the son of ahlai, 11:42
adina the son of shiza the reubenite, a captain of the reubenites, and
thirty with him, 11:43 hanan the son of maachah, and joshaphat the
mithnite, 11:44 uzzia the ashterathite, shama and jehiel the sons of
hothan the aroerite, 11:45 jediael the son of shimri, and joha his
brother, the tizite, 11:46 eliel the mahavite, and jeribai, and
joshaviah, the sons of elnaam, and it
 
 ___________________________
 
t he brought from all these nations; from edom, and
from moab, and from the children of ammon, and from the philistines,
and from amalek.

18:12 moreover abishai the son of zeruiah slew of the edomites in the
valley of salt eighteen thousand.

18:13 and he put garrisons in edom; and all the edomites became
david's servants. thus the lord preserved david whithersoever he went.

18:14 so david reigned over all israel, and executed judgment and
justice among all his people.

18:15 and joab the son of zeruiah was over the host; and jehoshaphat
the son of ahilud, recorder.

18:16 and zadok the son of ahitub, and abimelech the son of abiathar,
were the priests; and shavsha was scribe; 18:17 and benaiah the son of
jehoiada was over the cherethites and the pelethites; and the sons of
david were chief about the king.

19:1 now it came to pass after this, that nahash the king of the
children of ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.

19:2 and david said, i will shew ki
 
 ___________________________
 
of ammon saw that they had made themselves
odious to david, hanun and the children of ammon sent a thousand
talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of
mesopotamia, and out of syriamaachah, and out of zobah.

19:7 so they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of
maachah and his people; who came and pitched before medeba. and the
children of ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and
came to battle.

19:8 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

19:9 and the children of ammon came out, and put the battle in array
before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come were by
themselves in the field.

19:10 now when joab saw that the battle was set against him before and
behind, he chose out of all the choice of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians.

19:11 and the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of abishai
his brother, and they set themselves in array agains
 
 ___________________________
 
t the children of
ammon.

19:12 and he said, if the syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then i will help thee.

19:13 be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for
our people, and for the cities of our god: and let the lord do that
which is good in his sight.

19:14 so joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the
syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.

19:15 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrians were fled,
they likewise fled before abishai his brother, and entered into the
city. then joab came to jerusalem.

19:16 and when the syrians saw that they were put to the worse before
israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the syrians that were
beyond the river: and shophach the captain of the host of hadarezer
went
 
 ___________________________
 
the syrians fled before israel; and david slew of the
syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty
thousand footmen, and killed shophach the captain of the host.

19:19 and when the servants of hadarezer saw that they were put to the
worse before israel, they made peace with david, and became his
servants: neither would the syrians help the children of ammon any
more.

20:1 and it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time
that kings go out to battle, joab led forth the power of the army, and
wasted the country of the children of ammon, and came and besieged
rabbah. but david tarried at jerusalem. and joab smote rabbah, and
destroyed it.

20:2 and david took the crown of their king from off his head, and
found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in
it; and it was set upon david's head: and he brought also exceeding
much spoil out of the city.

20:3 and he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with
 
 ___________________________
 
gain there was war at gath, where was a man of great
stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each
hand, and six on each foot and he also was the son of the giant.

20:7 but when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimea david's
brother slew him.

20:8 these were born unto the giant in gath; and they fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of his servants.

21:1 and satan stood up against israel, and provoked david to number
israel.

21:2 and david said to joab and to the rulers of the people, go,
number israel from beersheba even to dan; and bring the number of them
to me, that i may know it.

21:3 and joab answered, the lord make his people an hundred times so
many more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my
lord's servants?  why then doth my lord require this thing? why will
he be a cause of trespass to israel?  21:4 nevertheless the king's
word prevailed against joab. wherefore joab departed, and went
throughout all israel
 
 ___________________________
 
, and came to jerusalem.

21:5 and joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto david. and
all they of israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand
men that drew sword: and judah was four hundred threescore and ten
thousand men that drew sword.

21:6 but levi and benjamin counted he not among them: for the king's
word was abominable to joab.

21:7 and god was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote
israel.

21:8 and david said unto god, i have sinned greatly, because i have
done this thing: but now, i beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy
servant; for i have done very foolishly.

21:9 and the lord spake unto gad, david's seer, saying, 21:10 go and
tell david, saying, thus saith the lord, i offer thee three things:
choose thee one of them, that i may do it unto thee.

21:11 so gad came to david, and said unt
 
 ___________________________
 
haiah his
son, and joram his son, and zichri his son, and shelomith his son.

26:26 which shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.

26:28 and all that samuel the seer, and saul the son of kish, and
abner the son of ner, and joab the son of zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 of the izharites, chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 and of the hebronites, hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
israel on this side jordan westward in all the business of the lord,
and in the service of the king.

26:31 a
 
 ___________________________
 
he second month was dodai an ahohite, and
of his course was mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were
twenty and four thousand.

27:5 the third captain of the host for the third month was benaiah the
son of jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and
four thousand.

27:6 this is that benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above
the thirty: and in his course was ammizabad his son.

27:7 the fourth captain for the fourth month was asahel the brother of
joab, and zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:8 the fifth captain for the fifth month was shamhuth the izrahite:
and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:9 the sixth captain for the sixth month was ira the son of ikkesh
the tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:10 the seventh captain for the seventh month was helez the
pelonite, of the children of ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

2
 
 ___________________________
 
27:20 of the children of ephraim, hoshea the son of azaziah:
of the half tribe of manasseh, joel the son of pedaiah: 27:21 of the
half tribe of manasseh in gilead, iddo the son of zechariah: of
benjamin, jaasiel the son of abner: 27:22 of dan, azareel the son of
jeroham. these were the princes of the tribes of israel.

27:23 but david took not the number of them from twenty years old and
under: because the lord had said he would increase israel like to the
stars of the heavens.

27:24 joab the son of zeruiah began to number, but he finished not,
because there fell wrath for it against israel; neither was the number
put in the account of the chronicles of king david.

27:25 and over the king's treasures was azmaveth the son of adiel: and
over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the
villages, and in the castles, was jehonathan the son of uzziah: 27:26
and over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground
was ezri the son of chelub: 27:27 an
 
 ___________________________
 
as jehdeiah the
meronothite: 27:31 and over the flocks was jaziz the hagerite. all
these were the rulers of the substance which was king david's.

27:32 also jonathan david's uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a
scribe: and jehiel the son of hachmoni was with the king's sons: 27:33
and ahithophel was the king's counsellor: and hushai the archite was
the king's companion: 27:34 and after ahithophel was jehoiada the son
of benaiah, and abiathar: and the general of the king's army was joab.

28:1 and david assembled all the princes of israel, the princes of the
tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king
by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the
hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of
the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men,
and with all the valiant men, unto jerusalem.

28:2 then david the king stood up upon his feet, and said, hear me, my
brethren, and my pe
 
 ___________________________
 
, and came again unto
jerusalem and judah, every one unto his city; 2:2 which came with
zerubbabel: jeshua, nehemiah, seraiah, reelaiah, mordecai, bilshan,
mizpar, bigvai, rehum, baanah. the number of the men of the people of
israel: 2:3 the children of parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy
and two.

2:4 the children of shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

2:5 the children of arah, seven hundred seventy and five.

2:6 the children of pahathmoab, of the children of jeshua and joab,
two thousand eight hundred and twelve.

2:7 the children of elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

2:8 the children of zattu, nine hundred forty and five.

2:9 the children of zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

2:10 the children of bani, six hundred forty and two.

2:11 the children of bebai, six hundred twenty and three.

2:12 the children of azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two.

2:13 the children of adonikam, six hundred sixty and six.

2:14 the children 
 
 ___________________________
 
red and fifty.

8:4 of the sons of pahathmoab; elihoenai the son of zerahiah, and with
him two hundred males.

8:5 of the sons of shechaniah; the son of jahaziel, and with him three
hundred males.

8:6 of the sons also of adin; ebed the son of jonathan, and with him
fifty males.

8:7 and of the sons of elam; jeshaiah the son of athaliah, and with
him seventy males.

8:8 and of the sons of shephatiah; zebadiah the son of michael, and
with him fourscore males.

8:9 of the sons of joab; obadiah the son of jehiel, and with him two
hundred and eighteen males.

8:10 and of the sons of shelomith; the son of josiphiah, and with him
an hundred and threescore males.

8:11 and of the sons of bebai; zechariah the son of bebai, and with
him twenty and eight males.

8:12 and of the sons of azgad; johanan the son of hakkatan, and with
him an hundred and ten males.

8:13 and of the last sons of adonikam, whose names are these,
eliphelet, jeiel, and shemaiah, and with them thr
 
 ___________________________
 
alem and to judah, every one unto his
city; 7:7 who came with zerubbabel, jeshua, nehemiah, azariah,
raamiah, nahamani, mordecai, bilshan, mispereth, bigvai, nehum,
baanah. the number, i say, of the men of the people of israel was
this; 7:8 the children of parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and
two.

7:9 the children of shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

7:10 the children of arah, six hundred fifty and two.

7:11 the children of pahathmoab, of the children of jeshua and joab,
two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.

7:12 the children of elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

7:13 the children of zattu, eight hundred forty and five.

7:14 the children of zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

7:15 the children of binnui, six hundred forty and eight.

7:16 the children of bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.

7:17 the children of azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.

7:18 the children of adonikam, six hundred threescore and sev