in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in bethlehem. and joab and his men went all night,
and they came to hebron at break of day.

3:1 now there was long war between the house of saul and the house of
david: but david waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of saul
waxed weaker and weaker.

3:2 and unto david were sons born in hebron: and his firstborn was
amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; 3:3 and his second, chileab, of
abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite; and the third, absalom the
son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur; 3:4 and the
fourth, adonijah the son of haggith; and the fifth, shephatiah the son
of abital; 3:5 and the sixth, ithream, by eglah david's wife. these
were born to david in hebron.

3:6 and it came to pass, while there was war between the house of saul
and the house of david, that abner made himself strong for the house
of saul.

3:7 and saul had a concubine, whose name was rizpah, the daughter of
aiah: and ishbosheth said to a
 
 ___________________________
 
ght
whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set
on david's head. and he brought forth the spoil of the city in great
abundance.

12:31 and he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the
cities of the children of ammon. so david and all the people returned
unto jerusalem.

13:1 and it came to pass after this, that absalom the son of david had
a fair sister, whose name was tamar; and amnon the son of david loved
her.

13:2 and amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister tamar;
for she was a virgin; and amnon thought it hard for him to do anything
to her.

13:3 but amnon had a friend, whose name was jonadab, the son of
shimeah david's brother: and jonadab was a very subtil man.

13:4 and he said unto him, why art thou, being the king's son, lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? and amno
 
 ___________________________
 
n said unto him, i
love tamar, my brother absalom's sister.

13:5 and jonadab said unto him, lay thee down on thy bed, and make
thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, i
pray thee, let my sister tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the
meat in my sight, that i may see it, and eat it at her hand.

13:6 so amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was
come to see him, amnon said unto the king, i pray thee, let tamar my
sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that i may eat
a
 
 ___________________________
 


13:17 then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said,
put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

13:18 and she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such
robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. then his
servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

13:19 and tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers
colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
crying.

13:20 and absalom her brother said unto her, hath amnon thy brother
been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother;
regard not this thing. so tamar remained desolate in her brother
absalom's house.

13:21 but when king david heard of all these things, he was very
wroth.

13:22 and absalom spake unto his brother amnon neither good nor bad:
for absalom hated amnon, because he had forced his sister tamar.

13:23 and it came to pass after two full years, that absalom had
sheepsheare
 
 ___________________________
 
rs in baalhazor, which is beside ephraim: and absalom
invited all the king's sons.

13:24 and absalom came to the king, and said, behold now, thy servant
hath sheepshearers; let the king, i beseech thee, and his servants go
with thy servant.

13:25 and the king said to absalom, nay, my son, let us not all now
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. and he pressed him: howbeit he
would not go, but blessed him.

13:26 then said absalom, if not, i pray thee, let my brother amnon go
with us. and the king said unto him, why should he go with thee?
13:27 but absalom pressed him, that he let amnon and all the king's
sons go with him.

13:28 now absalom had commanded his servants, saying, mark ye now when
amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when i say unto you, smite
amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not i commanded you? be
courageous, and be valiant.

13:29 and the servants of absalom did unto amnon as absalom had

 
 ___________________________
 
commanded.

then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his
mule, and fled.

13:30 and it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings
came to david, saying, absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and
there is not one of them left.

13:31 then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the
earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

13:32 and jonadab, the son of shimeah david's brother, answered and
said, let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men
the king's sons; for amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of
absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his
sister tamar.

13:33 
 
 ___________________________
 
now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his
heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead: for amnon only is
dead.

13:34 but absalom fled. and the young man that kept the watch lifted
up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the
way of the hill side behind him.

13:35 and jonadab said unto the king, behold, the king's sons come: as
thy servant said, so it is.

13:36 and it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and
wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

13:37 but absalom fled, and went to t
 
 ___________________________
 
almai, the son of ammihud, king
of geshur. and david mourned for his son every day.

13:38 so absalom fled, and went to geshur, and was there three years.

13:39 and the soul of king david longed to go forth unto absalom: for
he was comforted concerning amnon, seeing he was dead.

14:1 now joab the son of zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was
toward absalom.

14:2 and joab sent to tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and
said unto her, i pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a
woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 14:3 and come to the
king, and speak on this manner unto him. so joab put the words in her
mouth.

14:4 and when the woman of tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her
face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, help, o king.


 
 ___________________________
 
d
the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant joab, he bade me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 to
fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant joab done this thing:
and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of god, to
know all things that are in the earth.

14:21 and the king said unto joab, behold now, i have done this thing:
go therefore, bring the young man absalom again.

14:22 and joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king: and joab said, to day thy servant knoweth that i
have found grace in thy sight, my lord, o king, in that the king hath
fulfilled the request of his servant.

14:23 so joab arose and went to geshur, and brought absalom to
jerusalem.

14:24 and the king said, let him turn to his own house, and let him
not see my face. so absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the
king's face.

14:
 
 ___________________________
 
25 but in all israel there was none to be so much praised as
absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of
his head there was no blemish in him.

14:26 and when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end
that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he
polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels
after the king's weight.

14:27 and unto absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter,
whose name was tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

14:28 so absalom dwelt two full years in jerusalem, and saw not the
king's face.

14:29 therefore absalom sent for joab, to have sent him to the king;
but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time,
he would not come.

14:30 therefore he said unto his servants, see, joab's field is near
mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. and absalom's

 
 ___________________________
 
servants set the field on fire.

14:31 then joab arose, and came to absalom unto his house, and said
unto him, wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?  14:32 and
absalom answered joab, behold, i sent unto thee, saying, come hither,
that i may send thee to the king, to say, wherefore am i come from
geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in
me, let him kill me.

14:33 so joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called
for absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the
ground before the king: and the king kissed absalom.

15:1 and it 
 
 ___________________________
 
came to pass after this, that absalom prepared him
chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

15:2 and absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate:
and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the
king for judgment, then absalom called unto him, and said, of what
city art thou? and he said, thy servant is of one of the tribes of
israel.

15:3 and absalom said unto him, see, thy matters are good and right;
but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

15:4 absalom said moreover, oh that i were made judge in the land,
that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and i
would do him justice!  15:5 and it was so, that when any man came nigh
to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and
kissed him.

15:6 and on this manner did absalom to all israel that came to the
king for judgment: so abs
 
 ___________________________
 
alom stole the hearts of the men of israel.

15:7 and it came to pass after forty years, that absalom said unto the
king, i pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which i have vowed unto
the lord, in hebron.

15:8 for thy servant vowed a vow while i abode at geshur in syria,
saying, if the lord shall bring me again indeed to jerusalem, then i
will serve the lord.

15:9 and the king said unto him, go in peace. so he arose, and went to
hebron.

15:10 but absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of israel,
saying, as soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall
say, absalom reigneth in hebron.

15:11 and with absalom went two hundred men out of jerusalem, that
were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any
thing.

15:12 and absalom sent for ahithophel the gilonite, david's
counsellor, from his city, even from giloh, while he offered
sacrifices. and the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased
conti
 
 ___________________________
 
nually with absalom.

15:13 and there came a messenger to david, saying, the hearts of the
men of israel are after absalom.

15:14 and david said unto all his servants that were with him at
jerusalem, arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from
absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring
evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

15:15 and the king's servants said unto the king, behold, thy servants
are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.

15:16 and the king went forth, and all his household after him. and
the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

15:17 and the king went forth, and all the people after him, and
tarried in a place that was far 
 
 ___________________________
 
 plain of the wilderness, until there
come word from you to certify me.

15:29 zadok therefore and abiathar carried the ark of god again to
jerusalem: and they tarried there.

15:30 and david went up by the ascent of mount olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up,
weeping as they went up.

15:31 and one told david, saying, ahithophel is among the conspirators
with absalom. and david said, o lord, i pray thee, turn the counsel of
ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 and it came to pass, that when david was come to the top of the
mount, where he worshipped god, behold, hushai the archite came to
meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 15:33 unto whom
david said, if thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 but if thou return to the city, and say unto absalom, i
will be thy servant, o king; as i have been thy father's 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou for me
defeat the counsel of ahithophel.

15:35 and hast thou not there with thee zadok and abiathar the
priests?  therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt
hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to zadok and abiathar
the priests.

15:36 behold, they have there with them their two sons, ahimaaz
zadok's son, and jonathan abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send
unto me every thing that ye can hear.

15:37 so hushai david's friend came into the city, and absalom came
into jerusalem.

16:1 and when david was a little past the top of the hill, behold,
ziba the servant of mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses
saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred
bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of
wine.

16:2 and the king said unto ziba, what meanest thou by these? and ziba
said, the asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the
 
 ___________________________
 
i, the son
of gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

16:6 and he cast stones at david, and at all the servants of king
david: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right
hand and on his left.

16:7 and thus said shimei when he cursed, come out, come out, thou
bloody man, and thou man of belial: 16:8 the lord hath returned upon
thee all the blood of the house of saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of
absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody man.

16:9 then said abishai the son of zeruiah unto the king, why should
this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, i pray thee, and
take off his head.

16:10 and the king said, what have i to do with you, ye sons of
zeruiah?  so let him curse, because the lord hath said unto him, curse
david. who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so?  16:11 and
david said to abishai, and to all his serv
 
 ___________________________
 
njamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the lord hath
bidden him.

16:12 it may be that the lord will look on mine affliction, and that
the lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.

16:13 and as david and his men went by the way, shimei went along on
the hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw
stones at him, and cast dust.

16:14 and the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,
and refreshed themselves there.

16:15 and absalom, and all the people the men of israel, came to
jerusalem, and ahithophel with him.

16:16 and it came to pass, when hushai the archite, david's friend,
was come unto absalom, that hushai said unto absalom, god save the
king, god save the king.

16:17 and absalom said to hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend?
why wentest thou not with thy friend?  16:18 and hushai said unto
absalom, nay; but whom the lord, and this people, and all the men of
israel, choose, his will i be, and with
 
 ___________________________
 
 him will i abide.

16:19 and again, whom should i serve? should i not serve in the
presence of his son? as i have served in thy father's presence, so
will i be in thy presence.

16:20 then said absalom to ahithophel, give counsel among you what we
shall do.

16:21 and ahithophel said unto absalom, go in unto thy father's
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all israel shall
hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 so they spread absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all
israel.

16:23 and the counsel of ahithophel, which he counselled in those
days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of god: so was all
the counsel of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ahithophel both with david and with absalom.

17:1 moreover ahithophel said unto absalom, let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and i will arise and pursue after david this
night: 17:2 and i will come upon him while he is weary and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him
shall flee; and i will smite the king only: 17:3 and i will bring back
all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

17:4 and the saying pleased absalom well, and all the elders of
israel.

17:5 th
 
 ___________________________
 
en said absalom, call now hushai the archite also, and let us
hear likewise what he saith.

17:6 and when hushai was come to absalom, absalom spake unto him,
saying, ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after
his saying? if not; speak thou.

17:7 and hushai said unto absalom, the counsel that ahithophel hath
given is not good at this time.

17:8 for, said hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they
be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of
her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not
lodge with the people.

17:9 behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it
will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that
whosoever heareth it will say, there is a slaug
 
 ___________________________
 
hter among the people
that follow absalom.

17:10 and he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a
lion, shall utterly melt: for all israel knoweth that thy father is a
mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

17:11 therefore i counsel that all israel be generally gathered unto
thee, from dan even to beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.

17:12 so shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found,
and we will light upon
 
 ___________________________
 
 him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of
him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so
much as one.

17:13 moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all israel
bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until
there be not one small stone found there.

17:14 and absalom and all the men of israel said, the counsel of
hushai the archite is better than the counsel of ahithophel. for the
lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of ahithophel, to the
intent that the lord might bring evil upon absalom.

17:15 then said hushai unto zadok and to abiathar the priests, thus
and thus did ahithophel counsel absalom and the elders of israel; and
thus and thus have i counselled.

17:16 now therefore send quickly, and tell david, saying, lodge not
this night i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over;
lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

17:17 now jonathan and ahimaaz stayed by enrogel; for they might not
be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and
they went and told king david.

17:18 nevertheless a lad saw them, and told absalom: but they went
both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in bahurim, which
had a well in his court; whither they went down.

17:19 and the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth,
and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

17:20 and when absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they
said, where is ahimaaz and jonathan? and the woman said unto them,
they be gone over the brook of water. and when they had sought and
could not find t
 
 ___________________________
 

counselled against you.

17:22 then david arose, and all the people that were with him, and
they passed over jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of
them that was not gone over jordan.

17:23 and when ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his
city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died,
and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

17:24 then david came to mahanaim. and absalom passed over jordan, he
and all the men of israel with him.

17:25 and absalom made amasa captain of the host instead of joab:
which amasa was a man's son, whose name was ithra an israelite, that
went in to abigail the daughter of nahash, sister to zeruiah joab's
mother.

17:26 so israel and absalom pitched in the land of gilead.

17:27 and it came to pass, when david was come to mahanaim, that shobi
the son of nahash of rabbah of the children of ammon, and machir the
son of ammiel o
 
 ___________________________
 
: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

18:4 and the king said unto them, what seemeth you best i will do. and
the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands.

18:5 and the king commanded joab and abishai and ittai, saying, deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with absalom. and all the
people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
absalom.

18:6 so the people went out into the field against israel: and the
battle was in the wood of ephraim; 18:7 where the people of israel
were slain before the servants of david, and there was there a great
slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

18:8 for the battle was there scattered over the face of all the
country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd absalom met the servants of david. and absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

18:10 and a certain man saw it, and told joab, and said, behold, i saw
absalom hanged in an oak.

18:11 and joab said unto the man that told him, and, behold, thou
sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
i would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

18:12 and the man said unto joab, though i should receive a thousand
shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would i not put forth mine hand
against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and
abishai and ittai, saying, beware that none touch the young man
ab
 
 ___________________________
 
salom.

18:13 otherwise i should have wrought falsehood against mine own life:
for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest
have set thyself against me.

18:14 then said joab, i may not tarry thus with thee. and he took
three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of absalom,
while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

18:15 and ten young men that bare joab's armour compassed about and
smote absalom, and slew him.

18:16 and joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
after israel: for joab held back the people.

18:17 and they took absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all israel
fled every one to his tent.

18:18 now absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself
a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, i have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar
 
 ___________________________
 
 after his own
name: and it is called unto this day, absalom's place.

18:19 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok, let me now run, and bear the
king tidings, how that the lord hath avenged him of his enemies.

18:20 and joab said unto him, thou shalt not bear tidings this day,
but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear
no tidings, because the king's son is dead.

18:21 then said joab to cushi, go tell the king what thou hast seen.
and cushi bowed himself unto joab, and ran.

18:22 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok ye
 
 ___________________________
 
th tidings.

18:27 and the watchman said, me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of ahimaaz the son of zadok. and the king said, he
is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 and ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, all is well. and he
fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said,
blessed be the lord thy god, which hath delivered up the men that
lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 and the king said, is the young man absalom safe? and ahimaaz
answered, when joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, i saw
a great tumult, but i knew not what it was.

18:30 and the king said unto him, turn aside, and stand here. and he
turned aside, and stood still.

18:31 and, behold, cushi came; and cushi said, tidings, my lord the
king: for the lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 and the king said unto cushi, is the young man absalom safe? and
cushi answered, the enemies
 
 ___________________________
 
 of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 and the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, o my son absalom, my
son, my son absalom! would god i had died for thee, o absalom, my son,
my son!  19:1 and it was told joab, behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for absalom.

19:2 and the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
his son.

19:3 and the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 but the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud
voice, o my son absalom, o absalom, my son, my son!  19:5 and joab
came into the house to the king, and said, thou hast shamed this day
the fac
 
 ___________________________
 
es of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and
the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy
wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 19:6 in that thou lovest thine
enemies, and hatest thy friends. for thou hast declared this day, that
thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day i perceive,
that if absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had
pleased thee well.

19:7 now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy
servants: for i swear by the lord, if thou go not forth, there will
not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee
than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

19:8 then the king arose, and sat in the gate. and they told unto all
the people, saying, behold, the king doth sit in the gate. and all the
people ca
 
 ___________________________
 
me before the king: for israel had fled every man to his
tent.

19:9 and all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
israel, saying, the king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and
he delivered us out of the hand of the philistines; and now he is fled
out of the land for absalom.

19:10 and absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?  19:11
and king david sent to zadok and to abiathar the priests, saying,
speak unto the elders of judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 and say ye to amasa
 
 ___________________________
 
whom he had left to keep the house, and put
them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. so they were
shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

20:4 then said the king to amasa, assemble me the men of judah within
three days, and be thou here present.

20:5 so amasa went to assemble the men of judah: but he tarried longer
than the set time which he had appointed him.

20:6 and david said to abishai, now shall sheba the son of bichri do
us more harm than did absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and
pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

20:7 and there went out after him joab's men, and the cherethites, and
the pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of
jerusalem, to pursue after sheba the son of bichri.

20:8 when they were at the great stone which is in gibeon, amasa went
before them. and joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto
him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in t
 
 ___________________________
 

israel, and found abishag a shunammite, and brought her to the king.

1:4 and the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and
ministered to him: but the king knew her not.

1:5 then adonijah the son of haggith exalted himself, saying, i will
be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him.

1:6 and his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, why
hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother
bare him after absalom.

1:7 and he conferred with joab the son of zeruiah, and with abiathar
the priest: and they following adonijah helped him.

1:8 but zadok the priest, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and nathan
the prophet, and shimei, and rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
david, were not with adonijah.

1:9 and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
zoheleth, which is by enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of judah the king's servants: 1
 
 ___________________________
 
 of israel, unto abner
the son of ner, and unto amasa the son of jether, whom he slew, and
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his
feet.

2:6 do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

2:7 but shew kindness unto the sons of barzillai the gileadite, and
let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me
when i fled because of absalom thy brother.

2:8 and, behold, thou hast with thee shimei the son of gera, a
benjamite of bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day
when i went to mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at jordan, and i
sware to him by the lord, saying, i will not put thee to death with
the sword.

2:9 now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 so david s
 
 ___________________________
 
lds; for thou art worthy of death: but i will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the lord
god before david my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 so solomon thrust out abiathar from being priest unto the lord;
that he might fulfil the word of the lord, which he spake concerning
the house of eli in shiloh.

2:28 then tidings came to joab: for joab had turned after adonijah,
though he turned not after absalom. and joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 and it was told king solomon that joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. then solomon
sent benaiah the son of jehoiada, saying, go, fall upon him.

2:30 and benaiah came to the tabernacle of the lord, and said unto
him, thus saith the king, come forth. and he said, nay; but i will die
here. and benaiah brought the king word again, saying, thus said j
 
 ___________________________
 
f salma; bethlehem, and the
netophathites, ataroth, the house of joab, and half of the
manahethites, the zorites.

2:55 and the families of the scribes which dwelt at jabez; the
tirathites, the shimeathites, and suchathites. these are the kenites
that came of hemath, the father of the house of rechab.

3:1 now these were the sons of david, which were born unto him in
hebron; the firstborn amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; the second
daniel, of abigail the carmelitess: 3:2 the third, absalom the son of
maachah the daughter of talmai king of geshur: the fourth, adonijah
the son of haggith: 3:3 the fifth, shephatiah of abital: the sixth,
ithream by eglah his wife.

3:4 these six were born unto him in hebron; and there he reigned seven
years and six months: and in jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
years.

3:5 and these were born unto him in jerusalem; shimea, and shobab, and
nathan, and solomon, four, of bathshua the daughter of ammiel: 3:6
ibhar also, and elishama, and
 
 ___________________________
 
o jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the lord god of their fathers.

11:17 so they strengthened the kingdom of judah, and made rehoboam the
son of solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of david and solomon.

11:18 and rehoboam took him mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son
of david to wife, and abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse;
11:19 which bare him children; jeush, and shamariah, and zaham.

11:20 and after her he took maachah the daughter of absalom; which
bare him abijah, and attai, and ziza, and shelomith.

11:21 and rehoboam loved maachah the daughter of absalom above all his
wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore
daughters.)  11:22 and rehoboam made abijah the son of maachah the
chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him
king.

11:23 and he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children
throughout all the countr