nce thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but i
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 and the lord said unto him, who hath made man's mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not i the
lord?  4:12 now therefore go, and i will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 and he said, o my lord, send, i pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4:14 and the anger of the lord was kindled against moses, and he said,
is not aaron the levite thy brother? i know that he can speak well.
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and i
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of god.

4:17 and thou shalt t
 
 ___________________________
 
my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, i will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 and it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 so he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 and the lord said to aaron, go into the wilderness to meet moses.
and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kissed him.

4:28 and moses told aaron all the words of the lord who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the words which the
lord had spoken unto moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 and the people believed: and when they heard that 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord had
visited the children of israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 and afterward moses and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus
saith the lord god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to
let israel go? i know not the lord, neither will i let israel go.

5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.
 
 ___________________________
 


5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and
aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 and pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; ye shall no
 
 ___________________________
 
, behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 but he said, ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, let us
go and do sacrifice to the lord.

5:18 go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 and the officers of the children of israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it was said, ye shall not minish ought from your
bricks of your daily task.

5:20 and they met moses and aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from pharaoh: 5:21 and they said unto them, the lord look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the
eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this pe
 
 ___________________________
 
:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcised lips?  6:13 and the lord spake unto moses and unto
aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of israel, and unto
pharaoh king of egypt, to bring the children of israel out of the land
of egypt.

6:14 these be the heads of their fathers' houses: the sons of reuben
the firstborn of israel; hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and carmi: these
be the families of reuben.

6:15 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman: these are the
families of simeon.

6:16 and these are 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the years of the
life of levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 the sons of gershon; libni, and shimi, according to their
families.

6:18 and the sons of kohath; amram, and izhar, and hebron, and uzziel:
and the years of the life of kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.

6:19 and the sons of merari; mahali and mushi: these are the families
of levi according to their generations.

6:20 and amram took him jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
bare him aaron and moses: and the years of the life of amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 and the sons of izhar; korah, and nepheg, and zichri.

6:22 and the sons of uzziel; mishael, and elzaphan, and zithri.

6:23 and aaron took him elisheba, daughter of amminadab, sister of
naashon, to wife; and she bare him nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and
ithamar.

6:24 and the sons of korah; assir, and elkanah, and abiasaph: these
are the families of the korhites.

6:25 and eleazar aaron'
 
 ___________________________
 
s son took him one of the daughters of putiel
to wife; and she bare him phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers
of the levites according to their families.

6:26 these are that aaron and moses, to whom the lord said, bring out
the children of israel from the land of egypt according to their
armies.

6:27 these are they which spake to pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out
the children of israel from egypt: these are that moses and aaron.

6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto moses in
the land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, i am
the lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that i say unto
thee.

6:30 and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 and the lord said
unto moses, see, i have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 thou shalt speak all that i command
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee: and aaron thy brother
shall speak unto pharaoh, that he send the children of israel out of
his land.

7:3 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of egypt.

7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that i may lay my hand
upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
israel, out of the land of egypt by great judgments.

7:5 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i stretch
forth mine hand upon egypt, and brin
 
 ___________________________
 
g out the children of israel from
among them.

7:6 and moses and aaron did as the lord commanded them, so did they.

7:7 and moses was fourscore years old, and aaron fourscore and three
years old, when they spake unto pharaoh.

7:8 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 7:9 when
pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, shew a miracle for you: then
thou shalt say unto aaron, take thy rod, and cast it before pharaoh,
and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 and moses and aaron went in unto pharaoh, and they did so as the
lord had commanded: and aaron cast down his rod before pharaoh, and
before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 then pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magicians of egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 for they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
but aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 and he hardened pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;

 
 ___________________________
 
eople go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 thus saith the lord, in this thou shalt know that i am the lord:
behold, i will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, take thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the waters of egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
vessels of stone.

7:20 and moses and aaron did so, as the lord commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight
of pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants;
 
 ___________________________
 
 serve me.

8:2 and if thou refuse to let them go, behold, i will smite all thy
borders with frogs: 8:3 and the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
8:4 and the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and
upon all thy servants.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of egypt.

8:6 and aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of egypt; and the
frogs came up, and covered the land of egypt.

8:7 and the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of egypt.

8:8 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron, and said, intreat the
lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from m
 
 ___________________________
 
araoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 and he said, to morrow. and he said, be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the lord
our god.

8:11 and the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 and moses and aaron went out from pharaoh: and moses cried unto
the lord because of the frogs which he had brought against pharaoh.

8:13 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 and they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 but when pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said.

8:16 and the lord said unto moses, say unto
 
 ___________________________
 
 aaron, stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of egypt.

8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
egypt.

8:18 and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 then the magicians said unto pharaoh, this is the finger of god:
and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the lord had said.

8:20
 
 ___________________________
 
ich my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that i am the lord in the midst of the earth.

8:23 and i will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 and pharaoh called for moses and for aaron, and said, go ye,
sacrifice to your god in the land.

8:26 and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 we will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command us.

8:28 and pharaoh said, i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
lord your god in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 all that is the
children's of israel.

9:5 and the lord appointed a set time, saying, to morrow the lord
shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 and the lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of israel died not one.

9:7 and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of
the israelites dead. and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, and he did
not let the people go.

9:8 and the lord said unto moses and unto aaron, take to you handfuls
of ashes of the furnace, and let moses sprinkle it toward the heaven
in the sight of pharaoh.

9:9 and it shall become small dust in all the land of egypt, and shall
be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of egypt.

9:10 and they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before pharaoh; and
moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 and the magic
 
 ___________________________
 
d of egypt.

9:24 so there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of egypt since it
became a nation.

9:25 and the hail smote throughout all the land of egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 only in the land of goshen, where the children of israel were,
was there no hail.

9:27 and pharaoh sent, and called for moses and aaron, and said unto
them, i have sinned this time: the lord is righteous, and i and my
people are wicked.

9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and i will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 and moses said unto him, as soon as i am gone out of the city, i
will spread abroad my hands unto the lord; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the lord's.

9:
 
 ___________________________
 
rt of pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
children of israel go; as the lord had spoken by moses.

10:1 and the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh: for i have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that i might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things i have wrought in egypt,
and my signs which i have done among them; that ye may know how that i
am the lord.

10:3 and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
i bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat ever
 
 ___________________________
 
0:6 and they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned himself, and went out
from pharaoh.

10:7 and pharaoh's servants said unto him, how long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the lord their
god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?  10:8 and moses and
aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go,
serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 and
moses said, we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the lord.

10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as i will
let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 not so: go now ye that are men, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 for they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of egypt.

10:16 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i
have sinned against the lord your god, and against you.

10:17 now therefore forgive, i pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

10:19 and the lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of egypt.

10:20 but the lord hardene
 
 ___________________________
 
against man or beast: that ye may know how that the lord
doth put a difference between the egyptians and israel.

11:8 and all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselves unto me, saying, get thee out, and all the people that
follow thee: and after that i will go out. and he went out from
pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of egypt.

11:10 and moses and aaron did all these wonders before pharaoh: and
the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of israel go out of his land.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in the land of egypt
saying, 12:2 this month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it
shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 speak ye unto all the congregation of israel, saying, in the
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb,
according to the house of the
 
 ___________________________
 
according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
this service.

12:26 and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, what mean ye by this service?  12:27 that ye shall say, it is the
sacrifice of the lord's passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of israel in egypt, when he smote the egyptians, and
delivered our houses. and the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 and the children of israel went away, and did as the lord had
commanded moses and aaron, so did they.

12:29 and it came to pass, that at midnight the lord smote all the
firstborn in the land of egypt, from the firstborn of pharaoh that sat
on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 and pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the egyptians; and there was a great cry in egypt; for there was
not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 and he called for moses and aaron by nig
 
 ___________________________
 
dren of israel, who dwelt in
egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 and it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of
the lord went out from the land of egypt.

12:42 it is a night to be much observed unto the lord for bringing
them out from the land of egypt: this is that night of the lord to be
observed of all the children of israel in their generations.

12:43 and the lord said unto moses and aaron, this is the ordinance of
the passover: there shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 but every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 a foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 in one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 all the congregation of israel shall keep it.

12:48 and when a stranger sh
 
 ___________________________
 
all sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 one law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 thus did all the children of israel; as the lord commanded moses
and aaron, so did they.

12:51 and it came to pass the selfsame day, that the lord did bring
the children of israel out of the land of egypt by their armies.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 and moses said unto the people, remember this day, in which ye
came out from egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of
hand the lord brough
 
 ___________________________
 
t them in the mountain of
thine inheritance, in the place, o lord, which thou hast made for thee
to dwell in, in the sanctuary, o lord, which thy hands have
established.

15:18 the lord shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19 for the horse of pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his
horsemen into the sea, and the lord brought again the waters of the
sea upon them; but the children of israel went on dry land in the
midst of the sea.

15:20 and miriam the prophetess, the sister of aaron, took a timbrel
in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and
with dances.

15:21 and miriam answered them, sing ye to the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:22 so moses brought israel from the red sea, and they went out into
the wilderness of shur; and they went three days in the wilderness,
and found no water.

15:23 and when they came to marah, they could not drink of the waters
of marah, for the
 
 ___________________________
 
healeth thee.

15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation
of the children of israel came unto the wilderness of sin, which is
between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their departing out of the land of egypt.

16:2 and the whole congregation of the children of israel murmured
against moses and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of
israel said unto them, would to god we had died by the hand of the
lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, i will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that i may prove them, whether they will w
 
 ___________________________
 
alk in my law, or
no.

16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as
they gather daily.

16:6 and moses and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at
even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the
land of egypt: 16:7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of
the lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord: and
what are we, that ye murmur against us?  16:8 and moses said, this
shall be, when the lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your
murmurings which ye murmur against him:
 
 ___________________________
 
 and what are we? your
murmurings are not against us, but against the lord.

16:9 and moses spake unto aaron, say unto all the congregation of the
children of israel, come near before the lord: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of israel, that they looked toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glory of the lord appeared in the cloud.

16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 i have heard the
murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread;
and ye shall know that i am the lord your god.

16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and
covered 
 
 ___________________________
 
the seventh day.

16:30 so the people rested on the seventh day.

16:31 and the house of israel called the name thereof manna: and it
was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers
made with honey.

16:32 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commandeth,
fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see
the bread wherewith i have fed you in the wilderness, when i brought
you forth from the land of egypt.

16:33 and moses said unto aaron, take a pot, and put an omer full of
manna therein, and lay it up before the lord, to be kept for your
generations.

16:34 as the lord commanded moses, so aaron laid it up before the
testimony, to be kept.

16:35 and the children of israel did eat manna forty years, until they
came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
borders of the land of canaan.

16:36 now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 and all the congregation of the children of israel
 
 ___________________________
 
7:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the
lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the ed
 
 ___________________________
 
ad done
to israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the egyptians.

18:10 and jethro said, blessed be the lord, who hath delivered you out
of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath
delivered the people from under the hand of the egyptians.

18:11 now i know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 and jethro, moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for god: and aaron came, and all the elders of israel, to
eat bread with moses' father in law before god.

18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses sat to judge the
people: and the people stood by moses from the morning unto the
evening.

18:14 and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
he said, what is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?  18:15 and moses said unto his father i
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord said unto moses, go down, charge the people, lest
they break through unto the lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

19:22 and let the priests also, which come near to the lord, sanctify
themselves, lest the lord break forth upon them.

19:23 and moses said unto the lord, the people cannot come up to mount
sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and
sanctify it.

19:24 and the lord said unto him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt
come up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 so moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 i am the lord thy
god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

20:3 thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven a
 
 ___________________________
 
ll set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea of
the philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for i will
deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
drive them out before thee.

23:32 thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron,
nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 and moses alone shall come near the lord: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 and moses came and told the people all the words of the lord, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and
said, all the words which the lord hath said will we do.

24:4 and moses wrote all the words of the lord, and rose up early in
the morning, and buil
 
 ___________________________
 
oxen unto the lord.

24:6 and moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half
of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of
the people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and
be obedient.

24:8 and moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of
the elders of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and moses rose up, and his minister joshua: and moses went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of israel.

24:18 and moses went into the midst 
 
 ___________________________
 
readth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined
linen, and their sockets of brass.

27:19 all the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof,
and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of
brass.

27:20 and thou shalt command the children of israel, that they bring
thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn
always.

27:21 in the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is
before the testimony, aaron and his sons shall order it from evening
to morning before the lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their
generations on the behalf of the children of israel.

28:1 and take thou unto thee aaron thy brother, and his sons with him,
from among the children of israel, that he may minister unto me in the
priest's office, even aaron, nadab and abihu, eleazar and ithamar,
aaron's sons.

28:2 and thou shalt make holy garments for aaron thy brother for glory
and for beauty.

28:3 and t
 
 ___________________________
 
hou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom i have
filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make aaron's garments
to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's
office.

28:4 and these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate,
and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle:
and they shall make holy garments for aaron thy brother, and his sons,
that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:5 and they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen.

28:6 and they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.

28:7 it shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two
edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.

28:8 and the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be
of the sam
 
 ___________________________
 
e names
of the children of israel: 28:10 six of their names on one stone, and
the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their
birth.

28:11 with the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a
signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the
children of israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.

28:12 and thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of israel: and aaron
shall bear their names before the lord upon his two shoulders for a
memorial.

28:13 and thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 and two chains of pure
gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten
the wreathen chains to the ouches.

28:15 and thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning
work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt
thou make it.

28:16 foursquar
 
 ___________________________
 
in the side of the ephod inward.

28:27 and two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them
on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of
the ephod.

28:28 and they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto
the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the
curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed
from the ephod.

28:29 and aaron shall bear the names of the children of israel in the
breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
place, for a memorial before the lord continually.

28:30 and thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the urim and
the thummim; and they shall be upon aaron's heart, when he goeth in
before the lord: and aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of
israel upon his heart before the lord continually.

28:31 and thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of
 
 ___________________________
 
an hole in the top of it, in the midst
thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of
it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

28:33 and beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and
bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 a golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe
round about.

28:35 and it shall be upon aaron to minister: and his sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the lord, and when
he cometh out, that he die not.

28:36 and thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
like the engravings of a signet, holiness to the lord.

28:37 and thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.

28:38 and it shall be upon aaron's forehead, that aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things, which th
 
 ___________________________
 
e children of israel shall hallow
in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead,
that they may be accepted before the lord.

28:39 and thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt
make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of
needlework.

28:40 and for aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make
for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and
for beauty.

28:41 and thou shalt put them upon aaron thy brother, and his sons
with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify
them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:42 and thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their
nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43
and they shall be upon aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto
the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity
 
 ___________________________
 
atute for ever unto him and his seed after
him.

29:1 and this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: take one young
bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 and unleavened bread, and
cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed
with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

29:3 and thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

29:4 and aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

29:5 and thou shalt take the garments, and put upon aaron the coat,
and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and
gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 and thou shalt put
the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

29:7 then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his
head, and anoint him.

29:8 and tho
 
 ___________________________
 
u shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.

29:9 and thou shalt gird them with girdles, aaron and his sons, and
put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a
perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate aaron and his sons.

29:10 and thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the
tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron and his sons shall put their
hands upon the head of the bullock.

29:11 and thou shalt kill the bullock before the lord, by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

29:12 and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon
the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside
the bottom of the altar.

29:13 and thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and
the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n them, and burn them upon the altar.

29:14 but the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt
thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

29:15 thou shalt also take one ram; and aaron and his sons shall put
their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:16 and thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and
sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

29:17 and thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of
him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.

29:18 and thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt
offering unto the lord: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire
unto the lord.

29:19 and thou shal
 
 ___________________________
 
t take the other ram; and aaron and his sons shall
put their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:20 then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it
upon the tip of the right ear of aaron, and upon the tip of the right
ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the
great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar
round about.

29:21 and thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of
the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he
shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

29:22 als
 
 ___________________________
 
o thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the
two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder;
for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 and one loaf of bread, and one
cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened
bread that is before the lord: 29:24 and thou shalt put all in the
hands of aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for
a wave offering before the lord.

29:25 and thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon
the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the lord: it
is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

29:26 and thou shalt take the breast of the ram of aaron's
consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the lord: and it
shall be thy part.

29:27 and thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved
up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for aaron,
and of that which is for his sons: 29:28 and it shall be aaron's and
his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of israel: for it is
an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children
of israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave
offering unto the lord.

29:29 and the holy garments of aaron shall be his sons' after him, to
be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.

29:30 and that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven
days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to
minister in the holy place.

29:31 and thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his
flesh in the holy place.

29:32 and aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the
bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the
congreg
 
 ___________________________
 
ation.

29:33 and they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was
made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat
thereof, because they are holy.

29:34 and if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread,
remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire:
it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

29:35 and thus shalt thou do unto aaron, and to his sons, according to
all things which i have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou
consecrate them.

29:36 and thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for
atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an
atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.

29:37 seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and
sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth
the altar shall be holy.

29:38 now this is
 
 ___________________________
 
rink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by
fire unto the lord.

29:42 this shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the lord: where i will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 and there i will meet with the children of israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44 and i will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
altar: i will sanctify also both aaron and his sons, to minister to me
in the priest's office.

29:45 and i will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their
god.

29:46 and they shall know that i am the lord their god, that brought
them forth out of the land of egypt, that i may dwell among them: i am
the lord their god.

30:1 and thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim
wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 a cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof; foursquare shall it be
 
 ___________________________
 
crown of gold round about.

30:4 and two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it,
by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make
it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.

30:5 and thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

30:6 and thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the
testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where i
will meet with thee.

30:7 and aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he
dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.

30:8 and when aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense
upon it, a perpetual incense before the lord throughout your
generations.

30:9 ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice,
nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

30:10 and aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
year with the blood of the si
 
 ___________________________
 
he atonement money of the children of
israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of israel
before the lord, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:18 thou shalt also
make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and
thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 for aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat: 30:20 when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near
to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the lord:
30:21 so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die
not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to
his seed throughout their generations.

30:22 moreover the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:23
 
 ___________________________
 
rt of the apothecary: it shall be an holy
anointing oil.

30:26 and thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation
therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 and the table and all
his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of
incense, 30:28 and the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels,
and the laver and his foot.

30:29 and thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy:
whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.

30:30 and thou shalt anoint aaron and his sons, and consecrate them,
that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

30:31 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, this
shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make
any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it
shall be holy unto you.

30:33 whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of
it upon a stranger, shall eve
 
 ___________________________
 
se
hearted i have put wisdom, that they may make all that i have
commanded thee; 31:7 the tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark
of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the
furniture of the tabernacle, 31:8 and the table and his furniture, and
the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
31:9 and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the
laver and his foot, 31:10 and the cloths of service, and the holy
garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office, 31:11 and the anointing oil, and
sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that i have
commanded thee shall they do.

31:12 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:13 speak thou also
unto the children of israel, saying, verily my sabbaths ye shall keep:
for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that
ye may know that i am the lord that doth sanctify you.

31:14 ye shall keep 
 
 ___________________________
 
or a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for
in six days the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of god.

32:1 and when the people saw that moses delayed to come down out of
the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto aaron, and
said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for
this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we
wot not what is become of him.

32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, which
are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.

32:3 and all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in
their ears, and brought them unto aaron.

32:4 and he received them at their hand, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and fashioned it with a
graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these
be thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and aaron
made proclamation, and said, to morrow is a feast to the lord.

32:6 and they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt
offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrupted
themselves: 32:8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which i
commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, an
 
 ___________________________
 
them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do i hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' anger waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made
the children of israel drink of it.

32:21 and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 and aaron said, let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are set on mischief.

32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us:
for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 and i said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off. so they gave it me: then i cast i
 
 ___________________________
 
t into the fire, and there came
out this calf.

32:25 and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then
moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord's
side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of levi gathered
themselves together unto him.

32:27 and he said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 an
 
 ___________________________
 
 if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me,
i pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoever hath sinned against me,
him will i blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee;
 
 ___________________________
 
 words i have made a covenant with thee and with
israel.

34:28 and he was there with the lord forty days and forty nights; he
did neither eat bread, nor drink water. and he wrote upon the tables
the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 and it came to pass, when moses came down from mount sinai with
the two tables of testimony in moses' hand, when he came down from the
mount, that moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he
talked with him.

34:30 and when aaron and all the children of israel saw moses, behold,
the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 and moses called unto them; and aaron and all the rulers of the
congregation returned unto him: and moses talked with them.

34:32 and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave
them in commandment all that the lord had spoken with him in mount
sinai.

34:33 and till moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
face.

34:34 but when
 
 ___________________________
 
he anointing oil,
and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in
of the tabernacle, 35:16 the altar of burnt offering, with his brasen
grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17
the hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the
hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 the pins of the tabernacle,
and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 the cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for aaron
the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
office.

35:20 and all the congregation of the children of israel departed from
the presence of moses.

35:21 and they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every
one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the lord's offering
to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his
service, and for the holy garments.

35:22 and they came, both men and women, as many as were willing
hea
 
 ___________________________
 

answerable to the hangings of the court.

38:19 and their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four;
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their
fillets of silver.

38:20 and all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round
about, were of brass.

38:21 this is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of
testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of moses,
for the service of the levites, by the hand of ithamar, son to aaron
the priest.

38:22 and bezaleel the son uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah,
made all that the lord commanded moses.

38:23 and with him was aholiab, son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan,
an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in
purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 all the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of
the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine
talents, and seven hundred and thirty sheke
 
 ___________________________
 
 shekels.

38:30 and therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for
it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 and the sockets of the
court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins
of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

39:1 and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments
for aaron; as the lord commanded moses.

39:2 and he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen.

39:3 and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cunning work.

39:4 they made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the
two edges was it coupled together.

39:5 and the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the
same, acco
 
 ___________________________
 
he hole, that it should not
rend.

39:24 and they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

39:25 and they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the
pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
pomegranates; 39:26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the
lord commanded moses.

39:27 and they made coats of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and
for his sons, 39:28 and a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of
fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 and a
girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of
needlework; as the lord commanded moses.

39:30 and they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and
wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, holiness
to the lord.

39:31 and they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon
the mitre; as the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the anointing oil, and the sweet
incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door, 39:39 the brasen
altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the
laver and his foot, 39:40 the hangings of the court, his pillars, and
his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his
pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the
tent of the congregation, 39:41 the cloths of service to do service in
the holy place, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

39:42 according to all that the lord commanded moses, so the children
of israel made all the work.

39:43 and moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done
it as the lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and moses
blessed them.

40:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 40:2 on the first day of
the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

40:3 and
 
 ___________________________
 
alt set up the court round about, and hang up the
hanging at the court gate.

40:9 and thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle,
and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels
thereof: and it shall be holy.

40:10 and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all
his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most
holy.

40:11 and thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.

40:12 and thou shalt bring aaron and his sons unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 and thou shalt put upon aaron the holy garments, and anoint him,
and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

40:14 and thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15
and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing
shall surely be an everlasting priesthood thr
 
 ___________________________
 
fore the vail: 40:27 and he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:28 and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 and he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the
burnt offering and the meat offering; as the lord commanded moses.

40:30 and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 and moses and aaron and his sons washed their hands and their
feet thereat: 40:32 when they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:33 and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. so moses finished the
work.

40:34 then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory
of the lord filled the tabernacle.

40:35 and moses was not able to enter i
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the
herd, and of the flock.

1:3 if his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord.

1:4 and he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and
it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.

1:5 and he shall kill the bullock before the lord: and the priests,
aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round
about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

1:6 and he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.

1:7 and the sons of aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,
and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 1:8 and the priests, aaron's
sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the
wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:9 but his inwards
a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on
the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:10 and if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of
the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without
blemish.

1:11 and he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before
the lord: and the priests, aaron's sons, shall sprinkle his blood
round about upon the altar.

1:12 and he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat:
and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire
which is upon the altar: 1:13 but he shall wash the inwards and the
legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon
the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:14 and if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to th
 
 ___________________________
 
he altar on the east part, by
the place of the ashes: 1:17 and he shall cleave it with the wings
thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it
upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt
sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:1 and when any will offer a meat offering unto the lord, his
offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and
put frankincense thereon: 2:2 and he shall bring it to aaron's sons
the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof;
and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: 2:3 and the
remnant of the meat offering shall be aaron's and his sons': it is a
thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made by fire.

2:4 and if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the
oven, it shall be
 
 ___________________________
 
oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it
shall be made of fine flour with oil.

2:8 and thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these
things unto the lord: and when it is presented unto the priest, he
shall bring it unto the altar.

2:9 and the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial
thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:10 and that which is left of the meat offering shall be aaron's and
his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made
by fire.

2:11 no meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the lord, shall be
made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any
offering of the lord made by fire.

2:12 as for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto
the lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

2:13 and every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with
salt; neither shalt
 
 ___________________________
 
16 and the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten
corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense
thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

3:1 and if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer
it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it
without blemish before the lord.

3:2 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron's sons
the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

3:3 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:4 and the two
kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the
caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:5 and aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt
sacrifice, which is upon
 
 ___________________________
 
 the wood that is on the fire: it is an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

3:6 and if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the
lord be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without
blemish.

3:7 if he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before
the lord.

3:8 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron's sons shall
sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:9 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat thereof, and the whole
rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that
covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:10
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
take away.

3:1
 
 ___________________________
 
1 and the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire unto the lord.

3:12 and if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the
lord.

3:13 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before
the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of aaron shall
sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.

3:14 and he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by
fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat
that is upon the inwards, 3:15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver,
with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:16 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire for a swee
 
 ___________________________
 
e fifth part
more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day
of his trespass offering.

6:6 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord, a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: 6:7 and the priest shall make an atonement
for him before the lord: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of
all that he hath done in trespassing therein.

6:8 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:9 command aaron and his
sons, saying, this is the law of the burnt offering: it is the burnt
offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.

6:10 and the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen
breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the
fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall
put them beside the altar.

6:11 and he shall put off his garments, and put on 
 
 ___________________________
 
other garments, and
carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.

6:12 and the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not
be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and
lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the
fat of the peace offerings.

6:13 the fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go
out.

6:14 and this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of aaron shall
offer it before the lord, before the altar.

6:15 and he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat
offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is
upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet
savour, even the memorial of it, unto the lord.

6:16 and the remainder thereof shall aaron and his sons eat: with
unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of
the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat
 
 ___________________________
 
 it.

6:17 it shall not be baken with leaven. i have given it unto them for
their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

6:18 all the males among the children of aaron shall eat of it. it
shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the
offerings of the lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall
be holy.

6:19 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:20 this is the offering
of aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the lord in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for
a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof
at night.

6:21 in a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou
shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt
thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord.

6:22 and the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall
offer it: it is a statute f
 
 ___________________________
 
or ever unto the lord; it shall be wholly
burnt.

6:23 for every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it
shall not be eaten.

6:24 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:25 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, saying, this is the law of the sin offering: in the place
where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed
before the lord: it is most holy.

6:26 the priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy
place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

6:27 whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt
wash that whereon it was s
 
 ___________________________
 
ass offering: there is one
law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have
it.

7:8 and the priest that offereth any man's burnt offering, even the
priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he
hath offered.

7:9 and all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that
is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's
that offereth it.

7:10 and every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the
sons of aaron have, one as much as another.

7:11 and this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
shall offer unto the lord.

7:12 if he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the
sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and
unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of
fine flour, fried.

7:13 besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread
with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.

7:1
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:29 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, he that offereth the sacrifice of his
peace offerings unto the lord shall bring his oblation unto the lord
of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.

7:30 his own hands shall bring the offerings of the lord made by fire,
the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
waved for a wave offering before the lord.

7:31 and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
shall be aaron's and his sons'.

7:32 and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave
offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.

7:33 he among the sons of aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace
offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.

7:34 for the wave breast and the heave shoulder have i taken of the
children of israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings,
and have given them unto aaron the priest and unto his sons by a
statu
 
 ___________________________
 
te for ever from among the children of israel.

7:35 this is the portion of the anointing of aaron, and of the
anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the lord made by fire,
in the day when he presented them to minister unto the lord in the
priest's office; 7:36 which the lord commanded to be given them of the
children of israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for
ever throughout their generations.

7:37 this is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and
of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
consecrations, and of the sacri
 
 ___________________________
 
fice of the peace offerings; 7:38 which
the lord commanded moses in mount sinai, in the day that he commanded
the children of israel to offer their oblations unto the lord, in the
wilderness of sinai.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 take aaron and his sons
with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for
the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 8:3
and gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

8:4 and moses did as the lord commanded him; and the assembly was
gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

8:5 and moses said unto the congregation, this is the thing which the
lord commanded to be done.

 
 ___________________________
 

8:6 and moses brought aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.

8:7 and he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and
clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith.

8:8 and he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the
breastplate the urim and the thummim.

8:9 and he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon
his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; 
 
 ___________________________
 
as the
lord commanded moses.

8:10 and moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and
all that was therein, and sanctified them.

8:11 and he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to
sanctify them.

8:12 and he poured of the anointing oil upon aaron's head, and
anointed him, to sanctify him.

8:13 and moses brought aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and
girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:14 and he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin
offering.

8:15 and he slew it; and moses took the blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the
altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified
it, to make reconci
 
 ___________________________
 
liation upon it.

8:16 and he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul
above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and moses burned
it upon the altar.

8:17 but the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt
with fire without the camp; as the lord commanded moses.

8:18 and he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and aaron and his
sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:19 and he killed it; and moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar
round about.

8:20 and he cut the ram into pieces; and moses burnt the head, and the
pieces, and the fat.

8:21 and he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and moses burnt
the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet
savour, and an offering made by fire unto the lord; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:22 and he brought the other ram,
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ram of consecration: and aaron
and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:23 and he slew it; and moses took of the blood of it, and put it
upon the tip of aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

8:24 and he brought aaron's sons, and moses put of the blood upon the
tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and
upon the great toes of their right feet: and moses sprinkled the blood
upon the altar round about.

8:25 and he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon
the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and
their fat, and the right shoulder: 8:26 and out of the basket of
unleavened bread, that was before the lord, he took one unleavened
cake, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the
fat, and upon the right shoulder: 8:27 and he put all upon aaron's
hands, and upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave offering
before the lord.

8:28 and moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet
savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

8:29 and moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering
before the lord: for of the ram of consecration it was moses' part; as
the lord commanded moses.

8:30 and moses took of the anointing oil, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the blood which was
upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and
sanctified aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

8:31 and moses said unto aaron and to his sons, boil the flesh at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the
bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as i commanded, saying,
aaron and his sons shall eat it.

8:32 and that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye
burn with fire.

8:33 and ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at
an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

8:34 as he hath done this day, so the lord hath commanded to do, to
make an atonement for you.

8:35 therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and nig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht seven days, and keep the charge of the
lord, that ye die not: for so i am commanded.

8:36 so aaron and his sons did all things which the lord commanded by
the hand of moses.

9:1 and it came to pass on the eighth day, that moses called aaron and
his sons, and the elders of israel; 9:2 and he said unto aaron, take
thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
without blemish, and offer them before the lord.

9:3 and unto the children of israel thou shalt speak, saying, take ye
a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of
the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 9:4 also a
bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the lord;
and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the lord will appear
unto you.

9:5 an
 
 ___________________________
 
d they brought that which moses commanded before the tabernacle
of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood
before the lord.

9:6 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commanded that ye
should do: and the glory of the lord shall appear unto you.

9:7 and moses said unto aaron, go unto the altar, and offer thy sin
offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself,
and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an
atonement for them; as the lord commanded.

9:8 aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself.

9:9 and the sons of aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped
his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and
poured out the blood at the
 
 ___________________________
 
 bottom of the altar: 9:10 but the fat, and
the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he
burnt upon the altar; as the lord commanded moses.

9:11 and the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

9:12 and he slew the burnt offering; and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.

9:13 and they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces
thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

9:14 and he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the
burnt offering on the altar.

9:15 and he brought the people's offering, and took the goat, which
was the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for
sin, as the first.

9:16 and he brou
 
 ___________________________
 
ght the burnt offering, and offered it according to
the manner.

9:17 and he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof,
and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the
morning.

9:18 he slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, which was for the people: and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 9:19 and
the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
9:20 and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon
the altar: 9:21 and the breasts and the right shoulder aaron waved for
a wave offering before the lord; as moses commanded.

9:22 and aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them,
 
 ___________________________
 

and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt
offering, and peace offerings.

9:23 and moses and aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the people.

9:24 and there came a fire out from before the lord, and consumed upon
the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people
saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

10:1 and nadab and abihu, the sons of aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered
strange fire before the lord, which he commanded them not.

10:2 and there went out fire from the lord, and devoured them, and
they died before the lord.

10:3 then moses said unto aaron, this is it that the lord spake,
saying, i will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people i will be glorified. and aaron held his peace.

10:4 and moses called mishael and elzaphan, th
 
 ___________________________
 
e sons of uzziel the
uncle of aaron, and said unto them, come near, carry your brethren
from before the sanctuary out of the camp.

10:5 so they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the
camp; as moses had said.

10:6 and moses said unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar, his
sons, uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
whole house of israel, bewail the burning which the lord hath kindled.

10:7 and ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the lord is upon
you. and they did according to the word of moses.

10:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, saying, 10:9 do 
 
 ___________________________
 
not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for
ever throughout your generations: 10:10 and that ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 10:11 and that
ye may teach the children of israel all the statutes which the lord
hath spoken unto them by the hand of moses.

10:12 and moses spake unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar,
his sons that were left, take the meat offering that remaineth of the
offerings of the lord made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside
the altar: for it is most holy: 10:13 and ye shall eat it in the holy
place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of
the lord made by fire: for so i am commanded.

10:14 and the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for 
 
 ___________________________
 
due, which are given out of the sacrifices of
peace offerings of the children of israel.

10:15 the heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
before the lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
statute for ever; as the lord hath commanded.

10:16 and moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with eleazar and ithamar, the
sons of aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy,
and god hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the lord?  10:18 behold, the blood of
it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy place, as i commanded.

10:19 and aaron said unto moses, behold, this day have they offered
their sin offering and their burnt offering be
 
 ___________________________
 
fore the lord; and such
things have befallen me: and if i had eaten the sin offering to day,
should it have been accepted in the sight of the lord?  10:20 and when
moses heard that, he was content.

11:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying unto them,
11:2 speak unto the children of israel, saying, these are the beasts
which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.

11:3 whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

11:4 nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:5 and the coney, because
 
 ___________________________
 
ation, unto the priest:
12:7 who shall offer it before the lord, and make an atonement for
her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. this is
the law for her that hath born a male or a female.

12:8 and if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
her, and she shall be clean.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, saying, 13:2 when a man
shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he
shall be brought unto aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the
priests: 13:3 and the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of
the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the
plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pr
 
 ___________________________
 
14:30 and he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 even such as he is able to get, the
one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is
to be cleansed before the lord.

14:32 this is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.

14:33 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:34 when
ye be come into the land of canaan, which i give to you for a
possession, and i put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
your possession; 14:35 and he that owneth the house shall come and
tell the priest, saying, it seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 then the priest shall command that they empty the
house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest s
 
 ___________________________
 
e hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 but he shall let go the living bird out of the
city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it
shall be clean.

14:54 this is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 and for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 and for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 to teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying, 15:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when any man hath a
running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.

15:3 and this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh
run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
uncleanness.

15:4 every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

15:5 and whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clo
 
 ___________________________
 
ye separate the children of israel from their
uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
my tabernacle that is among them.

15:32 this is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 15:33 and of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

16:1 and the lord spake unto moses after the death of the two sons of
aaron, when they offered before the lord, and died; 16:2 and the lord
said unto moses, speak unto aaron thy brother, that he come not at all
times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which
is upon the ark; that he die not: for i will appear in the cloud upon
the mercy seat.

16:3 thus shall aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock
for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

16:4 he shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen
bree
 
 ___________________________
 
ches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and
with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments;
therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.

16:5 and he shall take of the congregation of the children of israel
two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt
offering.

16:6 and aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.

16:7 and he shall take the two goats, and present them before the lord
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

16:8 and aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.

16:9 and aaron shall bring the goat upon which the lord's lot fell,
and offer him for a sin offering.

16:10 but the goat, on which
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall
be presented alive before the lord, to make an atonement with him, and
to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.

16:11 and aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his
house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for
himself: 16:12 and he shall take a censer full of burning coals of
fire from off the altar before the lord, and his hands full of sweet
incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail: 16:13 and he shall
put the incense upon the fire before the lord, that the cloud of the
incense may cover the mercy s
 
 ___________________________
 
ore the lord, and
make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock,
and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar
round about.

16:19 and he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven
times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the
children of israel.

16:20 and when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and
the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the
live goat: 16:21 and aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of
the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of
a fit man into the wilderness: 16:22 and the goat shall bear upon him
all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go
the goat in the wilderness.

16:23 and aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
arments: 16:33 and he shall make an atonement for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

16:34 and this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an
atonement for the children of israel for all their sins once a year.
and he did as the lord commanded moses.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto aaron, and
unto his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto them;
this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, saying, 17:3 what man
soever there be of the house of israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb,
or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, 17:4 and
bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to offer an offering unto the lord before the tabernacle of the lord;
blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man
 
 ___________________________
 
or by fowl, or by any manner of living
thing that creepeth on the ground, which i have separated from you as
unclean.

20:26 and ye shall be holy unto me: for i the lord am holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 a man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with
stones: their blood shall be upon them.

21:1 and the lord said unto moses, speak unto the priests the sons of
aaron, and say unto them, there shall none be defiled for the dead
among his people: 21:2 but for his kin, that is near unto him, that
is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his
daughter, and for his brother.

21:3 and for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 but he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his
people, to profane himself.

21:5 they shall not make baldness upon their head, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his god; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his god is upon him: i am the lord.

21:13 and he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to
wife.

21:15 neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for i the
lord do sanctify him.

21:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 21:17 speak unto aaron,
saying, whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his god.

21:18 for whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
thing superfluous, 21:19 or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken; 21:21
no man that hath a bl
 
 ___________________________
 
emish of the seed of aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the lord made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his god.

21:22 he shall eat the bread of his god, both of the most holy, and of
the holy.

21:23 only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries:
for i the lord do sanctify them.

21:24 and moses told it unto aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of israel.

22:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:2 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the
children of israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those
things which they hallow unto me: i am the lord.

22:3 say unto them, whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of
israel hallow unto the lord, having his un
 
 ___________________________
 
cleanness upon him, that
soul shall be cut off from my presence: i am the lord.

22:4 what man soever of the seed of aaron is a leper, or hath a
running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean.
and whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man
whose seed goeth from him; 22:5 or whosoever toucheth any creeping
thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take
uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath; 22:6 the soul which hath
touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the
holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.

22:
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall be no stranger eat
thereof.

22:14 and if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest
with the holy thing.

22:15 and they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
israel, which they offer unto the lord; 22:16 or suffer them to bear
the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for i the
lord do sanctify them.

22:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:18 speak unto aaron,
and to his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto
them, whatsoever he be of the house of israel, or of the strangers in
israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his
freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the lord for a burnt
offering; 22:19 ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20 but whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it
shall not be acceptable f
 
 ___________________________
 
ions may know that
i made the children of israel to dwell in booths, when i brought them
out of the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

23:44 and moses declared unto the children of israel the feasts of the
lord.

24:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:2 command the children
of israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

24:3 without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shall aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
before the lord continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations.

24:4 he shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the
lord continually.

24:5 and thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof:
two tenth deals shall be in one cake.

24:6 and thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
table before the lord.

24:7 and thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may
be o
 
 ___________________________
 
n the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the
lord.

24:8 every sabbath he shall set it in order before the lord
continually, being taken from the children of israel by an everlasting
covenant.

24:9 and it shall be aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in
the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the
lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.

24:10 and the son of an israelitish woman, whose father was an
egyptian, went out among the children of israel: and this son of the
israelitish woman and a man of israel strove together in the camp;
24:11 and the israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the lord,
and cursed. and they brought him unto moses: (and his mother's name
 
 ___________________________
 

1:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of egypt,
saying, 1:2 take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the
number of their names, every male by their polls; 1:3 from twenty
years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in israel:
thou and aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 and with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head
of the house of his fathers.

1:5 and these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of
the tribe of reuben; elizur the son of shedeur.

1:6 of simeon; shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

1:7 of judah; nahshon the son of amminadab.

1:8 of issachar; nethaneel the son of zuar.

1:9 of zebulun; eliab the son of helon.

1:10 of the children of joseph: of ephraim; elish
 
 ___________________________
 
ama the son of
ammihud: of manasseh; gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

1:11 of benjamin; abidan the son of gideoni.

1:12 of dan; ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

1:13 of asher; pagiel the son of ocran.

1:14 of gad; eliasaph the son of deuel.

1:15 of naphtali; ahira the son of enan.

1:16 these were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in israel.

1:17 and moses and aaron took these men which are expressed by their
names: 1:18 and they assembled all the congregation together on the
first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 as the lord commanded moses, so he numbered them in the
wilderness of sinai.

1:20 and the children of reuben, israel's eldest son, by their
generations, after their
 
 ___________________________
 
ed of them, even of the tribe
of asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 of the children of naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
go forth to war; 1:43 those that were numbered of them, even of the
tribe of naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 these are those that were numbered, which moses and aaron
numbered, and the princes of israel, being twelve men: each one was
for the house of his fathers.

1:45 so were all those that were numbered of the children of israel,
by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in israel; 1:46 even all they that
were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty.

1:47 but the levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.

1:48 fo
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren of israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 but the levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of israel: and the levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

1:54 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses, so did they.

2:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 2:2 every
man of the children of israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.

2:3 and on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of judah pitch throughout their armies: and
nahshon the son of amminadab shall be captain of the children of
judah.

2:4 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and fourteen th
 
 ___________________________
 
se that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty.

2:33 but the levites were not numbered among the children of israel;
as the lord commanded moses.

2:34 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers.

3:1 these also are the generations of aaron and moses in the day that
the lord spake with moses in mount sinai.

3:2 and these are the names of the sons of aaron; nadab the firstborn,
and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

3:3 these are the names of the sons of aaron, the priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.

3:4 and nadab and abihu died before the lord, when they offered
strange fire before the lord, in the wilderness of sinai, and they had
no children: and eleazar and ithamar minist
 
 ___________________________
 
ered in the priest's office
in the sight of aaron their father.

3:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:6 bring the tribe of levi
near, and present them before aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him.

3:7 and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:8 and they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:9 and thou shalt give the levites unto aaron and to his sons: they
are wholly given unto him out of the children of is
 
 ___________________________
 
rael.

3:10 and thou shalt appoint aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death.

3:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:12 and i, behold, i have
taken the levites from among the children of israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of israel:
therefore the levites shall be mine; 3:13 because all the firstborn
are mine; for on the day that i smote all the firstborn in the land of
egypt i hallowed unto me al
 
 ___________________________
 
ix hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.

3:29 the families of the sons of kohath shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacle southward.

3:30 and the chief of the house of the father of the families of the
kohathites shall be elizaphan the son of uzziel.

3:31 and their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.

3:32 and eleazar the son of aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
charge of the sanctuary.

3:33 of merari was the family of the mahlites, and the family of the
mushites: these are the families of merari.

3:34 and those that were numbered of them, according to the number of
all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
hundred.

3:35 and the chief of the house of the father of the families of
merari was zuriel the son of a
 
 ___________________________
 
acle northward.

3:36 and under the custody and charge of the sons of merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 and the pillars of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

3:38 but those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be moses,
and aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the
charge of the children of israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.

3:39 all that were numbered of the levites, which moses and aaron
numbered at the commandment of the lord, throughout their families,
all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two
thousand.

3:40 and the lord said unto moses, number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of israel from a month old and upward, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 the levites instead of their cattle; and the levites shall
be mine: i am the lord.

3:46 and for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of israel,
which are more than the levites; 3:47 thou shalt even take five
shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 3:48 and thou shalt
give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto aaron and to his sons.

3:49 and moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the levites: 3:50 of the firstborn of
the children of israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and
threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
and moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto aaron and to
his sons, according to the word of the lord, as the lord commanded
moses.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaro
 
 ___________________________
 
n, saying, 4:2 take the
sum of the sons of kohath from among the sons of levi, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, 4:3 from thirty years old and
upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.

4:4 this shall be the service of the sons of kohath in the tabernacle
of the congregation, about the most holy things: 4:5 and when the camp
setteth forward, aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take
down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it: 4:6
and shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall spread
over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.

4:7 and upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon: 4:8 and
they shall spread upon them 
 
 ___________________________
 
put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and
shall put them on a bar: 4:13 and they shall take away the ashes from
the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon: 4:14 and they shall put
upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it,
even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all
the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of
badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.

4:15 and when aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
forward; after that, the sons of kohath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. these things are
the burden of the sons of kohath in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:16 and to the office of eleazar the son of aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anointin
 
 ___________________________
 
g oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessels thereof.

4:17 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron saying, 4:18 cut ye
not off the tribe of the families of the kohathites from among the
levites: 4:19 but thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holy things: aaron and his sons shall
go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
4:20 but they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
lest they die.

4:21 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:22 take also the sum of
the sons of gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their
families; 4:23 from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old
shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to
do the work in the tabernacle of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the
tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and
the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the
hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, 4:26 and
the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of
the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about,
and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all
that is made for them: so shall they serve.

4:27 at the appointment of aaron and his sons shall be all the service
of the sons of the gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.

4:28 this is the service of the families of the sons of gershon in the
tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the
hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:29 as for the sons of merari, thou shalt number them after their
families, by the house of their fathers; 4:30 from thirty y
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the
tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 and the pillars of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden.

4:33 this is the service of the families of the sons of merari,
according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation,
under the hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:34 and moses and aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the kohathites after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:36 and those that were
numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and
fifty.

4:37 these were they that were numbered of the families of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, which moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord by the hand of moses.

4:38 and those that were numbered of the sons of gershon, throughout
their families, and by the house of their fathers, 4:39 from thirty
years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that
entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:40 even those that were numbered of them, throughout
their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and
six hundred 
 
 ___________________________
 
and thirty.

4:41 these are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of
gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, whom moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord.

4:42 and those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, 4:43
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one
that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:44 even those that were numbered of them after their
families, were three thousand and two hundred.

4:45 these be those that were numbered of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the families of the sons of
merari, whom moses and aaron numbered according to the word of the
lord by the hand of moses.

4:46 all those that were numbered of the levites, whom moses and aaron
and the chief of israel numbered, after their families, and after the
house of their fathers, 4:47 from thirty years old and upward even
unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the
ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:48 even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and
five hundred and fourscore, 4:49 according to the commandment of the
lord they were numbered by the hand of moses, every one according to
 
 ___________________________
 
on is shaven: 6:20 and the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before the lord: this is holy for the priest, with the wave
breast and heave shoulder: and after that the nazarite may drink wine.

6:21 this is the law of the nazarite who hath vowed, and of his
offering unto the lord for his separation, beside that that his hand
shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after
the law of his separation.

6:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:23 speak unto aaron and
unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of
israel, saying unto them, 6:24 the lord bless thee, and keep thee:
6:25 the lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee: 6:26 the lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

6:27 and they shall put my name upon the children of israel, and i
will bless them.

7:1 and it came to pass on the day that moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and
 
 ___________________________
 
saying, 7:5 take it of them, that
they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the levites, to every man according to
his service.

7:6 and moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the
levites.

7:7 two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of gershon,
according to their service: 7:8 and four wagons and eight oxen he gave
unto the sons of merari, according unto their service, under the hand
of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

7:9 but unto the sons of kohath he gave none: because the service of
the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their
shoulders.

7:10 and the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day
that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before
the altar.

7:11 and the lord said unto moses, they shall offer their offering,
each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.

7:12 and he that offered his offering the firs
 
 ___________________________
 
offerings were
twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the
lambs of the first year sixty. this was the dedication of the altar,
after that it was anointed.

7:89 and when moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation
to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him
from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from
between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 speak unto aaron and
say unto him, when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give
light over against the candlestick.

8:3 and aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
candlestick, as the lord commanded moses.

8:4 and this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the
shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according
unto the pattern which the lord had shewed moses, so he made the
candlestick.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:6 take
 
 ___________________________
 
r clothes, and so make themselves clean.

8:8 then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even
fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take
for a sin offering.

8:9 and thou shalt bring the levites before the tabernacle of the
congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children
of israel together: 8:10 and thou shalt bring the levites before the
lord: and the children of israel shall put their hands upon the
levites: 8:11 and aaron shall offer the levites before the lord for an
offering of the children of israel, that they may execute the service
of the lord.

8:12 and the levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the
bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering, unto the lord, to make an atonement for
the levites.

8:13 and thou shalt set the levites before aaron, and before his sons,
and offer them for an offering unto the lord.

8:14 thus shalt thou sep
 
 ___________________________
 
e wholly given unto me from among the children of
israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the
firstborn of all the children of israel, have i taken them unto me.

8:17 for all the firstborn of the children of israel are mine, both
man and beast: on the day that i smote every firstborn in the land of
egypt i sanctified them for myself.

8:18 and i have taken the levites for all the firstborn of the
children of israel.

8:19 and i have given the levites as a gift to aaron and to his sons
from among the children of israel, to do the service of the children
of israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an
atonement for the children of israel: that there be no plague among
the children of israel, when the children of israel come nigh unto the
sanctuary.

8:20 and moses, and aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
israel, did to the levites according unto all that the lord commanded
moses concerning the levites, so did the children
 
 ___________________________
 
 of israel unto them.

8:21 and the levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and
aaron offered them as an offering before the lord; and aaron made an
atonement for them to cleanse them.

8:22 and after that went the levites in to do their service in the
tabernacle of the congregation before aaron, and before his sons: as
the lord had commanded moses concerning the levites, so did they unto
them.

8:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:24 this is it that
belongeth unto the levites: from twenty and five years old and upward
they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 8:25 and from the age of fifty years they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more: 8:26 but
shall minister with their brethren in the tabernac
 
 ___________________________
 
to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.

9:4 and moses spake unto the children of israel, that they should keep
the passover.

9:5 and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilderness of sinai: according to all that the
lord commanded moses, so did the children of israel.

9:6 and there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a
man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came
before moses and before aaron on that day: 9:7 and those men said unto
him, we are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept
back, that we may not offer an offering of the lord in his appointed
season among the children of israel?  9:8 and moses said unto them,
stand still, and i will hear what the lord will command concerning
you.

9:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 9:10 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, if any man of you or of your posterity
shall be unclean by reason of a dead bod
 
 ___________________________
 
ne trumpet, then the princes, which
are heads of the thousands of israel, shall gather themselves unto
thee.

10:5 when ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts
shall go forward.

10:6 when ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on
the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for
their journeys.

10:7 but when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall
blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.

10:8 and the sons of aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets;
and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations.

10:9 and if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye
shall be remembered before the lord your god, and ye shall be saved
from your enemies.

10:10 also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and
in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over
your
 
 ___________________________
 
homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 and while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the lord was kindled against the people, and the
lord smote the people with a very great plague.

11:34 and he called the name of that place kibrothhattaavah: because
there they buried the people that lusted.

11:35 and the people journeyed from kibrothhattaavah unto hazeroth;
and abode at hazeroth.

12:1 and miriam and aaron spake against moses because of the ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had married an ethiopian woman.

12:2 and they said, hath the lord indeed spoken only by moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? and the lord heard it.

12:3 (now the man moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 and the lord spake suddenly unto
moses, and unto aaron, and unto miriam, come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. and they three came out.
 
 ___________________________
 


12:5 and the lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
the door of the tabernacle, and called aaron and miriam: and they both
came forth.

12:6 and he said, hear now my words: if there be a prophet among you,
i the lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 my servant moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

12:8 with him will i speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the lord shall he behold:
wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant moses?
12:9 and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
anger of the lord was kindled against them; and he
departed.

12:10 and the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
miriam became leprous, white as snow: and aaron looked upon miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.

12:11 and aaron said unto moses, alas, my lord, i beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 and moses cried unto the lord, saying, heal her now, o god, i
beseech thee.

12:14 and the lord said unto moses, if her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days,
 
 ___________________________
 
 seven years before zoan in egypt.)  13:23 and they came unto
the brook of eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 the place was called the brook eshcol, because of the cluster of
grapes which the children of israel cut down from thence.

13:25 and they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

13:26 and they went and came to moses, and to aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of israel, unto the wilderness of paran,
to kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

13:27 and they told him, and said, we came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
fruit of it.

13:28 nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and
the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the
c
 
 ___________________________
 
and, through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 and there we saw the giants, the sons of anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 and all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 and all the children of israel murmured against moses and against
aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, would god that we
had died in the land of egypt! or would god we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then moses and aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the cong
 
 ___________________________
 
surely they
shall not see the land which i sware unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that provoked me see it: 14:24 but my servant caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will i bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (now the amalekites and the canaanites dwelt in the valley.)
tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the
red sea.

14:26 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:27 how
long shall i bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against
me? i have heard the murmurings of the children of israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 say unto them, as truly as i live, saith the lord, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will i do to you: 14:29 your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14:30 doubtless y
 
 ___________________________
 
, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people.

15:31 because he hath despised the word of the lord, and hath broken
his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity
shall be upon him.

15:32 and while the children of israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

15:33 and they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto moses
and aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 and they put him in ward, because it was not declared what
should be done to him.

15:35 and the lord said unto moses, the man shall be surely put to
death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the
camp.

15:36 and all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the lord commanded moses.

15:37 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:38 speak unto the
children of israel, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
r god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt, to be your god: i am the lord your god.

16:1 now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi,
and dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab, and on, the son of peleth,
sons of reuben, took men: 16:2 and they rose up before moses, with
certain of the children of israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 and they
gathered themselves together against moses and against aaron, and said
unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the lord is among them: wherefore then
lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the lord?  16:4 and
when moses heard it, he fell upon his face: 16:5 and he spake unto
korah and unto all his company, saying, even to morrow the lord will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
h
 
 ___________________________
 
i:
16:9 seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel
hath separated you from the congregation of israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 and he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 for which cause
both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the lord:
and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 and moses sent
to call dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab: which said, we will not
come up: 16:13 is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?  16:14 moreover
thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
eyes of these men
 
 ___________________________
 
? we will not come up.

16:15 and moses was very wroth, and said unto the lord, respect not
thou their offering: i have not taken one ass from them, neither have
i hurt one of them.

16:16 and moses said unto korah, be thou and all thy company before
the lord, thou, and they, and aaron, to morrow: 16:17 and take every
man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the lord
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and
aaron, each of you his censer.

16:18 and they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with moses and aaron.

16:19 and korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 16:21
separate yourselves from among this congregation
 
 ___________________________
 
heir goods.

16:33 they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
congregation.

16:34 and all israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them: for they said, lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 and there came out a fire from the lord, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

16:36 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:37 speak unto eleazar
the son of aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 the censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered
them before the lord, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of israel.

16:39 and eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plate
 
 ___________________________
 
s for a
covering of the altar: 16:40 to be a memorial unto the children of
israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of aaron, come near
to offer incense before the lord; that he be not as korah, and as his
company: as the lord said to him by the hand of moses.

16:41 but on the morrow all the congregation of the children of israel
murmured against moses and against aaron, saying, ye have killed the
people of the lord.

16:42 and it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
moses and against aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
lord appeared.

16:43 and moses and aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.

16:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:45 get you up from
among this congregation, that i may consume them as in a moment. and
 
 ___________________________
 

they fell upon their faces.

16:46 and moses said unto aaron, take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the lord; the plague is begun.

16:47 and aaron took as moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

16:48 and he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
stayed.

16:49 now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of korah.

16:50 and aaron returned unto moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and t
 
 ___________________________
 
he plague was stayed.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to
the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the
house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon
his rod.

17:3 and thou shalt write aaron's name upon the rod of levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

17:4 and thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, where i will meet with you.

17:5 and it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom i shall
choose, shall blossom: and i will make to cease from me the murmurings
of the children of israel, whereby they murmur against you.

17:6 and moses spake unto the children of israel, and every one of
their pr
 
 ___________________________
 
inces gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 and moses laid up the rods before the lord in the tabernacle of
witness.

17:8 and it came to pass, that on the morrow moses went into the
tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of aaron for the house of
levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
yielded almonds.

17:9 and moses brought out all the rods from before the lord unto all
the children of israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

17:10 and the lord said unto moses, bring aaron's rod again before the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

17:11 and moses did so: as the lord commande
 
 ___________________________
 
d him, so did he.

17:12 and the children of israel spake unto moses, saying, behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the lord
shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  18:1 and the lord said
unto aaron, thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee
shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

18:2 and thy brethren also of the tribe of levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and
minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister
before the tabernacle of witness.

18:3 and they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the
tabernacle: only t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and i, behold, i have taken your brethren the levites from among
the children of israel: to you they are given as a gift for the lord,
to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:7 therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's
office for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall
serve: i have given your priest's office unto you as a service of
gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

18:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, behold, i also have given thee the
charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the
children of israel; unto thee have i given them by reason of the
anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.

18:9 this shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the
fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and
every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs
which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and fo
 
 ___________________________
 
shalt burn their fat for an
offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the lord.

18:18 and the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as
the right shoulder are thine.

18:19 all the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children
of israel offer unto the lord, have i given thee, and thy sons and thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt
for ever before the lord unto thee and to thy seed with thee.

18:20 and the lord spake unto aaron, thou shalt have no inheritance in
their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: i am thy part
and thine inheritance among the children of israel.

18:21 and, behold, i have given the children of levi all the tenth in
israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:22 neither must the children of israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

18:23 but 
 
 ___________________________
 

tithes which i have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the lord, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 and this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of
the winepress.

18:28 thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the lord of all
your tithes, which ye receive of the children of israel; and ye shall
give thereof the lord's heave offering to aaron the priest.

18:29 out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the
lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of
it.

18:30 therefore thou shalt say unto them, when ye have heaved the best
thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the levites as the
increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

18:31 and ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the
congregation.

18:32 and ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of
the children of israel, lest ye die.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 19:2 this
is the ordinance of the law which the lord hath commanded, saying,
speak unto the children of israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 and ye shall give her unto eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
19:4 and eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,
and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of t
 
 ___________________________
 
cheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

19:22 and whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 then came the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of zin in the first month: and the people abode in
kadesh; and miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 and there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against moses and against aaron.

20:3 and the people chode with moses, and spake, saying, would god
that we had died when our brethren died before the lord!  20:4 and why
have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 and wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 and moses and aaron went fro
 
 ___________________________
 
m the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the lord appeared unto them.

20:7 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:8 take the rod, and
gather thou the assembly together, thou, and aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

20:9 and moses took the rod from before the lord, as he commanded him.

20:10 and moses and aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock, and he said unto them, hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch
you water out of this rock?  20:11 and moses lifted up his hand, and
 
 ___________________________
 

with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

20:12 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which i have given
them.

20:13 this is the water of meribah; because the children of israel
strove with the lord, and he was sanctified in them.

20:14 and moses sent messengers from kadesh unto the king of edom,
thus saith thy brother israel, thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 how our fathers went down into egypt, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
drink of thy water, then i will pay for
it: i will only, without doing anything else, go through on my feet.

20:20 and he said, thou shalt not go through. and edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 thus edom refused to give israel passage through his border:
wherefore israel turned away from him.

20:22 and the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from kadesh, and came unto mount hor.

20:23 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in mount hor, by the
coast of the land of edom, saying, 20:24 aaron shall be gathered unto
his people: for he shall not enter into the land which i have given
unto the children of israel, because ye rebelled against my word at
the water of meribah.

20:25 take aaron and eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount
hor: 20:26 and strip aaron of his garments, and put them upon eleazar
his son: and aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die
there.

20:27 and moses did as th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lord commanded: and they went up into mount
hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 and moses stripped aaron of his garments, and put them upon
eleazar his son; and aaron died there in the top of the mount: and
moses and eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 and when all the congregation saw that aaron was dead, they
mourned for aaron thirty days, even all the house of israel.

21:1 and when king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 and israel vowed a vow unto the lord, and said, if thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then i will utterly destroy
their cities.

21:3 and the lord hearkened to the voice of israel, and delivered up
the canaanites; and they utterly destroyed
 
 ___________________________
 
he fierce
anger of the lord may be turned away from israel.

25:5 and moses said unto the judges of israel, slay ye every one his
men that were joined unto baalpeor.

25:6 and, behold, one of the children of israel came and brought unto
his brethren a midianitish woman in the sight of moses, and in the
sight of all the congregation of the children of israel, who were
weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

25:7 and when phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in his hand; 25:8 and he went after the man of israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of israel, and the
woman through her belly. so the plague was stayed from the children of
israel.

25:9 and those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

25:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:11 phinehas, the son
of eleazar, the son of aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath
 
 ___________________________
 
f zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in midian.

25:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:17 vex the midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of peor, and in the matter of
cozbi, the daughter of a prince of midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plague for peor's sake.

26:1 and it came to pass after the plague, that the lord spake unto
moses and unto eleazar the son of aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 take
the sum of all the congregation of the children of israel, from twenty
years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
able to go to war in israel.

26:3 and moses and eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
moab by jordan near jericho, saying, 26:4 take the sum of the people,
from twenty years old and upward; as the lord commanded moses and the
children of israel, which went forth out of the land of egypt.

26:5 reuben, th
 
 ___________________________
 
the hanochites: of pallu, the family of
the palluites: 26:6 of hezron, the family of the hezronites: of carmi,
the family of the carmites.

26:7 these are the families of the reubenites: and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and
thirty.

26:8 and the sons of pallu; eliab.

26:9 and the sons of eliab; nemuel, and dathan, and abiram. this is
that dathan and abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who
strove against moses and against aaron in the company of korah, when
they strove against the lord: 26:10 and the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up together with korah, when that company died,
what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 notwithstanding the children of korah died not.

26:12 the sons of simeon after their families: of nemuel, the family
of the nemuelites: of jamin, the family of the jaminites: of jachin,
the family of the jachinites: 26:13 of zerah, the f
 
 ___________________________
 
 their
families: of gershon, the family of the gershonites: of kohath, the
family of the kohathites: of merari, the family of the merarites.

26:58 these are the families of the levites: the family of the
libnites, the family of the hebronites, the family of the mahlites,
the family of the mushites, the family of the korathites. and kohath
begat amram.

26:59 and the name of amram's wife was jochebed, the daughter of levi,
whom her mother bare to levi in egypt: and she bare unto amram aaron
and moses, and miriam their sister.

26:60 and unto aaron was born nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

26:61 and nadab and abihu died, when they offered strange fire before
the lord.

26:62 and those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not
numbered among the children of israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of israel.

26:63 these are they that were numbered by moses an
 
 ___________________________
 
d eleazar the
priest, who numbered the children of israel in the plains of moab by
jordan near jericho.

26:64 but among these there was not a man of them whom moses and aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
mahlah, 
 
 ___________________________
 
her's brethren.

27:11 and if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of israel a
statute of judgment, as the lord commanded moses.

27:12 and the lord said unto moses, get thee up into this mount
abarim, and see the land which i have given unto the children of
israel.

27:13 and when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 for ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and moses spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let the lord, the
god of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may 
 
 ___________________________
 
it, and dispossessed the amorite which was in it.

32:40 and moses gave gilead unto machir the son of manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 and jair the son of manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them havothjair.

32:42 and nobah went and took kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it nobah, after his own name.

33:1 these are the journeys of the children of israel, which went
forth out of the land of egypt with their armies under the hand of
moses and aaron.

33:2 and moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the lord: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out.

33:3 and they departed from rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
egyptians.

33:4 for the egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the lord had
smitten among them: upon their gods also
 
 ___________________________
 
n benejaakan.

33:32 and they removed from benejaakan, and encamped at horhagidgad.

33:33 and they went from horhagidgad, and pitched in jotbathah.

33:34 and they removed from jotbathah, and encamped at ebronah.

33:35 and they departed from ebronah, and encamped at eziongaber.

33:36 and they removed from eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness
of zin, which is kadesh.

33:37 and they removed from kadesh, and pitched in mount hor, in the
edge of the land of edom.

33:38 and aaron the priest went up into mount hor at the commandment
of the lord, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children
of israel were come out of the land of egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month.

33:39 and aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he
died in mount hor.

33:40 and king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of canaan, heard of the coming of the children of israel.

33:41 and they departed from mount hor, and pitched in zalmon
 
 ___________________________
 
my two hands, and
brake them before your eyes.

9:18 and i fell down before the lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: i did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the lord,
to provoke him to anger.

9:19 for i was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
lord was wroth against you to destroy you. but the lord hearkened unto
me at that time also.

9:20 and the lord was very angry with aaron to have destroyed him: and
i prayed for aaron also the same time.

9:21 and i took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was
as small as dust: and i cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descended out of the mount.

9:22 and at taberah, and at massah, and at kibrothhattaavah, ye
provoked the lord to wrath.

9:23 likewise when the lord sent you from kadeshbarnea, saying, go up
and possess the land whi
 
 ___________________________
 
mine hand.

10:4 and he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the lord spake unto you in the mount out of
the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the lord gave
them unto me.

10:5 and i turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tables in the ark which i had made; and there they be, as the lord
commanded me.

10:6 and the children of israel took their journey from beeroth of the
children of jaakan to mosera: there aaron died, and there he was
buried; and eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

10:7 from thence they journeyed unto gudgodah; and from gudgodah to
jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

10:8 at that time the lord separated the tribe of levi, to bear the
ark of the covenant of the lord, to stand before the lord to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

10:9 wherefore levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren;
the lord is his inherit
 
 ___________________________
 
because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
go over jordan to possess it.

32:48 and the lord spake unto moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
get thee up into this mountain abarim, unto mount nebo, which is in
the land of moab, that is over against jericho; and behold the land of
canaan, which i give unto the children of israel for a possession:
32:50 and die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as aaron thy brother died in mount hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 because ye trespassed against me among the
children of israel at the waters of meribahkadesh, in the wilderness
of zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
israel.

32:52 yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which i give the children of israel.

33:1 and this is the blessing, wherewith moses the man of god blessed
the children of israel before
 
 ___________________________
 
n, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of israel; 21:2 and they
spake unto them at shiloh in the land of canaan, saying, the lord
commanded by the hand of moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 and the children of israel gave unto the levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the lord, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 and the lot came out for the families of the kohathites: and the
children of aaron the priest, which were of the levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of judah, and out of the tribe of simeon, and out of
the tribe of benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 and the rest of the children of kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of ephraim, and out of the tribe of dan, and out
of the half tribe of manasseh, ten cities.

21:6 and the children of gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of issachar, and out of the tribe of asher, and out of the tribe
of na
 
 ___________________________
 
ies.

21:7 the children of merari by their families had out of the tribe of
reuben, and out of the tribe of gad, and out of the tribe of zebulun,
twelve cities.

21:8 and the children of israel gave by lot unto the levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the lord commanded by the hand of moses.

21:9 and they gave out of the tribe of the children of judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

21:10 which the children of aaron, being of the families of the
kohathites, who were of the children of levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot.

21:11 and they gave them the city of arba the father of anak, which
city is hebron, in the hill country of judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it.

21:12 but the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they
to caleb the son of jephunneh for his possession.

21:13 thus they gave to the children of aaron the priest hebron with
her suburbs, to be a city of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 and jattir with her suburbs, and eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 and holon with her suburbs, and debir with her suburbs,
21:16 and ain with her suburbs, and juttah with her suburbs, and
bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.

21:17 and out of the tribe of benjamin, gibeon with her suburbs, geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 anathoth with her suburbs, and almon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:19 all the cities of the children of aaron, the priests, were
thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:20 and the families of the children of kohath, the levites which
remained of the children of kohath, even they had the cities of their
lot out of the tribe of ephraim.

21:21 for they gave them shechem with her suburbs in mount ephraim, to
be a city of refuge for the slayer; and gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
and kibzaim with her suburbs, and bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities.

21:23 and out of the tribe of dan, eltekeh
 
 ___________________________
 
ael, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cried unto the lord, he put darkness between you
and the egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what i have done in egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilderness a long sea
 
 ___________________________
 
srael served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived joshua, and which had known all the
works of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bones of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buried they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the sons of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
ephraim.




the book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children
of israel asked the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
canaanites first, to fight against them?  1:2 and the lord said, judah
shall go up: behold, i have delivered the land into his hand.

1:3 and judah said unto simeon his brother, come up with me into my
lot, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
d of the children of israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 then all the children of israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of god, and wept, and sat there before the
lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the lord.

20:27 and the children of israel enquired of the lord, (for the ark of
the covenant of god was there in those days, 20:28 and phinehas, the
son of eleazar, the son of aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, shall i yet again go out to battle against the children of
benjamin my brother, or shall i cease? and the lord said, go up; for
to morrow i will deliver them into thine hand.

20:29 and israel set liers in wait round about gibeah.

20:30 and the children of israel went up against the children of
benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against gibeah,
as at other times.

20:31 and the children of benjamin went out against the peo
 
 ___________________________
 
 have i oppressed? or of whose hand have i
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and i will restore it
you.

12:4 and they said, thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, he is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, it is the lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of 
 
 ___________________________
 
od destroyed
before them.

5:26 and the god of israel stirred up the spirit of pul king of
assyria, and the spirit of tilgathpilneser king of assyria, and he
carried them away, even the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, and brought them unto halah, and habor, and hara,
and to the river gozan, unto this day.

6:1 the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

6:2 and the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, and hebron, and uzziel.

6:3 and the children of amram; aaron, and moses, and miriam. the sons
also of aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

6:4 eleazar begat phinehas, phinehas begat abishua, 6:5 and abishua
begat bukki, and bukki begat uzzi, 6:6 and uzzi begat zerahiah, and
zerahiah begat meraioth, 6:7 meraioth begat amariah, and amariah begat
ahitub, 6:8 and ahitub begat zadok, and zadok begat ahimaaz, 6:9 and
ahimaaz begat azariah, and azariah begat johanan, 6:10 and johanan
begat azariah, (he it is that executed the priest's office 
 
 ___________________________
 
f gershom, the son
of levi.

6:44 and their brethren the sons of merari stood on the left hand:
ethan the son of kishi, the son of abdi, the son of malluch, 6:45 the
son of hashabiah, the son of amaziah, the son of hilkiah, 6:46 the son
of amzi, the son of bani, the son of shamer, 6:47 the son of mahli,
the son of mushi, the son of merari, the son of levi.

6:48 their brethren also the levites were appointed unto all manner of
service of the tabernacle of the house of god.

6:49 but aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt
offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the
work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for israel,
according to all that moses the servant of god had commanded.

6:50 and these are the sons of aaron; eleazar his son, phinehas his
son, abishua his son, 6:51 bukki his son, uzzi his son, zerahiah his
son, 6:52 meraioth his son, amariah his son, ahitub his son, 6:53
zadok his son, ahimaaz his son.

6:54 
 
 ___________________________
 
now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles in
their coasts, of the sons of aaron, of the families of the kohathites:
for theirs was the lot.

6:55 and they gave them hebron in the land of judah, and the suburbs
thereof round about it.

6:56 but the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave
to caleb the son of jephunneh.

6:57 and to the sons of aaron they gave the cities of judah, namely,
hebron, the city of refuge, and libnah with her suburbs, and jattir,
and eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 6:58 and hilen with her suburbs,
debir with her suburbs, 6:59 and ashan with her suburbs, and
bethshemesh with her suburbs: 6:60 and out of the tribe of benjamin;
geba with her suburbs, and alemeth with her suburbs, and anathoth with
her suburbs. all their cities throughout their families were thirteen
cities.

6:61 and unto the sons of kohath, w
 
 ___________________________
 
ese are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to
the war, and came to david to hebron, to turn the kingdom of saul to
him, according to the word of the lord.

12:24 the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

12:25 of the children of simeon, mighty men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 of the children of levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 and jehoiada was the leader of the aaronites, and with him were
three thousand and seven hundred; 12:28 and zadok, a young man mighty
of valour, and of his father's house twenty and two captains.

12:29 and of the children of benjamin, the kindred of saul, three
thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
the house of saul.

12:30 and of the children of ephraim twenty thousand and eight
hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their
fathers.

12:31 and of the half tribe of man
 
 ___________________________
 
him upon all nations.

15:1 and david made him houses in the city of david, and prepared a
place for the ark of god, and pitched for it a tent.

15:2 then david said, none ought to carry the ark of god but the
levites: for them hath the lord chosen to carry the ark of god, and to
minister unto him for ever.

15:3 and david gathered all israel together to jerusalem, to bring up
the ark of the lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it.

15:4 and david assembled the children of aaron, and the levites: 15:5
of the sons of kohath; uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
and twenty: 15:6 of the sons of merari; asaiah the chief, and his
brethren two hundred and twenty: 15:7 of the sons of gershom; joel the
chief and his brethren an hundred and thirty: 15:8 of the sons of
elizaphan; shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred: 15:9 of
the sons of hebron; eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 15:10
of the sons of uzziel; amminadab the chief, and his brethr
 
 ___________________________
 

23:9 the sons of shimei; shelomith, and haziel, and haran, three.
these were the chief of the fathers of laadan.

23:10 and the sons of shimei were, jahath, zina, and jeush, and
beriah.

these four were the sons of shimei.

23:11 and jahath was the chief, and zizah the second: but jeush and
beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning,
according to their father's house.

23:12 the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel, four.

23:13 the sons of amram; aaron and moses: and aaron was separated,
that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for
ever, to burn incense before the lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name for ever.

23:14 now concerning moses the man of god, his sons were named of the
tribe of levi.

23:15 the sons of moses were, gershom, and eliezer.

23:16 of the sons of gershom, shebuel was the chief.

23:17 and the sons of eliezer were, rehabiah the chief. and eliezer
had none other sons; but t
 
 ___________________________
 
did the work for the service of the house of the
lord, from the age of twenty years and upward.

23:25 for david said, the lord god of israel hath given rest unto his
people, that they may dwell in jerusalem for ever: 23:26 and also unto
the levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels
of it for the service thereof.

23:27 for by the last words of david the levites were numbered from
twenty years old and above: 23:28 because their office was to wait on
the sons of aaron for the service of the house of the lord, in the
courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things,
and the work of the service of the house of god; 23:29 both for the
shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the
unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that
which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size; 23:30 and to
stand every morning to thank and praise the lord, and likewise at
even: 23:31 and to offer all burnt
 
 ___________________________
 
 sacrifices unto the lord in the
sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number,
according to the order commanded unto them, continually before the
lord: 23:32 and that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of
the congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of
the sons of aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the
lord.

24:1 now these are the divisions of the sons of aaron. the sons of
aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

24:2 but nadab and abihu died before their father, and had no
children: therefore eleazar and ithamar executed the priest's office.

24:3 and david distributed them, both zadok of the sons of eleazar,
and ahimelech of the sons of ithamar, according to their offices in
their service.

24:4 and there were more chief men found of the sons of eleazar than
of the sons of ithamar, and thus were they divided. among the sons of
eleazar there were six
 
 ___________________________
 
h to huppah, the fourteenth to jeshebeab, 24:14 the fifteenth
to bilgah, the sixteenth to immer, 24:15 the seventeenth to hezir, the
eighteenth to aphses, 24:16 the nineteenth to pethahiah, the twentieth
to jehezekel, 24:17 the one and twentieth to jachin, the two and
twentieth to gamul, 24:18 the three and twentieth to delaiah, the four
and twentieth to maaziah.

24:19 these were the orderings of them in their service to come into
the house of the lord, according to their manner, under aaron their
father, as the lord god of israel had commanded him.

24:20 and the rest of the sons of levi were these: of the sons of
amram; shubael: of the sons of shubael; jehdeiah.

24:21 concerning rehabiah: of the sons of rehabiah, the first was
isshiah.

24:22 of the izharites; shelomoth: of the sons of shelomoth; jahath.

24:23 and the sons of hebron; jeriah the first, amariah the second,
jahaziel the third, jekameam the fourth.

24:24 of the sons of uzziel; michah: of the sons of 
 
 ___________________________
 
s of isshiah;
zechariah.

24:26 the sons of merari were mahli and mushi: the sons of jaaziah;
beno.

24:27 the sons of merari by jaaziah; beno, and shoham, and zaccur, and
ibri.

24:28 of mahli came eleazar, who had no sons.

24:29 concerning kish: the son of kish was jerahmeel.

24:30 the sons also of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jerimoth. these
were the sons of the levites after the house of their fathers.

24:31 these likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
aaron in the presence of david the king, and zadok, and ahimelech, and
the chief of the fathers of the priests and levites, even the
principal fathers over against their younger brethren.

25:1 moreover david and the captains of the host separated to the
service of the sons of asaph, and of heman, and of jeduthun, who
should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the
number of the workmen according to their service was: 25:2 of the sons
of asaph; zaccur, and joseph, and n
 
 ___________________________
 
captain for the eleventh month was benaiah the
pirathonite, of the children of ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:15 the twelfth captain for the twelfth month was heldai the
netophathite, of othniel: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:16 furthermore over the tribes of israel: the ruler of the
reubenites was eliezer the son of zichri: of the simeonites,
shephatiah the son of maachah: 27:17 of the levites, hashabiah the son
of kemuel: of the aaronites, zadok: 27:18 of judah, elihu, one of the
brethren of david: of issachar, omri the son of michael: 27:19 of
zebulun, ishmaiah the son of obadiah: of naphtali, jerimoth the son of
azriel: 27:20 of the children of ephraim, hoshea the son of azaziah:
of the half tribe of manasseh, joel the son of pedaiah: 27:21 of the
half tribe of manasseh in gilead, iddo the son of zechariah: of
benjamin, jaasiel the son of abner: 27:22 of dan, azareel the son of
jeroham. these were the princes of the
 
 ___________________________
 
nst his lord.

13:7 and there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of belial,
and have strengthened themselves against rehoboam the son of solomon,
when rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 and now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the lord in the hand
of the sons of david; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 have ye not cast out the priests of the lord, the sons of aaron,
and the levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the
nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself
with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them
that are no gods.

13:10 but as for us, the lord is our god, and we have not forsaken
him; and the priests, which minister unto the lord, are the sons of
aaron, and the levites wait upon their business: 13:11 and they burn
unto the lord every morning and every evening burnt sacrif
 
 ___________________________
 
as strong.

26:16 but when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction: for he transgressed against the lord his god, and went
into the temple of the lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense.

26:17 and azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore
priests of the lord, that were valiant men: 26:18 and they withstood
uzziah the king, and said unto him, it appertaineth not unto thee,
uzziah, to burn incense unto the lord, but to the priests the sons of
aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary;
for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from
the lord god.

26:19 then uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn
incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even
rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the lord,
from beside the incense altar.

26:20 and azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon
him, and, behold, he was leprous in his
 
 ___________________________
 
l the vessels, which king ahaz in his reign did cast
away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and,
behold, they are before the altar of the lord.

29:20 then hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of
the city, and went up to the house of the lord.

29:21 and they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven
lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for
the sanctuary, and for judah. and he commanded the priests the sons of
aaron to offer them on the altar of the lord.

29:22 so they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood,
and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the
rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the
lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.

29:23 and they brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before
the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:
29:24 and the priests killed them, and they made reco
 
 ___________________________
 
 into the house of
the lord, his daily portion for their service in their charges
according to their courses; 31:17 both to the genealogy of the priests
by the house of their fathers, and the levites from twenty years old
and upward, in their charges by their courses; 31:18 and to the
genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office
they sanctified themselves in holiness: 31:19 also of the sons of
aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their
cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to
give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were
reckoned by genealogies among the levites.

31:20 and thus did hezekiah throughout all judah, and wrought that
which was good and right and truth before the lord his god.

31:21 and in every work that he began in the service of the house of
god, and in the law, and in the commandments,
 
 ___________________________
 
offerings, that they might give
according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer
unto the lord, as it is written in the book of moses. and so did they
with the oxen.

35:13 and they roasted the passover with fire according to the
ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

35:14 and afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: because the priests the sons of aaron were busied in offering
of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the levites
prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of aaron.

35:15 and the singers the sons of asaph were in their place, according
to the commandment of david, and asaph, and heman, and jeduthun the
king's seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the levites prepared for
them.

35:16 so all the service of the lord was prepared t
 
 ___________________________
 
ria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of
the house of god, the god of israel.

7:1 now after these things, in the reign of artaxerxes king of persia,
ezra the son of seraiah, the son of azariah, the son of hilkiah, 7:2
the son of shallum, the son of zadok, the son of ahitub, 7:3 the son
of amariah, the son of azariah, the son of meraioth, 7:4 the son of
zerahiah, the son of uzzi, the son of bukki, 7:5 the son of abishua,
the son of phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the chief
priest: 7:6 this ezra went up from babylon; and he was a ready scribe
in the law of moses, which the lord god of israel had given: and the
king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the lord
his god upon him.

7:7 and there went up some of the children of israel, and of the
priests, and the levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the
nethinims, unto jerusalem, in the seventh year of artaxerxes the king.

7:8 and he came to jerusalem in the fifth month,
 
 ___________________________
 
the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks,
to bring to the house of our god, unto the priests that minister in
the house of our god: 10:37 and that we should bring the firstfruits
of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees,
of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of
our god; and the tithes of our ground unto the levites, that the same
levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.

10:38 and the priest the son of aaron shall be with the levites, when
the levites take tithes: and the levites shall bring up the tithe of
the tithes unto the house of our god, to the chambers, into the
treasure house.

10:39 for the children of israel and the children of levi shall bring
the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the
chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that
minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake
the house of our god.

11:1 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
heir god,
and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of
david, and of solomon his son.

12:46 for in the days of david and asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the days of zerubbabel, and in the days of
nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the levites; and the
levites sanctified them unto the children of aaron.

13:1 on that day they read in the book of moses in the audience of the
people; and therein was found written, that the ammonite and the
moabite should not come into the congregation of god for ever; 13:2
because they met not the children of israel with bread and with water,
but hired balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our
god turned the curse into a blessing.

13:3 now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separated from israel all the mixed mu
 
 ___________________________
 
.

77:16 the waters saw thee, o god, the waters saw thee; they were
afraid: the depths also were troubled.

77:17 the clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
arrows also went abroad.

77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings
lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.

77:19 thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

77:20 thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of moses and
aaron.



78:1 give ear, o my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words
of my mouth.

78:2 i will open my mouth in a parable: i will utter dark sayings of
old:

78:3 which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.

78:4 we will not hide them from their children, shewing to the
generation to come the praises of the lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he hath done.

78:5 for he established a testimony in jacob, and appointed a law in
israel, which 
 
 ___________________________
 
 with equity.



99:1 the lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the lord, and he answered them.

99:7 he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, o lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our god, and worship at his holy hill; for the
lord our god is holy.



100:1 make a joyful noise unto the
 
 ___________________________
 
the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 he made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

105:22 to bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators
wisdom.

105:23 israel also came into egypt; and jacob sojourned in the land of
ham.

105:24 and he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger
than their enemies.

105:25 he turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.

105:26 he sent moses his servant; and aaron whom he had chosen.

105:27 they shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
ham.

105:28 he sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not
against his word.

105:29 he turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.

105:30 their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of
their kings.

105:31 he spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all
their coasts.

105:32 he gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.

 
 ___________________________
 
nd of him that hated them, and
redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

106:11 and the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them
left.

106:12 then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

106:13 they soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:

106:14 but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted god in
the desert.

106:15 and he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their
soul.

106:16 they envied moses also in the camp, and aaron the saint of the
lord.

106:17 the earth opened and swallowed up dathan and covered the
company of abiram.

106:18 and a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up
the wicked.

106:19 they made a calf in horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

106:20 thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
eateth grass.

106:21 they forgat god their saviour, which had done great things in
egypt;

106:22 wondrous works in the land of ham, and terrible things 
 
 ___________________________
 
e work of men's hands.

115:5 they have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they
see not:

115:6 they have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they
smell not:

115:7 they have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they
walk not: neither speak they through their throat.

115:8 they that make them are like unto them; so is every one that
trusteth in them.

115:9 o israel, trust thou in the lord: he is their help and their
shield.

115:10 o house of aaron, trust in the lord: he is their help and their
shield.

115:11 ye that fear the lord, trust in the lord: he is their help and
their shield.

115:12 the lord hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will
bless the house of israel; he will bless the house of aaron.

115:13 he will bless them that fear the lord, both small and great.

115:14 the lord shall increase you more and more, you and your
children.

115:15 ye are blessed of the lord which made heaven and earth.

115:16
 
 ___________________________
 
 all his
people.

116:19 in the courts of the lord's house, in the midst of thee, o
jerusalem. praise ye the lord.



117:1 o praise the lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.

117:2 for his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of
the lord endureth for ever. praise ye the lord.



118:1 o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good: because his mercy
endureth for ever.

118:2 let israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

118:3 let the house of aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for
ever.

118:4 let them now that fear the lord say, that his mercy endureth for
ever.

118:5 i called upon the lord in distress: the lord answered me, and
set me in a large place.

118:6 the lord is on my side; i will not fear: what can man do unto
me?

118:7 the lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall
i see my desire upon them that hate me.

118:8 it is better to trust in the lord than to put confidence in man.

118:9 it i
 
 ___________________________
 
 her poor
with bread.

132:16 i will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints
shall shout aloud for joy.

132:17 there will i make the horn of david to bud: i have ordained a
lamp for mine anointed.

132:18 his enemies will i clothe with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.



133:1 behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity!

133:2 it is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of
his garments;

133:3 as the dew of hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of zion: for there the lord commanded the blessing, even
life for evermore.



134:1 behold, bless ye the lord, all ye servants of the lord, which by
night stand in the house of the lord.

134:2 lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the lord.

134:3 the lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of zion.



135:1 praise ye the lord. 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself
concerning his servants.

135:15 the idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
hands.

135:16 they have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they
see not;

135:17 they have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath
in their mouths.

135:18 they that make them are like unto them: so is every one that
trusteth in them.

135:19 bless the lord, o house of israel: bless the lord, o house of
aaron:

135:20 bless the lord, o house of levi: ye that fear the lord, bless
the lord.

135:21 blessed be the lord out of zion, which dwelleth at jerusalem.

praise ye the lord.



136:1 o give thanks unto the lord; for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:2 o give thanks unto the god of gods: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:3 o give thanks to the lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:4 to him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth 
 
 ___________________________
 
lord saith; arise, contend thou before the
mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

6:2 hear ye, o mountains, the lord's controversy, and ye strong
foundations of the earth: for the lord hath a controversy with his
people, and he will plead with israel.

6:3 o my people, what have i done unto thee? and wherein have i
wearied thee? testify against me.

6:4 for i brought thee up out of the land of egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants; and i sent before thee moses, aaron, and
miriam.

6:5 o my people, remember now what balak king of moab consulted, and
what balaam the son of beor answered him from shittim unto gilgal;
that ye may know the righteousness of the lord.

6:6 wherewith shall i come before the lord, and bow myself before the
high god? shall i come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of
a year old?  6:7 will the lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall i give my firstborn for my
transgres