the first book of moses:  called genesis


1:1 in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth.

1:2 and the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep. and the spirit of god moved upon the face of the
waters.

1:3 and god said, let there be light: and there was light.

1:4 and god saw the light, that it was good: and god divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5 and god called the light day, and the darkness he called night.
and the evening and the morning were 
 
 ___________________________
 
ought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebulun, and
benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher.

1:5 and all the souls that came out of the loins of jacob were seventy
souls: for joseph was in egypt already.

1:6 and joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, an
 
 ___________________________
 
haraoh's daughter, shall i go and call to
thee a nurse of the hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for
thee?  2:8 and pharaoh's daughter said to her, go. and the maid went
and called the child's mother.

2:9 and pharaoh's daughter said unto her, take this child away, and
nurse it for me, and i will give thee thy wages. and the women took
the child, and nursed it.

2:10 and the child grew, and she brought him unto pharaoh's daughter,
and he became her son. and she called his name moses: and she said,
because i drew him out of the water.

2:11 and it came to pass in those days, when moses was grown, that he
went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied
an egyptian smiting an hebrew, one of his brethren.

2:12 and he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there
was no man, he slew the egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

2:13 and when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the
hebrews strove together: and he said to him that
 
 ___________________________
 
 did the wrong,
wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?  2:14 and he said, who made thee a
prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou
killedst the egyptian? and moses feared, and said, surely this thing
is known.

2:15 now when pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay moses. but
moses fled from the face of pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of midian:
and he sat down by a well.

2:16 now the priest of midian had seven daughters: and they came and
drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

2:17 and the shepherds came and drove them away: but moses stood up
and helped them, and watered their flock.

2:18 and when they came to reuel their father, he said, how is it that
ye are come so soon to day?  2:19 and they said, an egyptian delivered
us out 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for
us, and watered the flock.

2:20 and he said unto his daughters, and where is he? why is it that
ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 and moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon th
 
 ___________________________
 
e children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and moses said, i will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hi
 
 ___________________________
 
od land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and
the jebusites.

3:9 now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of israel is come
unto me: and i have also seen the oppression wherewith the egyptians
oppress them.

3:10 come now therefore, and i will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou
mayest bring forth my people the children of israel out of egypt.

3:11 and moses said unto god, who am i, that i should go unto pharaoh,
and that i should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt?
3:12 and he said, certainly i will be with thee; and this shall be a
token unto thee, that i have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth
the people out of egypt, ye shall serve god upon this mountain.

3:13 and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 say to me, what is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ypt with all my
wonders which i will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will
let you go.

3:21 and i will give this people favour in the sight of the egyptians:
and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the egyptians.

4:1 and moses answered and said, but, behold, they will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became 
 
 ___________________________
 
 was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
voice of the latter sign.

4:9 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the
water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which
thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

4:10 and moses said unto the lord, o my lord, i am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but i
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 and the lord said unto him, who hath made man's mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not i the
lord?  4:12 now therefore go, and i will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 and he said, o my lord, send, i pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4
 
 ___________________________
 
:14 and the anger of the lord was kindled against moses, and he said,
is not aaron the levite thy brother? i know that he can speak well.
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and i
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of g
 
 ___________________________
 
od.

4:17 and thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 and moses went and returned to jethro his father in law, and said
unto him, let me go, i pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
are in egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. and jethro said to
moses, go in peace.

4:19 and the lord said unto moses in midian, go, return into egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 and moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he returned to the land of egypt: and moses took the rod of god in
his hand.

4:21 and the lord said unto moses, when thou goest to return into
egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before pharaoh, which i have
put in thine hand: but i will harden his heart, that he shall not let
the people go.

4:22 and thou shalt say unto pharaoh, thus saith the lord, israel is
my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 and i say unto thee, let my s
 
 ___________________________
 
if thou refuse to let him go, behold, i will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 and it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 so he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 and the lord said to aaron, go into the wilderness to meet moses.
and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kissed him.

4:28 and moses told aaron all the words of the lord who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the words which the
lord had spoken unto moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 and the people believed: and when they heard that the lord had
visited the children of 
 
 ___________________________
 
israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 and afterward moses and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus
saith the lord god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to
let israel go? i know not the lord, neither will i let israel go.

5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
sword.

5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and
aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 and pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; 
 
 ___________________________
 
brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 but he said, ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, let us
go and do sacrifice to the lord.

5:18 go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 and the officers of the children of israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it was said, ye shall not minish ought from your
bricks of your daily task.

5:20 and they met moses and aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from pharaoh: 5:21 and they said unto them, the lord look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the
eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil 
 
 ___________________________
 
to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefore say unto the c
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcised lips?  6:13 and the lord spake unto moses and unto
aaron, and g
 
 ___________________________
 
rs of the
life of levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 the sons of gershon; libni, and shimi, according to their
families.

6:18 and the sons of kohath; amram, and izhar, and hebron, and uzziel:
and the years of the life of kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.

6:19 and the sons of merari; mahali and mushi: these are the families
of levi according to their generations.

6:20 and amram took him jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
bare him aaron and moses: and the years of the life of amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 and the sons of izhar; korah, and nepheg, and zichri.

6:22 and the sons of uzziel; mishael, and elzaphan, and zithri.

6:23 and aaron took him elisheba, daughter of amminadab, sister of
naashon, to wife; and she bare him nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and
ithamar.

6:24 and the sons of korah; assir, and elkanah, and abiasaph: these
are the families of the korhites.

6:25 and eleazar aaron's son took
 
 ___________________________
 
 him one of the daughters of putiel
to wife; and she bare him phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers
of the levites according to their families.

6:26 these are that aaron and moses, to whom the lord said, bring out
the children of israel from the land of egypt according to their
armies.

6:27 these are they which spake to pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out
the children of israel from egypt: these are that moses and aaron.

6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto moses in
the land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, i am
the lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that i say unto
thee.

6:30 and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 and the lord said
unto moses, see, i have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 thou shalt speak all that
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren of israel out of
his land.

7:3 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of egypt.

7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that i may lay my hand
upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
israel, out of the land of egypt by great judgments.

7:5 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i stretch
forth mine hand upon egypt, and bring out the children of israel from
among them.

7:6 and moses and aaron did as the lord commanded them, so did they.

7:7 and moses was fourscore years old, and aaron fourscore and three
years old, when they spake unto pharaoh.

7:8 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 7:9 when
pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, shew a miracle for you: then
thou shalt say unto aaron, take thy rod, and cast it before pharaoh,
and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 and moses and aaron went in unto pharaoh, and they did so as the
lord had command
 
 ___________________________
 
ed: and aaron cast down his rod before pharaoh, and
before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 then pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magicians of egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 for they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
but aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 and he hardened pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the lord had said.

7:14 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 get thee unto pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 and thou shalt say unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath
sent me unto thee, saying, let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 thus sai
 
 ___________________________
 
th the lord, in this thou shalt know that i am the lord:
behold, i will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, take thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the waters of egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
vessels of stone.

7:20 and moses and aaron did so, as the lord commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight
of pharaoh, and in the sight 
 
 ___________________________
 

7:22 and the magicians of egypt did so with their enchantments: and
pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
lord had said.

7:23 and pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set
his heart to this also.

7:24 and all the egyptians digged round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 and seven days were fulfilled, after that the lord had smitten
the river.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, go unto pharaoh, and say unto him,
thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:2 and if thou refuse to let them go, behold, i will smite all thy
borders with frogs: 8:3 and the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
8:4 and the frogs shall come up both on thee, and up
 
 ___________________________
 
on thy people, and
upon all thy servants.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of egypt.

8:6 and aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of egypt; and the
frogs came up, and covered the land of egypt.

8:7 and the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of egypt.

8:8 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron, and said, intreat the
lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and
i will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the lord.

8:9 and moses said unto pharaoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 and he said, to morrow. and he said, be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is no
 
 ___________________________
 
ne like unto the lord
our god.

8:11 and the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 and moses and aaron went out from pharaoh: and moses cried unto
the lord because of the frogs which he had brought against pharaoh.

8:13 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 and they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 but when pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said.

8:16 and the lord said unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of egypt.

8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretched out
 
 ___________________________
 
with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
egypt.

8:18 and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 then the magicians said unto pharaoh, this is the finger of god:
and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the lord had said.

8:20 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, i will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people,
and into thy houses: and the houses of the egyptians shall be full of
swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 and i will sever in that day the land of goshen, 
 
 ___________________________
 
in which my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that i am the lord in the midst of the earth.

8:23 and i will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 and pharaoh called for moses and for aaron, and said, go ye,
sacrifice to your god in the land.

8:26 and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 we will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command us.

8:28 and pharaoh said, i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
lord y
 
 ___________________________
 
our god in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away:
intreat for me.

8:29 and moses said, behold, i go out from thee, and i will intreat
the lord that the swarms of flies may depart from pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not pharaoh deal
deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
lord.

8:30 and moses went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

8:31 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and he removed
the swarms of flies from pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; there remained not one.

8:32 and pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would
he let the people go.

9:1 then the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh, and tell him,
thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my people go, that they
may serve me.

9:2 for if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
behold, the hand of the lord is upon thy cattle which is in
 
 ___________________________
 
 nothing die of all that is the
children's of israel.

9:5 and the lord appointed a set time, saying, to morrow the lord
shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 and the lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of israel died not one.

9:7 and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of
the israelites dead. and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, and he did
not let the people go.

9:8 and the lord said unto moses and unto aaron, take to you handfuls
of ashes of the furnace, and let moses sprinkle it toward the heaven
in the sight of pharaoh.

9:9 and it shall become small dust in all the land of egypt, and shall
be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of egypt.

9:10 and they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before pharaoh; and
moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:1
 
 ___________________________
 
1 and the magicians could not stand before moses because of the
boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the
egyptians.

9:12 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh, and he hearkened not
unto them; as the lord had spoken unto moses.

9:13 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh, and say unto him, thus saith the lord god of the
hebrews, let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 for i will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 for now i will stretch out my hand, that i may smite thee and thy
people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 and in v
 
 ___________________________
 
9:19 send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast
in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
them, and they shall die.

9:20 he that feared the word of the lord among the servants of pharaoh
made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 and he
that regarded not the word of the lord left his servants and his
cattle in the field.

9:22 and the lord said unto moses, stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of egypt, upon man, and
upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of
egypt.

9:23 and moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the lord
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
lord rained hail upon the land of egypt.

9:24 so there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of egypt s
 
 ___________________________
 
ince it
became a nation.

9:25 and the hail smote throughout all the land of egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 only in the land of goshen, where the children of israel were,
was there no hail.

9:27 and pharaoh sent, and called for moses and aaron, and said unto
them, i have sinned this time: the lord is righteous, and i and my
people are wicked.

9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and i will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 and moses said unto him, as soon as i am gone out of the city, i
will spread abroad my hands unto the lord; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d's.

9:30 but as for thee and thy servants, i know that ye will not yet
fear the lord god.

9:31 and the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in
the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 but the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 and moses went out of the city from pharaoh, and spread abroad
his hands unto the lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 and when pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.

9:35 and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
children of israel go; as the lord had spoken by moses.

10:1 and the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh: f
 
 ___________________________
 
or i have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that i might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things i have wrought in egypt,
and my signs which i have done among them; that ye may know how that i
am the lord.

10:3 and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
i bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shal
 
 ___________________________
 
he field: 10:6 and they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned himself, and went out
from pharaoh.

10:7 and pharaoh's servants said unto him, how long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the lord their
god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?  10:8 and moses and
aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go,
serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 and
moses said, we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the lord.

10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as i will
let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 not so: go now ye that ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e men, and serve the lord; for that ye
did desire. and they were driven out from pharaoh's presence.

10:12 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
land of egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of
egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath
left.

10:13 and moses stretched forth his rod over the land of egypt, and
the lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 and the locust went up over all the land of egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 for they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did
 
 ___________________________
 
 eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of egypt.

10:16 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i
have sinned against the lord your god, and against you.

10:17 now therefore forgive, i pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

10:19 and the lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of egypt.

10:20 but the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let
the children of israel go.

10:21 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of egypt, even
darkness which may be felt.

10:22 and moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was
a thick darkness in all the land of egypt three days: 10:23 they saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but
all the children of israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 and pharaoh called unto moses, and said, go ye, serve the lord;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones
also go with you.

10:25 and moses said, thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
we may sacrifice unto the lord our god.

10:26 our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the lord our god; and
we know not with what we must serve the lord, until we come thither.

10:27 but the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 and pharaoh said unto him, get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 and moses said, thou hast spoken well, i will see thy face again
no more.

11:1 and the lord said unto moses, yet will i bring one plague more
upon pharaoh, and upon egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence:
when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence
altogether.

11:2 speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of
his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and
jewels of gold.

11:3 and the lord gave the people favour in the sight 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
egyptians.

moreover the man moses was very great in the land of egypt, in the
sight of pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 and moses said, thus saith the lord, about midnight will i go out
into the midst of egypt: 11:5 and all the firstborn in the land of
egypt shall die, from the first born of pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the
mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 and there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

11:7 but against any of the children of israel shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
not a dog move
his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the lord
doth put a difference between the egyptians and israel.

11:8 and all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselves unto me, saying, get thee out, and all the people that
follow thee: and after that i will go out. and he went out from
pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of egypt.

11:10 and moses and aaron did all these wonders before pharaoh: and
the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of israel go out of his land.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in the land of egypt
saying, 12:2 this month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it
shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 speak ye unto all the congregation 
 
 ___________________________
 
r.

12:18 in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
month at even.

12:19 seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
off from the congregation of israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
in the land.

12:20 ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye
eat unleavened bread.

12:21 then moses called for all the elders of israel, and said unto
them, draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and
kill the passover.

12:22 and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts
with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at
the door of his house until the morning.

12:23 for the lord will pass through to smite the egyptians; and when
he seeth the blood upon the lintel, 
 
 ___________________________
 
give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
this service.

12:26 and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, what mean ye by this service?  12:27 that ye shall say, it is the
sacrifice of the lord's passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of israel in egypt, when he smote the egyptians, and
delivered our houses. and the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 and the children of israel went away, and did as the lord had
commanded moses and aaron, so did they.

12:29 and it came to pass, that at midnight the lord smote all the
firstborn in the land of egypt, from the firstborn of pharaoh that sat
on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 and pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the egyptians; and there was a great cry in egypt; for there was
not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 and he called for moses and aa
 
 ___________________________
 
f
israel; and go, serve the lord, as ye have said.

12:32 also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be
gone; and bless me also.

12:33 and the egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the land in haste; for they said, we be all dead men.

12:34 and the people took their dough before it was leavened, their
kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

12:35 and the children of israel did according to the word of moses;
and they borrowed of the egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment: 12:36 and the lord gave the people favour in the
sight of the egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as
they required. and they spoiled the egyptians.

12:37 and the children of israel journeyed from rameses to succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

12:38 and a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and
herds, even very much cattle.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
f the children of israel, who dwelt in
egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 and it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of
the lord went out from the land of egypt.

12:42 it is a night to be much observed unto the lord for bringing
them out from the land of egypt: this is that night of the lord to be
observed of all the children of israel in their generations.

12:43 and the lord said unto moses and aaron, this is the ordinance of
the passover: there shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 but every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 a foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 in one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 all the congregation of israel shall keep it.

12:48 and when a s
 
 ___________________________
 
tranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 one law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 thus did all the children of israel; as the lord commanded moses
and aaron, so did they.

12:51 and it came to pass the selfsame day, that the lord did bring
the children of israel out of the land of egypt by their armies.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 and moses said unto the people, remember this day, in which ye
came out from egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of
hand the 
 
 ___________________________
 
yes: for by strength of hand the lord brought us forth
out of egypt.

13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the people go, that
god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines,
although that was near; for god said, lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the red sea:
and the children of israel went up harnessed out of the land of egypt.

13:19 and moses took the bones of joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you; and
ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

13:20 and they took their journey from succoth, and encamped in etham,
in the edge of the wilderness.

13:21 and the lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night: 13:22 he took not away the pillar of
the cloud
 
 ___________________________
 
 by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the
people.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they turn and encamp before pihahiroth,
between migdol and the sea, over against baalzephon: before it shall
ye encamp by the sea.

14:3 for pharaoh will say of the children of israel, they are
entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

14:4 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after
them; and i will be honoured upon pharaoh, and upon all his host; that
the egyptians may know that i am the lord. an
 
 ___________________________
 
israel: and the children of israel went
out with an high hand.

14:9 but the egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots
of pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them
encamping by the sea, beside pihahiroth, before baalzephon.

14:10 and when pharaoh drew nigh, the children of israel lifted up
their eyes, and, behold, the egyptians marched after them; and they
were sore afraid: and the children of israel cried out unto the lord.

14:11 and they said unto moses, because there were no graves in egypt,
hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou
dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of egypt?  14:12 is not this
the word that we did tell thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we
may serve the egyptians? for it had been better for us to serve the
egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

14:13 and moses said unto the people, fear ye not, stand still, and
see the salvation of the lord, which he will she
 
 ___________________________
 
w to you to day: for
the egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever.

14:14 the lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

14:15 and the lord said unto moses, wherefore criest thou unto me?
speak unto the children of israel, that they go forward: 14:16 but
lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and
divide it: and the children of israel shall go on dry ground through
the midst of the sea.

14:17 and i, behold, i will harden the hearts of the egyptians, and
they shall follow them: and i will get me honour upon pharaoh, and
upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:18 and the egyptians shall know
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord, when i have
gotten me honour upon pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his
horsemen.

14:19 and the angel of god, which went before the camp of israel,
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 and it came between
the camp of the egyptians and the camp of israel; and it was a cloud
and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
one came not near the other all the night.

14:21 and moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the lord
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and
made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

14:22 and the children of israel went into the midst of the sea upon
the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right
hand, and on their left.

14:23 and the egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst
of the sea, even all pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.

14:24 and it 
 
 ___________________________
 
came to pass, that in the morning watch the lord looked
unto the host of the egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, and troubled the host of the egyptians, 14:25 and took off
their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the
egyptians said, let us flee from the face of israel; for the lord
fighteth for them against the egyptians.

14:26 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
sea, that the waters may come again upon the egyptians, upon their
chariots, and upon their horsemen.

14:27 and moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the egyptians
fled against it; and the lord overthrew the egyptians in the midst of
the sea.

14:28 and the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the
horsemen, and all the host of pharaoh that came into the sea after
the
 
 ___________________________
 
m; there remained not so much as one of them.

14:29 but the children of israel walked upon dry land in the midst of
the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and
on their left.

14:30 thus the lord saved israel that day out of the hand of the
egyptians; and israel saw the egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 and israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the
egyptians: and the people feared the lord, and believed the lord, and
his servant moses.

15:1 then sang moses and the children of israel this song unto the
lord, and spake, saying, i will sing unto the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:2 the lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation:
he is my god, and i will prepare him an habitation; my father's god,
and i will exalt him.

15:3 the lord is a man of war: the lord is his name.

15:4 pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the se
 
 ___________________________
 
n with his chariots and with his
horsemen into the sea, and the lord brought again the waters of the
sea upon them; but the children of israel went on dry land in the
midst of the sea.

15:20 and miriam the prophetess, the sister of aaron, took a timbrel
in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and
with dances.

15:21 and miriam answered them, sing ye to the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:22 so moses brought israel from the red sea, and they went out into
the wilderness of shur; and they went three days in the wilderness,
and found no water.

15:23 and when they came to marah, they could not drink of the waters
of marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
marah.

15:24 and the people murmured against moses, saying, what shall we
drink?  15:25 and he cried unto the lord; and the lord shewed him a
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were m
 
 ___________________________
 
lord that healeth thee.

15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation
of the children of israel came unto the wilderness of sin, which is
between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their departing out of the land of egypt.

16:2 and the whole congregation of the children of israel murmured
against moses and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of
israel said unto them, would to god we had died by the hand of the
lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, i will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that i may prove them, whether t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey will walk in my law, or
no.

16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as
they gather daily.

16:6 and moses and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at
even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the
land of egypt: 16:7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of
the lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord: and
what are we, that ye murmur against us?  16:8 and moses said, this
shall be, when the lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your
murmurings which ye murmur ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst him: and what are we? your
murmurings are not against us, but against the lord.

16:9 and moses spake unto aaron, say unto all the congregation of the
children of israel, come near before the lord: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of israel, that they looked toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glory of the lord appeared in the cloud.

16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 i have heard the
murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread;
and ye shall know that i am the lord your god.

16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and
covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of
the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the h
 
 ___________________________
 
oar
frost on the ground.

16:15 and when the children of israel saw it, they said one to
another, it is manna: for they wist not what it was. and moses said
unto them, this is the bread which the lord hath given you to eat.

16:16 this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, gather of it
every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to
the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in
his tents.

16:17 and the children of israel did so, and gathered, some more, some
less.

16:18 and when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much
had nothing over, and he that gathered little had
 
 ___________________________
 
 no lack; they
gathered every man according to his eating.

16:19 and moses said, let no man leave of it till the morning.

16:20 notwithstanding they hearkened not unto moses; but some of them
left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and moses
was wroth with them.

16:21 and they gathered it every morning, every man according to his
eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.

16:22 and it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice
as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the
congregation came and told moses.

16:23 and he said unto them, this is that which the lord hath said, to
morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the lord: bake that which
ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye
 
 ___________________________
 
 will seethe; and that which
remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

16:24 and they laid it up till the morning, as moses bade: and it did
not stink, neither was there any worm therein.

16:25 and moses said, eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto
the lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

16:26 six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is
the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

16:27 and it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on
the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

16:28 and the lord said unto moses, how long refuse ye to keep my
commandments and my laws?  16:29 see, for that the lord hath given you
the sabbath, th
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place
on the seventh day.

16:30 so the people rested on the seventh day.

16:31 and the house of israel called the name thereof manna: and it
was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers
made with honey.

16:32 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commandeth,
fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see
the bread wherewith i have fed you in the wilderness, when i brought
you forth from the land of egypt.

16:33 and moses said unto aaron, take a pot, and put an omer full of
manna therein, and lay it up before the lord, to be kept for your
generations.

16:34 as the lord commanded moses, so aaron laid it up before the
testimony, to be kept.

16:35 and the children 
 
 ___________________________
 
of israel did eat manna forty years, until they
came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
borders of the land of canaan.

16:36 now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 and all the congregation of the children of israel journeyed from
the wilderness of sin, after their journeys, according to the
commandment of the lord, and pitched in rephidim: and there was no
water for the people to drink.

17:2 wherefore the people did chide with moses, and said, give us
water that we may drink. and moses said unto them, why chide ye with
me? wherefore do ye tempt the lord?  17:3 and the people thirsted
there for water; and the people murmured against moses, and said,
wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of egypt, to kill
us and our children and our cattle with thirst?  17:4 and moses cried
unto the lord, saying, what shall i do unto this people? they be
almost ready to stone me.

17:5 and the lord said unto moses, go o
 
 ___________________________
 
n before the people, and take
with thee of the elders of israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest
the river, take in thine hand, and go.

17:6 behold, i will stand before thee there upon the rock in horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the people may drink. and moses did so in the sight of the elders
of israel.

17:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the
lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 so joshua did as moses ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the edge of
the sword.

17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write this for a memorial in a
book, and rehearse it in the ears of joshua: for i will utterly put
out the remembrance of amalek from
 
 ___________________________
 
 under heaven.

17:15 and moses built an altar, and called the name of it
jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, because the lord hath sworn that the
lord will have war with amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses' father in law, heard of
all that god had done for moses, and for israel his people, and that
the lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses'
father in law, took zipporah, moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
18:3 and her two sons; of which the name of the one was gershom; for
he said, i have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 and the name of
the other was eliezer; for the god of my father, said he, was mine
help, and delivered me from the sword of pharaoh: 18:5 and jethro,
moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto moses into
the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of god: 18:6 and he
said unto moses, i thy father in law jethro am 
 
 ___________________________
 
come unto thee, and thy
wife, and her two sons with her.

18:7 and moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance,
and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they
came into the tent.

18:8 and moses told his father in law all that the lord had done unto
pharaoh and to the egyptians for israel's sake, and all the travail
that had come upon them by the way, and how the lord delivered them.

18:9 and jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had done
to israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the egyptians.

18:10 and jethro said, blessed be the lord, who hath delivered you out
of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath
delivered the peo
 
 ___________________________
 
ple from under the hand of the egyptians.

18:11 now i know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 and jethro, moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for god: and aaron came, and all the elders of israel, to
eat bread with moses' father in law before god.

18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses sat to judge the
people: and the people stood by moses from the morning unto the
evening.

18:14 and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
he said, what is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?  18:15 and moses said unto his father in law, because the people
come unto me to enquire of god: 18:16 when they have a matter, they
come unto me; and i judge between one and another, and i do make them
know the statutes of god, and hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s laws.

18:17 and moses' father in law said unto him, the thing that thou
doest is not good.

18:18 thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is
with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to
perform it thyself alone.

18:19 hearken now unto my voice, i will give thee counsel, and god
shall be with thee: be thou for the people to god-ward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto god: 18:20 and thou shalt teach them
ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way where
 
 ___________________________
 
e rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 and let them judge the people at
all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring
unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be
easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 if thou shalt do this thing, and god command thee so, then thou
shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their
place in peace.

18:24 so moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did
all that he had said.

18:25 and moses chose able men out of all israel, and made them heads
over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens.

18:26 and they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they
brought unto moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

18:27 and moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into
his own land.

19:1 in the third 
 
 ___________________________
 
month, when the children of israel were gone forth
out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of sinai.

19:2 for they were departed from rephidim, and were come to the desert
of sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there israel camped
before the mount.

19:3 and moses went up unto god, and the lord called unto him out of
the mountain, saying, thus shalt thou say to the house of jacob, and
tell the children of israel; 19:4 ye have seen what i did unto the
egyptians, and how i bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an
 
 ___________________________
 
 holy nation.

these are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of
israel.

19:7 and moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid
before their faces all these words which the lord commanded him.

19:8 and all the people answered together, and said, all that the lord
hath spoken we will do. and moses returned the words of the people
unto the lord.

19:9 and the lord said unto moses, lo, i come unto thee in a thick
cloud, that the people may hear when i speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever.

and moses told the words of the people unto the lord.

19:10 and the lord said unto moses, go unto the people, and sanctify
them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 and
be ready against the third day: for the third day the lord will come
down in the sight of all the people upon mount sinai.

19:12 and thou shalt set bounds unto the people round
 
 ___________________________
 
 about, saying,
take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch
the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to
death: 19:13 there shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be
stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not
live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

19:14 and moses went down from the mount unto the people, and
sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

19:15 and he said unto the people, be ready against the third day:
come not at your wives.

19:16 and it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and
the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that
was in the camp trembled.

19:17 and moses brought forth the people out of the camp to m
 
 ___________________________
 
eet with
god; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 and mount sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the lord
descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

19:19 and when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder
and louder, moses spake, and god answered him by a voice.

19:20 and the lord came down upon mount sinai, on the top of the
mount: and the lord called moses up to the top of the mount; and moses
went up.

19:21 and the lord said unto moses, go down, charge the people, lest
they break through unto the lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

19:22 and let the priests also, which come near to the lord, sanctify
themselves, lest the lord break forth upon them.

19:23 and moses said unto the lord, the people cannot come up to mount
sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and
sanctify it.

19:24 and the lord said un
 
 ___________________________
 
to him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt
come up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 so moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 i am the lord thy
god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

20:3 thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve t
 
 ___________________________
 
lt not steal.

20:16 thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

20:17 thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

20:18 and all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the
people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 and they said unto moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not god speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 and moses said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin
not.

20:21 and the people stood afar off, and moses drew near unto the
thick darkness where god was.

20:22 and the lord said unto moses, thus thou shalt say unto the
children of israel, ye have seen that i have talked with you from
heaven.

20:23 ye shall not make 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and inherit the land.

23:31 and i will set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea of
the philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for i will
deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
drive them out before thee.

23:32 thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron,
nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 and moses alone shall come near the lord: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 and moses came and told the people all the words of the lord, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and
said, all the words which the lord hath said will we do.

24:4 and moses wrote all the words of the lord, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 rose up early in
the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars,
according to the twelve tribes of israel.

24:5 and he sent young men of the children of israel, which offered
burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the lord.

24:6 and moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half
of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of
the people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and
be obedient.

24:8 and moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy 
 
 ___________________________
 
of
the elders of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which i have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and moses rose up, and his minister joshua: and moses went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a
 
 ___________________________
 
 cloud covered the mount.

24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of israel.

24:18 and moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into
the mount: and moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that
giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.

25:3 and this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and
silver, and brass, 25:4 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 25:5 and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 oil for the
 
 ___________________________
 
urn incense
upon it, a perpetual incense before the lord throughout your
generations.

30:9 ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice,
nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

30:10 and aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the
year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it
is most holy unto the lord.

30:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:12 when thou takest
the sum of the children of israel after their number, then shall they
give every man a ransom for his soul unto the lord, when thou
numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou
numberest them.

30:13 this they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are
numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel
is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the lord.

30:14 every one that passeth among t
 
 ___________________________
 
ive an offering unto the lord.

30:15 the rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the lord, to make
an atonement for your souls.

30:16 and thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of
israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of israel
before the lord, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:18 thou shalt also
make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and
thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 for aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat: 30:20 when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near
to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the lord:

 
 ___________________________
 
30:21 so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die
not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to
his seed throughout their generations.

30:22 moreover the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:23 take thou also
unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of
sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and
of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 30:24 and of cassia
five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil
olive an hin: 30:25 and thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an
ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy
anointing oil.

30:26 and thou shalt anoin
 
 ___________________________
 
to me in the priest's office.

30:31 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, this
shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make
any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it
shall be holy unto you.

30:33 whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of
it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.

30:34 and the lord said unto moses, take unto thee sweet spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure
frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 and thou
shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary,
tempered together, pure and holy: 30:36 and thou shalt beat some of it
very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of
the congregation, where i will meet with thee: it shall be unto you
most holy.

30:37 and as for the perfume which thou 
 
 ___________________________
 
shalt make, ye shall not make
to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto
thee holy for the lord.

30:38 whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
even be cut off from his people.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 see, i have called by
name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah:
31:3 and i have filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31:4 to devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, 31:5 and in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of
timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 and i, behold, i have given with him aholiab, the son of
ah
 
 ___________________________
 
e table and his furniture, and
the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
31:9 and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the
laver and his foot, 31:10 and the cloths of service, and the holy
garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office, 31:11 and the anointing oil, and
sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that i have
commanded thee shall they do.

31:12 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:13 speak thou also
unto the children of israel, saying, verily my sabbaths ye shall keep:
for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that
ye may know that i am the lord that doth sanctify you.

31:14 ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you:
every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever
doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his
people.

31:15 six days may work be done; but in the sev
 
 ___________________________
 
enth is the sabbath of
rest, holy to the lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day,
he shall surely be put to death.

31:16 wherefore the children of israel shall keep the sabbath, to
observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for
in six days the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of god.

32:1 and when the people saw that moses delayed to come down out of
the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto aaron, and
said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for
this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we
wot not what is become of him.

32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the
 
 ___________________________
 
ashioned it with a
graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these
be thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and aaron
made proclamation, and said, to morrow is a feast to the lord.

32:6 and they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt
offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrupted
themselves: 32:8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which i
commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, these be thy gods, o
israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:9 and the lord said unto moses, i have seen this people, and,
behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 now therefore l
 
 ___________________________
 
et me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that i may consume them:
and i will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
32:12 wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.

32:13 remember abraham, isaac, and israel, thy servants, to who
 
 ___________________________
 
m thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, i will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 and the tables were the work of god, and the writing was the
writing of god, graven upon the tables.

32:17 and when joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
he said unto moses, there is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for ma
 
 ___________________________
 
stery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do i hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' anger waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made
the children of israel drink of it.

32:21 and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 and aaron said, let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are set o
 
 ___________________________
 
n mischief.

32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us:
for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 and i said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off. so they gave it me: then i cast it into the fire, and there came
out this calf.

32:25 and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then
moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord's
side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of levi gathered
themselves together unto him.

32:27 and he said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 and the children of levi did according to the word of moses: and
there fell of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the people that day about three thousand men.

32:29 for moses had said, consecrate yourselves today to the lord,
even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow
upon you a blessing this day.

32:30 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses said unto the
people, ye have sinned a great sin: and now i will go up unto the
lord; peradventure i shall make an atonement for your sin.

32:31 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, oh, this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

32:32 yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me,
i pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoever hath sinned against me,
him will i blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the d
 
 ___________________________
 
ay when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i 
 
 ___________________________
 
consume thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 for the lord had said unto moses, say unto the children of
israel, ye are a stiffnecked people: i will come up into the midst of
thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy
ornaments from thee, that i may know what to do unto thee.

33:6 and the children of israel stripped themselves of their ornaments
by the mount horeb.

33:7 and moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp,
afar off from the camp, and called it the tabernacle of the
congregation. and it came to pass, that every one 
 
 ___________________________
 
which sought the
lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was
without the camp.

33:8 and it came to pass, when moses went out unto the tabernacle,
that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and
looked after moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 and it came to pass, as moses entered into the tabernacle, the
cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and
the lord talked with moses.

33:10 and all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle
door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent
door.

33:11 and the lord spake unto moses face to face, as a man speaketh
unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp: but his servant
joshua, the son of nun, a young man, departed not out of the
tabernacle.

33:12 and moses said unto the lord, see, thou sayest unto me, bring up
this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wi
 
 ___________________________
 
in
thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.

33:14 and he said, my presence shall go with thee, and i will give
thee rest.

33:15 and he said unto him, if thy presence go not with me, carry us
not up hence.

33:16 for wherein shall it be known here that i and thy people have
found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so
shall we be separated, i and thy people, from all the people that are
upon the face of the earth.

33:17 and the lord said unto moses, i will do this thing also that
thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and i know
thee by name.

33:18 and he said, i beseech thee, shew me thy glory.

33:19 and he said, i will make all my goodness pass before thee, and i
will proclaim the name of the lord before thee; and will be gracious
to whom i will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom i will shew
mercy.

33:20 and he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man
see me, and live.

33:21 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord said, behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 and it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that i will put thee in a clift of the rock, and
will cover thee with my hand while i pass by: 33:23 and i will take
away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall
not be seen.

34:1 and the lord said unto moses, hew thee two tables of stone like
unto the first: and i will write upon these tables the words that were
in the first tables, which thou brakest.

34:2 and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto
mount sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

34:3 and no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen
throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before
that mount.

34:4 and he hewed two tables of stone like unto th
 
 ___________________________
 
e first; and moses
rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount sinai, as the
lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

34:5 and the lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the name of the lord.

34:6 and the lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the lord, the
lord god, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, 34:7 keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll by no means clear
the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.

34:8 and moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and
worshipped.

34:9 and he said, if now i have found grace in thy sight, o lord, let
my lord, i pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and
pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

34:10 and he said, behold, i make a covenant: before all thy people i
will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in
any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work
of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ons before thee, and enlarge thy
borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up
to appear before the lord thy god thrice in the year.

34:25 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven;
neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto
the morning.

34:26 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto
the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

34:27 and the lord said unto moses, write thou these words: for after
the tenor of these words i have made a covenant with thee and with
israel.

34:28 and he was there with the lord forty days and forty nights; he
did neither eat bread, nor drink water. and he wrote upon the tables
the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 and it came to pass, when moses came down from mount sinai with
the two tables of testimony in moses' hand, when he came down from the
mount, that moses wist not that the skin of his f
 
 ___________________________
 
ace shone while he
talked with him.

34:30 and when aaron and all the children of israel saw moses, behold,
the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 and moses called unto them; and aaron and all the rulers of the
congregation returned unto him: and moses talked with them.

34:32 and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave
them in commandment all that the lord had spoken with him in mount
sinai.

34:33 and till moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
face.

34:34 but when moses went in before the lord to speak with him, he
took the vail off, until he came out. and he came out, and spake unto
the children of israel that which he was commanded.

34:35 and the children of israel saw the face of moses, that the skin
of moses' face shone: and moses put the vail upon his face again,
until he went in to speak with him.

35:1 and moses gathered all the congregation of the children of isra
 
 ___________________________
 
el
together, and said unto them, these are the words which the lord hath
commanded, that ye should do them.

35:2 six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall
be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the lord: whosoever doeth
work therein shall be put to death.

35:3 ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the
sabbath day.

35:4 and moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of
israel, saying, this is the thing which the lord commanded, saying,
35:5 take ye from among you an offering unto the lord: whosoever is of
a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the lord; gold, and
silver, and brass, 35:6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 35:7 and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 and oil for the light, and spices for
anointing oil, and for the s
 
 ___________________________
 
es, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17
the hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the
hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 the pins of the tabernacle,
and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 the cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for aaron
the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
office.

35:20 and all the congregation of the children of israel departed from
the presence of moses.

35:21 and they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every
one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the lord's offering
to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his
service, and for the holy garments.

35:22 and they came, both men and women, as many as were willing
hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets,
all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of
gold unto the lord.

35:23 and every
 
 ___________________________
 
35:26 and all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun
goats' hair.

35:27 and the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for
the ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 and spice, and oil for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 the children of israel brought a willing offering unto the lord,
every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
manner of work, which the lord had commanded to be made by the hand of
moses.

35:30 and moses said unto the children of israel, see, the lord hath
called by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe
of judah; 35:31 and he hath filled him with the spirit of god, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship; 35:32 and to devise curious works, to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, 35:33 and in the cutting of stones, to set
them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

35:34 and he h
 
 ___________________________
 
rt, to work all manner of
work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the
embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen,
and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that
devise cunning work.

36:1 then wrought bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in
whom the lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all
manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that
the lord had commanded.

36:2 and moses called bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted
man, in whose heart the lord had put wisdom, even every one whose
heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 and they
received of moses all the offering, which the children of israel had
brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it
withal. and they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.

36:4 and all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
came every man from his work whi
 
 ___________________________
 
ch they made; 36:5 and they spake unto
moses, saying, the people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work, which the lord commanded to make.

36:6 and moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed
throughout the camp, saying, let neither man nor woman make any more
work for the offering of the sanctuary. so the people were restrained
from bringing.

36:7 for the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make
it, and too much.

36:8 and every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of
the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and
purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made
 
 ___________________________
 

cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits,
answerable to the hangings of the court.

38:19 and their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four;
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their
fillets of silver.

38:20 and all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round
about, were of brass.

38:21 this is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of
testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of moses,
for the service of the levites, by the hand of ithamar, son to aaron
the priest.

38:22 and bezaleel the son uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah,
made all that the lord commanded moses.

38:23 and with him was aholiab, son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan,
an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in
purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 all the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of
the holy place, even the gold of the off
 
 ___________________________
 
ith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for
it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 and the sockets of the
court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins
of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

39:1 and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments
for aaron; as the lord commanded moses.

39:2 and he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen.

39:3 and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cunning work.

39:4 they made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the
two edges was it coupled together.

39:5 and the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the
same, according to the work thereof; of
 
 ___________________________
 
 gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the lord commanded moses.

39:6 and they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven,
as signets are graven, with the names of the children of israel.

39:7 and he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should
be stones for a memorial to the children of israel; as the lord
commanded moses.

39:8 and he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the
ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

39:9 it was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was
the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.

39:10 and they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a
sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.

39:11 and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

39:12 and the
 
 ___________________________
 
ich was on the side of the
ephod inward.

39:20 and they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two
sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against
the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

39:21 and they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of
the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious
girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from
the ephod; as the lord commanded moses.

39:22 and he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

39:23 and there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of
an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not
rend.

39:24 and they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

39:25 and they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the
pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
pomegranates; 39:26 a bell 
 
 ___________________________
 
and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the
lord commanded moses.

39:27 and they made coats of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and
for his sons, 39:28 and a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of
fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 and a
girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of
needlework; as the lord commanded moses.

39:30 and they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and
wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, holiness
to the lord.

39:31 and they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon
the mitre; as the lord commanded moses.

39:32 thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation finished: and the children of israel did according to all
that the lord commanded moses, so did they.

39:33 and they brought the tabernacle unto
 
 ___________________________
 
 moses, the tent, and all
his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and
his sockets, 39:34 and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the
covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 the
ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
39:36 the table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37
the pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to
be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil fo
 
 ___________________________
 
of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the
laver and his foot, 39:40 the hangings of the court, his pillars, and
his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his
pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the
tent of the congregation, 39:41 the cloths of service to do service in
the holy place, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

39:42 according to all that the lord commanded moses, so the children
of israel made all the work.

39:43 and moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done
it as the lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and moses
blessed them.

40:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 40:2 on the first day of
the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

40:3 and thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover
the ark with the vail.

40:4 and thou shalt bring in the table, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 and thou shalt put upon aaron the holy garments, and anoint him,
and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

40:14 and thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15
and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing
shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their
generations.

40:16 thus did moses: according to all that the lord commanded him, so
did he.

40:17 and it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on
the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.

40:18 and moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets,
and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared
up his pillars.

40:19 and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the
covering of the tent above upon it; as the lord commanded moses.

40:2
 
 ___________________________
 
0 and he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the
staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 40:21
and he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the
covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:22 and he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the
side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.

40:23 and he set the bread in order upon it before the lord; as the
lord had commanded moses.

40:24 and he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over
against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.

40:25 and he lighted the lamps before the lord; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:26 and he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation
before the vail: 40:27 and he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:28 and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 and he put the altar of burnt offering by the do
 
 ___________________________
 
or of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the
burnt offering and the meat offering; as the lord commanded moses.

40:30 and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 and moses and aaron and his sons washed their hands and their
feet thereat: 40:32 when they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:33 and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. so moses finished the
work.

40:34 then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory
of the lord filled the tabernacle.

40:35 and moses was not able to enter into the tent of the
congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the
lord filled the tabernacle.

40:36 and when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the
childr
 
 ___________________________
 
en of israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 but if the
cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it
was taken up.

40:38 for the cloud of the lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of israel,
throughout all their journeys.




the third book of moses:  called leviticus


1:1 and the lord called unto moses, and spake unto him out of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 1:2 speak unto the children of
israel, and say unto them, if any man of you bring an offering unto
the lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the
herd, and of the flock.

1:3 if his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord.

1:4 and he shall put his
 
 ___________________________
 
all the fat
that is upon the inwards, 3:15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver,
with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:16 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the
lord's.

3:17 it shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout
all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:2 speak unto the children
of israel, saying, if a soul shall sin through ignorance against any
of the commandments of the lord concerning things which ought not to
be done, and shall do against any of them: 4:3 if the priest that is
anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish
unto the lord for a sin offering.

4:4 and he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of
the
 
 ___________________________
 
ncense thereon: for it is a
sin offering.

5:12 then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take
his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar,
according to the offerings made by fire unto the lord: it is a sin
offering.

5:13 and the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his
sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him:
and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.

5:14 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:15 if a soul commit a
trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the lord;
then he shall bring for his trespass unto the lord a ram without
blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.

5:16 and he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the
holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the
priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him 
 
 ___________________________
 
n to be done by the commandments of the lord; though he wist
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.

5:18 and he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with
thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance
wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:19 it is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against
the lord.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 if a soul sin, and
commit a trespass against the lord, and lie unto his neighbour in that
which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken
away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour; 6:3 or have found
that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in
any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: 6:4 then it shall
be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that
which he took violently away, or the th
 
 ___________________________
 
principal, and shall add the fifth part
more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day
of his trespass offering.

6:6 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord, a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: 6:7 and the priest shall make an atonement
for him before the lord: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of
all that he hath done in trespassing therein.

6:8 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:9 command aaron and his
sons, saying, this is the law of the burnt offering: it is the burnt
offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.

6:10 and the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen
breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the
fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall
put them beside the altar.

6:11 and he shall put of
 
 ___________________________
 
urt of
the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

6:17 it shall not be baken with leaven. i have given it unto them for
their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

6:18 all the males among the children of aaron shall eat of it. it
shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the
offerings of the lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall
be holy.

6:19 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:20 this is the offering
of aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the lord in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for
a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof
at night.

6:21 in a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou
shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt
thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord.

6:22 and the priest of his sons that is anointed in
 
 ___________________________
 
 his stead shall
offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the lord; it shall be wholly
burnt.

6:23 for every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it
shall not be eaten.

6:24 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:25 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, saying, this is the law of the sin offering: in the place
where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed
before the lord: it is most holy.

6:26 the priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy
place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

6:27 whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou sh
 
 ___________________________
 
 the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
offerings, that pertain unto the lord, having his uncleanness upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:21 moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the
uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean
thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which
pertain unto the lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.

7:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:23 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or
of sheep, or of goat.

7:24 and the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of
that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye
shall in no wise eat of it.

7:25 for whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord, even the soul that eateth it
shall be cut off from his people.

7:26 moreover ye shall eat no 
 
 ___________________________
 
manner of blood, whether it be of fowl
or of beast, in any of your dwellings.

7:27 whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that
soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:28 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:29 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, he that offereth the sacrifice of his
peace offerings unto the lord shall bring his oblation unto the lord
of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.

7:30 his own hands shall bring the offerings of the lord made by fire,
the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
waved for a wave offering before the lord.

7:31 and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
shall be aaron's and his sons'.
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord made by fire,
in the day when he presented them to minister unto the lord in the
priest's office; 7:36 which the lord commanded to be given them of the
children of israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for
ever throughout their generations.

7:37 this is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and
of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings; 7:38 which
the lord commanded moses in mount sinai, in the day that he commanded
the children of israel to offer their oblations unto the lord, in the
wilderness of sinai.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 take aaron and his sons
with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for
the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 8:3
and gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

8:4 and moses did as the lord commanded hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m; and the assembly was
gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

8:5 and moses said unto the congregation, this is the thing which the
lord commanded to be done.

8:6 and moses brought aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.

8:7 and he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and
clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith.

8:8 and he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the
breastplate the urim and the thummim.

8:9 and he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon
his forefront, did he put the golden plate, th
 
 ___________________________
 
e holy crown; as the
lord commanded moses.

8:10 and moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and
all that was therein, and sanctified them.

8:11 and he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to
sanctify them.

8:12 and he poured of the anointing oil upon aaron's head, and
anointed him, to sanctify him.

8:13 and moses brought aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and
girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:14 and he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin
offering.

8:15 and he slew it; and moses took the blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the
altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified
it, t
 
 ___________________________
 
o make reconciliation upon it.

8:16 and he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul
above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and moses burned
it upon the altar.

8:17 but the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt
with fire without the camp; as the lord commanded moses.

8:18 and he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and aaron and his
sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:19 and he killed it; and moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar
round about.

8:20 and he cut the ram into pieces; and moses burnt the head, and the
pieces, and the fat.

8:21 and he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and moses burnt
the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet
savour, and an offering made by fire unto the lord; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:22 and he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and aaron
and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.
 
 ___________________________
 


8:23 and he slew it; and moses took of the blood of it, and put it
upon the tip of aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

8:24 and he brought aaron's sons, and moses put of the blood upon the
tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and
upon the great toes of their right feet: and moses sprinkled the blood
upon the altar round about.

8:25 and he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon
the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and
their fat, and the right shoulder: 8:26 and out of the basket of
unleavened bread, that was before the lord, he took one unleavened
cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the
fat, and upon the right shoulder: 8:27 and he put all upon aaron's
hands, and upon his sons' hands, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 waved them for a wave offering
before the lord.

8:28 and moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet
savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

8:29 and moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering
before the lord: for of the ram of consecration it was moses' part; as
the lord commanded moses.

8:30 and moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was
upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and
sanctified aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

8:31 and moses said unto aaron and to his sons, boil the flesh at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the
bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as i commanded, saying,
aaron and his
 
 ___________________________
 
cle of the
congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at
an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

8:34 as he hath done this day, so the lord hath commanded to do, to
make an atonement for you.

8:35 therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the
lord, that ye die not: for so i am commanded.

8:36 so aaron and his sons did all things which the lord commanded by
the hand of moses.

9:1 and it came to pass on the eighth day, that moses called aaron and
his sons, and the elders of israel; 9:2 and he said unto aaron, take
thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
without blemish, and offer them before the lord.

9:3 and unto the children of israel thou shalt speak, saying, take ye
a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of
the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 9:4 also a
bullock and a ram for
 
 ___________________________
 
 peace offerings, to sacrifice before the lord;
and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the lord will appear
unto you.

9:5 and they brought that which moses commanded before the tabernacle
of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood
before the lord.

9:6 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commanded that ye
should do: and the glory of the lord shall appear unto you.

9:7 and moses said unto aaron, go unto the altar, and offer thy sin
offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself,
and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an
atonement for them; as the lord commanded.

9:8 aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself.

9:9 and the sons of aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped
his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and
poured out 
 
 ___________________________
 
the blood at the bottom of the altar: 9:10 but the fat, and
the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he
burnt upon the altar; as the lord commanded moses.

9:11 and the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

9:12 and he slew the burnt offering; and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.

9:13 and they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces
thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

9:14 and he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the
burnt offering on the altar.

9:15 and he brought the people's offering, and took th
 
 ___________________________
 
llock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, which was for the people: and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 9:19 and
the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
9:20 and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon
the altar: 9:21 and the breasts and the right shoulder aaron waved for
a wave offering before the lord; as moses commanded.

9:22 and aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them,
and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt
offering, and peace offerings.

9:23 and moses and aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the people.

9:24 and there came a fire out from before the lord, and consumed upon
the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people
saw,
 
 ___________________________
 
 they shouted, and fell on their faces.

10:1 and nadab and abihu, the sons of aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered
strange fire before the lord, which he commanded them not.

10:2 and there went out fire from the lord, and devoured them, and
they died before the lord.

10:3 then moses said unto aaron, this is it that the lord spake,
saying, i will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people i will be glorified. and aaron held his peace.

10:4 and moses called mishael and elzaphan, the sons of uzziel the
uncle of aaron, and said unto them, come near, carry your brethren
from before the sanctuary out of the camp.

10:5 so they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the
camp; as moses had said.

10:6 and moses said unto aaron, and un
 
 ___________________________
 
to eleazar and unto ithamar, his
sons, uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
whole house of israel, bewail the burning which the lord hath kindled.

10:7 and ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the lord is upon
you. and they did according to the word of moses.

10:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, saying, 10:9 do not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for
ever throughout your generations: 10:10 and that ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 10:11 and that
ye may teach the children of israel all the statutes which the lord
hath spoken unto them by the hand of moses.

10:12 and moses spake unto
 
 ___________________________
 
t and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be
thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of
peace offerings of the children of israel.

10:15 the heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
before the lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
statute for ever; as the lord hath commanded.

10:16 and moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with eleazar and ithamar, the
sons of aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy,
and god hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the lord?  10:18 behold, the blood of
it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy pla
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, as i commanded.

10:19 and aaron said unto moses, behold, this day have they offered
their sin offering and their burnt offering before the lord; and such
things have befallen me: and if i had eaten the sin offering to day,
should it have been accepted in the sight of the lord?  10:20 and when
moses heard that, he was content.

11:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying unto them,
11:2 speak unto the children of israel, saying, these are the beasts
which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.

11:3 whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

11:4 nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:5 and the c
 
 ___________________________
 
creepeth upon
the earth.

11:45 for i am the lord that bringeth you up out of the land of egypt,
to be your god: ye shall therefore be holy, for i am holy.

11:46 this is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 to make a difference between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 12:2 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, if a woman have conceived seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days
of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.

12:3 and in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised.

12:4 and she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three
and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
sanctuary, until the days of her purifying b
 
 ___________________________
 
he congregation, unto the priest:
12:7 who shall offer it before the lord, and make an atonement for
her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. this is
the law for her that hath born a male or a female.

12:8 and if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
her, and she shall be clean.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, saying, 13:2 when a man
shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he
shall be brought unto aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the
priests: 13:3 and the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of
the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the
plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on h
 
 ___________________________
 
spreading plague: thou shalt burn that
wherein the plague is with fire.

13:58 and the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of
skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from
them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.

13:59 this is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen
or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to
pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 this shall be the law
of the leper in the day of his cleansing: he shall be brought unto the
priest: 14:3 and the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the
priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in
the leper; 14:4 then shall the priest command to take for him that is
to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop: 14:5 and the priest shall command that one of the birds be
killed in an earthen vessel over ru
 
 ___________________________
 
e the lord.

14:30 and he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 even such as he is able to get, the
one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is
to be cleansed before the lord.

14:32 this is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.

14:33 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:34 when
ye be come into the land of canaan, which i give to you for a
possession, and i put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
your possession; 14:35 and he that owneth the house shall come and
tell the priest, saying, it seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 then the priest shall command that they empty the
house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
is in the house be not made unclean: and afterwa
 
 ___________________________
 
, and with the hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 but he shall let go the living bird out of the
city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it
shall be clean.

14:54 this is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 and for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 and for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 to teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying, 15:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when any man hath a
running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.

15:3 and this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh
run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
uncleanness.

15:4 every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

15:5 and whosoever toucheth his bed shall
 
 ___________________________
 
e of her uncleanness.

15:31 thus shall ye separate the children of israel from their
uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
my tabernacle that is among them.

15:32 this is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 15:33 and of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

16:1 and the lord spake unto moses after the death of the two sons of
aaron, when they offered before the lord, and died; 16:2 and the lord
said unto moses, speak unto aaron thy brother, that he come not at all
times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which
is upon the ark; that he die not: for i will appear in the cloud upon
the mercy seat.

16:3 thus shall aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock
for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

16:4 he shall put on the holy lin
 
 ___________________________
 
ke the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the
holy garments: 16:33 and he shall make an atonement for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

16:34 and this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an
atonement for the children of israel for all their sins once a year.
and he did as the lord commanded moses.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto aaron, and
unto his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto them;
this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, saying, 17:3 what man
soever there be of the house of israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb,
or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, 17:4 and
bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to offer an offering unto the lord before the tabernacle of the lord;

 
 ___________________________
 
 no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the
blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.

17:15 and every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that
which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or
a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

17:16 but if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear
his iniquity.

18:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, i am the lord your god.

18:3 after the doings of the land of egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of canaan, whither i bring
you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

18:4 ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein: i am the lord your god.

18:5 ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a
man do, he shall liv
 
 ___________________________
 
defiled;) 18:28 that the land spue not you out also, when
ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.

18:29 for whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the
souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

18:30 therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any
one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and
that ye defile not yourselves therein: i am the lord your god.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 19:2 speak unto all the
congregation of the children of israel, and say unto them, ye shall be
holy: for i the lord your god am holy.

19:3 ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
sabbaths: i am the lord your god.

19:4 turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: i am
the lord your god.

19:5 and if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the lord, ye
shall offer it at your own will.

19:6 it shall be eaten the same day ye offer
 
 ___________________________
 
n among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
strangers in the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

19:35 ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in
weight, or in measure.

19:36 just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
ye have: i am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt.

19:37 therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my
judgments, and do them: i am the lord.

20:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:2 again, thou shalt say
to the children of israel, whosoever he be of the children of israel,
or of the strangers that sojourn in israel, that giveth any of his
seed unto molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the
land shall stone him with stones.

20:3 and i will set my face against that man, and will cut him off
from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto molech,
to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.

20:4 and if the peopl
 
 ___________________________
 
 not make
your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living
thing that creepeth on the ground, which i have separated from you as
unclean.

20:26 and ye shall be holy unto me: for i the lord am holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 a man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with
stones: their blood shall be upon them.

21:1 and the lord said unto moses, speak unto the priests the sons of
aaron, and say unto them, there shall none be defiled for the dead
among his people: 21:2 but for his kin, that is near unto him, that
is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his
daughter, and for his brother.

21:3 and for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 but he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his
people, to profane himself.

21:5 the
 
 ___________________________
 
 his mother; 21:12 neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his god; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his god is upon him: i am the lord.

21:13 and he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to
wife.

21:15 neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for i the
lord do sanctify him.

21:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 21:17 speak unto aaron,
saying, whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his god.

21:18 for whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
thing superfluous, 21:19 or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones brok
 
 ___________________________
 
en; 21:21
no man that hath a blemish of the seed of aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the lord made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his god.

21:22 he shall eat the bread of his god, both of the most holy, and of
the holy.

21:23 only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries:
for i the lord do sanctify them.

21:24 and moses told it unto aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of israel.

22:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:2 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the
children of israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those
things which they hallow unto me: i am the lord.

22:3 say unto them, whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of
israel hallow unto the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of her father's meat: but there shall be no stranger eat
thereof.

22:14 and if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest
with the holy thing.

22:15 and they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
israel, which they offer unto the lord; 22:16 or suffer them to bear
the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for i the
lord do sanctify them.

22:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:18 speak unto aaron,
and to his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto
them, whatsoever he be of the house of israel, or of the strangers in
israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his
freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the lord for a burnt
offering; 22:19 ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20 but whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: f
 
 ___________________________
 
s or
lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering;
but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

22:24 ye shall not offer unto the lord that which is bruised, or
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof
in your land.

22:25 neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your
god of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and
blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

22:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:27 when a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accepted for an offering made by fire unto the lord.

22:28 and whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 and when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
lord, offer it at your own will.

22:30 on the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
until 
 
 ___________________________
 
the morrow: i am the lord.

22:31 therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: i am the
lord.

22:32 neither shall ye profane my holy name; but i will be hallowed
among the children of israel: i am the lord which hallow you, 22:33
that brought you out of the land of egypt, to be your god: i am the
lord.

23:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, concerning the feasts of the
lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are
my feasts.

23:3 six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the lord in all your dwellings.

23:4 these are the feasts of the lord, even holy convocations, which
ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

23:5 in the fourteen
 
 ___________________________
 
th day of the first month at even is the lord's
passover.

23:6 and on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleavened bread unto the lord: seven days ye must eat unleavened
bread.

23:7 in the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do
no servile work therein.

23:8 but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord seven
days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
which i give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the
priest: 23:11 and he shall wave the sheaf before the lord, to be
accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wave it.

23:12 and ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offe
 
 ___________________________
 
laim on the selfsame day, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it
shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

23:22 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: i am the lord your god.

23:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:24 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, in the seventh month, in the first day of
the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets,
an holy convocation.

23:25 ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord.

23:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:27 also on the tenth
day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict 
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall be cut off from among his people.

23:30 and whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,
the same soul will i destroy from among his people.

23:31 ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

23:32 it shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto
even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

23:33 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:34 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, the fifteenth day of this seventh month
shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the lord.

23:35 on the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:36 seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
lord: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye
shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord: it is a solemn
assembly; and ye shall do no ser
 
 ___________________________
 
 rejoice before the lord your god
seven days.

23:41 and ye shall keep it a feast unto the lord seven days in the
year.

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 that your generations may know that
i made the children of israel to dwell in booths, when i brought them
out of the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

23:44 and moses declared unto the children of israel the feasts of the
lord.

24:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:2 command the children
of israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

24:3 without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shall aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
before the lord continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations.

24:4 he shall order the 
 
 ___________________________
 


24:9 and it shall be aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in
the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the
lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.

24:10 and the son of an israelitish woman, whose father was an
egyptian, went out among the children of israel: and this son of the
israelitish woman and a man of israel strove together in the camp;
24:11 and the israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the lord,
and cursed. and they brought him unto moses: (and his mother's name
was shelomith, the daughter of dibri, of the tribe of dan:) 24:12 and
they put him in ward, that the mind of the lord might be shewed them.

24:13 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:14 bring forth him
that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.

24:15 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying,
whosoever curseth his god shall bear his sin.

24:16 and h
 
 ___________________________
 
st for beast.

24:19 and if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done,
so shall it be done to him; 24:20 breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be
done to him again.

24:21 and he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for i am the lord your god.

24:23 and moses spake to the children of israel, that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. and the children of israel did as the lord commanded moses.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses in mount sinai, saying, 25:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the
land which i give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
lord.

25:3 six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt
prune thy vineyard, an
 
 ___________________________
 
enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will i abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for i am the lord their
god.

26:45 but i will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors, whom i brought forth out of the land of egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that i might be their god: i am the lord.

26:46 these are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the lord
made between him and the children of israel in mount sinai by the hand
of moses.

27:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when a man shall make a
singular vow, the persons shall be for the lord by thy estimation.

27:3 and thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old
even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels
of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

27:4 and if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty
shekels.

27:5 and if it be from five yea
 
 ___________________________
 
 and if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.

27:32 and concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of
whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
lord.

27:33 he shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change
thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

27:34 these are the commandments, which the lord commanded moses for
the children of israel in mount sinai.




the fourth book of moses:  called numbers


1:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of egypt,
saying, 1:2 take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the
number of their names, every male by their polls
 
 ___________________________
 
the son of helon.

1:10 of the children of joseph: of ephraim; elishama the son of
ammihud: of manasseh; gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

1:11 of benjamin; abidan the son of gideoni.

1:12 of dan; ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

1:13 of asher; pagiel the son of ocran.

1:14 of gad; eliasaph the son of deuel.

1:15 of naphtali; ahira the son of enan.

1:16 these were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in israel.

1:17 and moses and aaron took these men which are expressed by their
names: 1:18 and they assembled all the congregation together on the
first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 as the lord commanded moses, so he numbered them in the
wilderness of sinai.

1:20 and the children of reuben, israel's eldest son, by their
generations, a
 
 ___________________________
 
ere numbered of them, even of the tribe
of asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 of the children of naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
go forth to war; 1:43 those that were numbered of them, even of the
tribe of naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 these are those that were numbered, which moses and aaron
numbered, and the princes of israel, being twelve men: each one was
for the house of his fathers.

1:45 so were all those that were numbered of the children of israel,
by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in israel; 1:46 even all they that
were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty.

1:47 but the levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.
 
 ___________________________
 


1:48 for the lord had spoken unto moses, saying, 1:49 only thou shalt
not number the tribe of levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of israel: 1:50 but thou shalt appoint the levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over
all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle.

1:51 and when the tabernacle setteth forward, the levites shall take
it down: and wh
 
 ___________________________
 
stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

1:52 and the children of israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 but the levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of israel: and the levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

1:54 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses, so did they.

2:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 2:2 every
man of the children of israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.

2:3 and on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of judah pitch throughout their armies: and
nahshon the son of amminadab shall be captain of the children of
judah.

2:4 and his host, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
l they that were numbered in the camp of dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. they shall go
hindmost with their standards.

2:32 these are those which were numbered of the children of israel by
the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty.

2:33 but the levites were not numbered among the children of israel;
as the lord commanded moses.

2:34 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers.

3:1 these also are the generations of aaron and moses in the day that
the lord spake with moses in mount sinai.

3:2 and these are the names of the sons of aaron; nadab the firstborn,
and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

3:3 these are the names of the sons of aaron, t
 
 ___________________________
 
he priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.

3:4 and nadab and abihu died before the lord, when they offered
strange fire before the lord, in the wilderness of sinai, and they had
no children: and eleazar and ithamar ministered in the priest's office
in the sight of aaron their father.

3:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:6 bring the tribe of levi
near, and present them before aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him.

3:7 and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:8 and they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:9 and thou shalt give the levites unto aaron 
 
 ___________________________
 
and to his sons: they
are wholly given unto him out of the children of israel.

3:10 and thou shalt appoint aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death.

3:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:12 and i, behold, i have
taken the levites from among the children of israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of israel:
therefore the levites shall be mine; 3:13 because all the firstborn
are mine; for on the day that i smote all the firstborn in the land of
egypt i hallowed unto me all the firstborn in israel, both man and
beast: mine shall they be: i am the lord.

3:14 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, saying,
 
 ___________________________
 

3:15 number the children of levi after the house of their fathers, by
their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou
number them.

3:16 and moses numbered them according to the word of the lord, as he
was commanded.

3:17 and these were the sons of levi by their names; gershon, and
kohath, and merari.

3:18 and these are the names of the sons of gershon by their families;
libni, and shimei.

3:19 and the sons of kohath by their families; amram, and izehar,
hebron, and uzziel.

3:20 and the sons of merari by their families; mahli, and mushi. these
are the families of the levites according to the house of their
fathers.

3:
 
 ___________________________
 

the tabernacle northward.

3:36 and under the custody and charge of the sons of merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 and the pillars of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

3:38 but those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be moses,
and aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the
charge of the children of israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.

3:39 all that were numbered of the levites, which moses and aaron
numbered at the commandment of the lord, throughout their families,
all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two
thousand.

3:40 and the lord said unto moses, number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of israel from a month old and
 
 ___________________________
 
 upward, and take
the number of their names.

3:41 and thou shalt take the levites for me (i am the lord) instead of
all the firstborn among the children of israel; and the cattle of the
levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children
of israel.

3:42 and moses numbered, as the lord commanded him, all the firstborn
among the children of israel.

3:43 and all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month
old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and
two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.

3:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:45 take the levites
instead of all the firstborn among the children of israel, and the
cattle of the levites instead of their cattle; and the levites shall
be mine
 
 ___________________________
 
: i am the lord.

3:46 and for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of israel,
which are more than the levites; 3:47 thou shalt even take five
shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 3:48 and thou shalt
give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto aaron and to his sons.

3:49 and moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the levites: 3:50 of the firstborn of
the children of israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and
threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
and moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto aaron and to
his sons, according to the word of the lord, as the lord commanded
moses.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 4:2 take the
sum of the
 
 ___________________________
 
ath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. these things are
the burden of the sons of kohath in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:16 and to the office of eleazar the son of aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessels thereof.

4:17 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron saying, 4:18 cut ye
not off the tribe of the families of the kohathites from among the
levites: 4:19 but thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holy things: aaron and his sons shall
go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
4:20 but they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
lest they die.

4:21 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:22 take also the sum of
the sons of gershon, t
 
 ___________________________
 
ars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 and the pillars of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden.

4:33 this is the service of the families of the sons of merari,
according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation,
under the hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:34 and moses and aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the kohathites after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:36 and those that were
numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and
fifty.

4:37 these were they that were numbered of the families of the
kohathites, all that mig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, which moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord by the hand of moses.

4:38 and those that were numbered of the sons of gershon, throughout
their families, and by the house of their fathers, 4:39 from thirty
years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that
entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:40 even those that were numbered of them, throughout
their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and
six hundred and thirty.

4:41 these are they that were numbered of the families of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he sons of
gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, whom moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord.

4:42 and those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, 4:43
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one
that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:44 even those that were numbered of them after their
families, were three thousand and two hundred.

4:45 these be those that were nu
 
 ___________________________
 
mbered of the families of the sons of
merari, whom moses and aaron numbered according to the word of the
lord by the hand of moses.

4:46 all those that were numbered of the levites, whom moses and aaron
and the chief of israel numbered, after their families, and after the
house of their fathers, 4:47 from thirty years old and upward even
unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the
ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:48 even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and
five hundred and fourscore, 4:49 according to the commandment of the
lord they were numbered by the hand of moses, every one acc
 
 ___________________________
 
ording to
his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of
him, as the lord commanded moses.

5:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:2 command the children of
israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that
hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead: 5:3 both male and
female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they
defile not their camps, in the midst whereof i dwell.

5:4 and the children of israel did so, and put them out without the
camp: as the lord spake unto moses, so did the children of israel.

5:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:6 spe
 
 ___________________________
 
h
trespassed.

5:8 but if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto,
let the trespass be recompensed unto the lord, even to the priest;
beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made
for him.

5:9 and every offering of all the holy things of the children of
israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.

5:10 and every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man
giveth the priest, it shall be his.

5:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:12 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, if any man's wife go aside, and
commit a trespass against him, 5:13 and a man lie with her carnally,
and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she
be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken
with the manner; 5:14 and the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he
be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of
jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ot defiled, but be clean; then she shall be
free, and shall conceive seed.

5:29 this is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another
instead of her husband, and is defiled; 5:30 or when the spirit of
jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall
set the woman before the lord, and the priest shall execute upon her
all this law.

5:31 then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman
shall bear her iniquity.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 speak unto the children
of israel, and say unto them, when either man or woman shall separate
themselves to vow a vow of a nazarite, to separate themselves unto the
lord: 6:3 he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and
shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither
shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.

6:4 all the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made
of the vine tree, from the kernels eve
 
 ___________________________
 
after the hair of his
separation is shaven: 6:20 and the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before the lord: this is holy for the priest, with the wave
breast and heave shoulder: and after that the nazarite may drink wine.

6:21 this is the law of the nazarite who hath vowed, and of his
offering unto the lord for his separation, beside that that his hand
shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after
the law of his separation.

6:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:23 speak unto aaron and
unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of
israel, saying unto them, 6:24 the lord bless thee, and keep thee:
6:25 the lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee: 6:26 the lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

6:27 and they shall put my name upon the children of israel, and i
will bless them.

7:1 and it came to pass on the day that moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, and had anoi
 
 ___________________________
 
 all the
instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and
had anointed them, and sanctified them; 7:2 that the princes of
israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of
the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered: 7:3 and
they brought their offering before the lord, six covered wagons, and
twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox:
and they brought them before the tabernacle.

7:4 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:5 take it of them, that
they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the levites, to every man according to
his service.

7:6 and moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the
levites.

7:7 two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of gershon,
according to their service: 7:8 and four wagons and eight oxen he gave
unto the sons of merari, according unto their service, under the hand
of ithamar the son o
 
 ___________________________
 
f aaron the priest.

7:9 but unto the sons of kohath he gave none: because the service of
the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their
shoulders.

7:10 and the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day
that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before
the altar.

7:11 and the lord said unto moses, they shall offer their offering,
each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.

7:12 and he that offered his offering the first day was nahshon the
son of amminadab, of the tribe of judah: 7:13 and his offering was one
silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering: 7:14 one spoon of ten shekels of gold, full 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the spoons was an hundred and twenty
shekels.

7:87 all the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the
rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat
offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.

7:88 and all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were
twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the
lambs of the first year sixty. this was the dedication of the altar,
after that it was anointed.

7:89 and when moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation
to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him
from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from
between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 speak unto aaron and
say unto him, when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give
light over against the candlestick.

8:3 and aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
candlestick,
 
 ___________________________
 
 as the lord commanded moses.

8:4 and this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the
shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according
unto the pattern which the lord had shewed moses, so he made the
candlestick.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:6 take the levites from
among the children of israel, and cleanse them.

8:7 and thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle water
of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let
them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.

8:8 then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even
fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take
for a sin offering.

8:9 and thou shalt bring the levites before the ta
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
egypt i sanctified them for myself.

8:18 and i have taken the levites for all the firstborn of the
children of israel.

8:19 and i have given the levites as a gift to aaron and to his sons
from among the children of israel, to do the service of the children
of israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an
atonement for the children of israel: that there be no plague among
the children of israel, when the children of israel come nigh unto the
sanctuary.

8:20 and moses, and aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
israel, did to the levites according unto all that the lord commanded
moses concerning the levites, so did the children of israel unto them.

8:21 and the levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and
aaron offered them as an offering before the lord; and aaron made an
atonement for them to cleanse them.

8:22 and after that went the levites in to do their service in the
tabernacle of the congregation before aaron, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 before his sons: as
the lord had commanded moses concerning the levites, so did they unto
them.

8:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:24 this is it that
belongeth unto the levites: from twenty and five years old and upward
they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 8:25 and from the age of fifty years they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more: 8:26 but
shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the
congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. thus shalt
thou do unto the levites touching their charge.

9:1 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, in the
first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of
egypt, saying, 9:2 let the children of israel also keep the passover
at his appointed season.

9:3 in the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in
his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according
to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.

9:4 and moses spake unto the children of israel, that they should keep
the passover.

9:5 and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilderness of sinai: according to all that the
lord commanded moses, so did the children of israel.

9:6 and there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a
man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came
before moses and before aaron on that day: 9:7 and those men said unto
him, we are defil
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept
back, that we may not offer an offering of the lord in his appointed
season among the children of israel?  9:8 and moses said unto them,
stand still, and i will hear what the lord will command concerning
you.

9:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 9:10 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, if any man of you or of your posterity
shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar
off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the lord.

9:11 the fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep
it, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.

9:12 they shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone
of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep
it.

9:
 
 ___________________________
 
 was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they
journeyed.

9:22 or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the
cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of
israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken
up, they journeyed.

9:23 at the commandment of the lord they rested in the tents, and at
the commandment of the lord they journeyed: they kept the charge of
the lord, at the commandment of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 10:2 make thee two
trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou
mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the
journeying of the camps.

10:3 and when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall
assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

10:4 and if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which
are heads of the thousands of israel, shall gather the
 
 ___________________________
 
peace offerings;
that they may be to you for a memorial before your god: i am the lord
your god.

10:11 and it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in
the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle
of the testimony.

10:12 and the children of israel took their journeys out of the
wilderness of sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of paran.

10:13 and they first took their journey according to the commandment
of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:14 in the first place went the standard of the camp of the children
of judah according to their armies: and over his host was nahshon the
son of amminadab.

10:15 and over the host of the tribe of the children of issachar was
nethaneel the son of zuar.

10:16 and over the host of the tribe of the children of zebulun was
eliab the son of helon.

10:17 and the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of gershon and
the sons of merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.

10:18 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the standard of the camp of the children of dan set forward,
which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and
over his host was ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

10:26 and over the host of the tribe of the children of asher was
pagiel the son of ocran.

10:27 and over the host of the tribe of the children of naphtali was
ahira the son of enan.

10:28 thus were the journeyings of the children of israel according to
their armies, when they set forward.

10:29 and moses said unto hobab, the son of raguel the midianite,
moses' father in law, we are journeying unto the place of which the
lord said, i will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee
good: for the lord hath spoken good concerning israel.

10:30 and he said unto him, i will not go; but i will depart to mine
own land, and to my kindred.

10:31 and he said, leave us not, i pray thee; forasmuch as thou
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to
us instead o
 
 ___________________________
 
yes.

10:32 and it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what
goodness the lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

10:33 and they departed from the mount of the lord three days'
journey: and the ark of the covenant of the lord went before them in
the three days' journey, to search out a resting place for them.

10:34 and the cloud of the lord was upon them by day, when they went
out of the camp.

10:35 and it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that moses said,
rise up, lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that
hate thee flee before thee.

10:36 and when it rested, he said, return, o lord, unto the many
thousands of israel.

11:1 and when the people complained, it displeased the lord: and the
lord heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the lord
burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts
of the camp.

11:2 and the people cried unto moses; and when moses prayed unto the
lord, t
 
 ___________________________
 
e garlick: 11:6 but now our soul is dried away: there is nothing
at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.

11:7 and the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as
the colour of bdellium.

11:8 and the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in
mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of
it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.

11:9 and when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell
upon it.

11:10 then moses heard the people weep throughout their families,
every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the lord was
kindled greatly; moses also was displeased.

11:11 and moses said unto the lord, wherefore hast thou afflicted thy
servant? and wherefore have i not found favour in thy sight, that thou
layest the burden of all this people upon me?  11:12 have i conceived
all this people? have i begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto
me, carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father bear
 
 ___________________________
 
eth the sucking
child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?  11:13
whence should i have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep
unto me, saying, give us flesh, that we may eat.

11:14 i am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me.

11:15 and if thou deal thus with me, kill me, i pray thee, out of
hand, if i have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my
wretchedness.

11:16 and the lord said unto moses, gather unto me seventy men of the
elders of israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people,
and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

11:17 and i will come down and talk with thee there: and i will take
of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
thyself alone.

11:18 and say thou unto the people, sanctify
 
 ___________________________
 
 wept in the ears of the
lord, saying, who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us
in egypt: therefore the lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

11:19 ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither
ten days, nor twenty days; 11:20 but even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye
have despised the lord which is among you, and have wept before him,
saying, why came we forth out of egypt?  11:21 and moses said, the
people, among whom i am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou
hast said, i will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

11:22 shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice
them?  or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them,
to suffice them?  11:23 and the lord said unto moses, is the lord's
hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee or not.

11:24 and moses went out, and told the people
 
 ___________________________
 
to him, and took
of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 but there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
one was eldad, and the name of the other medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 and there ran a young man, and told moses, and said, eldad and
medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, my lord moses, forbid them.

11:29 and moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would god
that all the lord's people were prophets, and that the lord would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 and moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of israel.

11:31 and there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought quails
from the sea
 
 ___________________________
 
ead them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 and while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the lord was kindled against the people, and the
lord smote the people with a very great plague.

11:34 and he called the name of that place kibrothhattaavah: because
there they buried the people that lusted.

11:35 and the people journeyed from kibrothhattaavah unto hazeroth;
and abode at hazeroth.

12:1 and miriam and aaron spake against moses because of the ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had married an ethiopian woman.

12:2 and they said, hath the lord indeed spoken only by moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? and the lord heard it.

12:3 (now the man moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 and the lord spake suddenly unto
moses, and unto aaron, and unto miriam, come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. and they three came out.

12:5 and the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
 came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
the door of the tabernacle, and called aaron and miriam: and they both
came forth.

12:6 and he said, hear now my words: if there be a prophet among you,
i the lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 my servant moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

12:8 with him will i speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the lord shall he behold:
wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant moses?
12:9 and the anger of the lord was kindled against them; and he
departed.

12:10 and the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
miriam became leprous, white as snow: and aaron looked upon miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.
 
 ___________________________
 


12:11 and aaron said unto moses, alas, my lord, i beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 and moses cried unto the lord, saying, heal her now, o god, i
beseech thee.

12:14 and the lord said unto moses, if her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

12:15 and miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till miriam was brought in again.

12:16 and afterward the people removed from hazeroth, and pitched in
the wilderness of paran.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 send thou men, that
they may search the land of canaa
 
 ___________________________
 
n, which i give unto the children of
israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one
a ruler among them.

13:3 and moses by the commandment of the lord sent them from the
wilderness of paran: all those men were heads of the children of
israel.

13:4 and these were their names: of the tribe of reuben, shammua the
son of zaccur.

13:5 of the tribe of simeon, shaphat the son of hori.

13:6 of the tribe of judah, caleb the son of jephunneh.

13:7 of the tribe of issachar, igal the son of joseph.

13:8 of the tribe of ephraim, oshea the son of nun.

13:9 of the tribe of benjamin, palti the son of raphu.
 
 ___________________________
 


13:10 of the tribe of zebulun, gaddiel the son of sodi.

13:11 of the tribe of joseph, namely, of the tribe of manasseh, gaddi
the son of susi.

13:12 of the tribe of dan, ammiel the son of gemalli.

13:13 of the tribe of asher, sethur the son of michael.

13:14 of the tribe of naphtali, nahbi the son of vophsi.

13:15 of the tribe of gad, geuel the son of machi.

13:16 these are the names of the men which moses sent to spy out the
land.

and moses called oshea the son of nun jehoshua.

13:17 and moses sent them to spy out the land of canaan, and said unto
them, get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
13:18 and see the land, what it is, and the people that dwelleth
therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 13:19 and what
the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what
cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong
holds; 13:20 and what the land is, whether it b
 
 ___________________________
 
ron
was built seven years before zoan in egypt.)  13:23 and they came unto
the brook of eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 the place was called the brook eshcol, because of the cluster of
grapes which the children of israel cut down from thence.

13:25 and they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

13:26 and they went and came to moses, and to aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of israel, unto the wilderness of paran,
to kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

13:27 and they told him, and said, we came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
fruit of it.

13:28 nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and
the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover
 
 ___________________________
 
 we saw the
children of anak there.

13:29 the amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the hittites,
and the jebusites, and the amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of jordan.

13:30 and caleb stilled the people before moses, and said, let us go
up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.

13:31 but the men that went up with him said, we be not able to go up
against the people; for they are stronger than we.

13:32 and they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
searched unto the children of israel, saying, the land, through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.
 
 ___________________________
 


13:33 and there we saw the giants, the sons of anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 and all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 and all the children of israel murmured against moses and against
aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, would god that we
had died in the land of egypt! or would god we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then moses and aaron fell on their faces before all the as
 
 ___________________________
 
 in us, then he will bring us into this land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 only rebel not ye against the lord, neither fear ye the people of
the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from
them, and the lord is with us: fear them not.

14:10 but all the congregation bade stone them with stones. and the
glory of the lord appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation
before all the children of israel.

14:11 and the lord said unto moses, how long will this people provoke
me?  and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs
which i have shewed among them?  14:12 i will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
nation and mightier than they.

14:13 and moses said unto the lord, then the egyptians shall hear it,
(for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
14:14 and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they
have heard that t
 
 ___________________________
 
y voice; 14:23 surely they
shall not see the land which i sware unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that provoked me see it: 14:24 but my servant caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will i bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (now the amalekites and the canaanites dwelt in the valley.)
tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the
red sea.

14:26 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:27 how
long shall i bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against
me? i have heard the murmurings of the children of israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 say unto them, as truly as i live, saith the lord, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will i do to you: 14:29 your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14
 
 ___________________________
 
rs,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.

14:34 after the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

14:35 i the lord have said, i will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 and the men, which moses sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land, 14:37 even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, died by the plague before the lord.

14:38 but joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

14:39 and moses told these sayings unto all the children of israel:
and the people mourned greatly.

14:40 and they ro
 
 ___________________________
 
se up early in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
place which the lord hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 and moses said, wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the lord? but it shall not prosper.

14:42 go not up, for the lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten
before your enemies.

14:43 for the amalekites and the canaanites are there before you, and
ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the lord,
therefore the lord will not be with you.

14:44 but they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the
ark of the covenant of the lord, and moses, departe
 
 ___________________________
 
d not out of the
camp.

14:45 then the amalekites came down, and the canaanites which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto hormah.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
of your habitations, which i give unto you, 15:3 and will make an
offering by fire unto the lord, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in
performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts,
to make a sweet savour unto the lord, of the herd or of the flock:
15:4 then shall he that offereth his offering unto the lord bring a
meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with th
 
 ___________________________
 
u, or whosoever be among you in
your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the lord; as ye do, so he shall do.

15:15 one ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever
in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the
lord.

15:16 one law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.

15:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:18 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land
whither i bring you, 15:19 then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the lord.

15:20 ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall
ye heave it.

15:21 of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the lord an heave
offering in your generation
 
 ___________________________
 
s.

15:22 and if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments,
which the lord hath spoken unto moses, 15:23 even all that the lord
hath commanded you by the hand of moses, from the day that the lord
commanded moses, and henceforward among your generations; 15:24 then
it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge
of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young
bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the lord, with
his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner,
and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.

15:25 and the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation
of the children of israel, and it shall be for
 
 ___________________________
 
sumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people.

15:31 because he hath despised the word of the lord, and hath broken
his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity
shall be upon him.

15:32 and while the children of israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

15:33 and they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto moses
and aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 and they put him in ward, because it was not declared what
should be done to him.

15:35 and the lord said unto moses, the man shall be surely put to
death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the
camp.

15:36 and all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the lord commanded moses.

15:37 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:38 speak unto the
children of i
 
 ___________________________
 
and that ye seek not
after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 that ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
be holy unto your god.

15:41 i am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt, to be your god: i am the lord your god.

16:1 now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi,
and dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab, and on, the son of peleth,
sons of reuben, took men: 16:2 and they rose up before moses, with
certain of the children of israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 and they
gathered themselves together against moses and against aaron, and said
unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the lord is among them: wherefore then
lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the lord?  16:4 and
when moses heard it, he fell upon his face: 16:5 and he spake unto
ko
 
 ___________________________
 
rah and unto all his company, saying, even to morrow the lord will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
him.

16:6 this do; take you censers, korah, and all his company; 16:7 and
put fire therein, and put incense in them before the lord to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the lord doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of levi.

16:8 and moses said unto korah, hear, i pray you, ye sons of levi:
16:9 seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel
hath separated you from the congregation of israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 and he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 for which cause
both thou and all thy company are
 
 ___________________________
 
 gathered together against the lord:
and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 and moses sent
to call dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab: which said, we will not
come up: 16:13 is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?  16:14 moreover
thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
eyes of these men? we will not come up.

16:15 and moses was 
 
 ___________________________
 
very wroth, and said unto the lord, respect not
thou their offering: i have not taken one ass from them, neither have
i hurt one of them.

16:16 and moses said unto korah, be thou and all thy company before
the lord, thou, and they, and aaron, to morrow: 16:17 and take every
man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the lord
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and
aaron, each of you his censer.

16:18 and they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with moses and aaron.

16:19 and korah gathered 
 
 ___________________________
 
all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 16:21
separate yourselves from among this congregation, that i may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 and they fell upon their faces, and said, o god, the god of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
all the congregation?  16:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying,
16:24 speak unto the congregation, saying, get you up from about the
tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram.

16:25 and moses rose up and went unto dathan and abir
 
 ___________________________
 
am; and the
elders of israel followed him.

16:26 and he spake unto the congregation, saying, depart, i pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of their's, lest
ye be consumed in all their sins.

16:27 so they gat up from the tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram,
on every side: and dathan and abiram came out, and stood in the door
of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
children.

16:28 and moses said, hereby ye shall know that the lord hath sent me
to do all these works; for i have not done them of mine own mind.

16:29 if these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men; then the lord hath not sent
me.

16:30 but if the lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
provoked the lord.

 
 ___________________________
 
d all the men that appertained unto korah, and all their goods.

16:33 they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
congregation.

16:34 and all israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them: for they said, lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 and there came out a fire from the lord, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

16:36 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:37 speak unto eleazar
the son of aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 the censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered
them before the lord, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of israel.

16:39 and eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that we
 
 ___________________________
 
re burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a
covering of the altar: 16:40 to be a memorial unto the children of
israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of aaron, come near
to offer incense before the lord; that he be not as korah, and as his
company: as the lord said to him by the hand of moses.

16:41 but on the morrow all the congregation of the children of israel
murmured against moses and against aaron, saying, ye have killed the
people of the lord.

16:42 and it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
moses and against aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
lord appeared.

16:43 and moses and aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.

16:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:45 get you up from
among this congregation, that i may consume them as
 
 ___________________________
 
 in a moment. and
they fell upon their faces.

16:46 and moses said unto aaron, take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the lord; the plague is begun.

16:47 and aaron took as moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

16:48 and he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
stayed.

16:49 now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of korah.

16:50 and aaron returned unto moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the plague was 
 
 ___________________________
 
stayed.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to
the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the
house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon
his rod.

17:3 and thou shalt write aaron's name upon the rod of levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

17:4 and thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, where i will meet with you.
 
 ___________________________
 


17:5 and it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom i shall
choose, shall blossom: and i will make to cease from me the murmurings
of the children of israel, whereby they murmur against you.

17:6 and moses spake unto the children of israel, and every one of
their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 and moses laid up the rods before the lord in the tabernacle of
witness.

17:8 and it came to pass, that on the morrow moses went into the
tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of aaron for the house of
levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
yielded almonds.

17:9 and moses brought out all the rods from before the lord unto all
the children of israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

17:10 and the lord said unto moses, bring aaron's rod again befo
 
 ___________________________
 
re the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

17:11 and moses did so: as the lord commanded him, so did he.

17:12 and the children of israel spake unto moses, saying, behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the lord
shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  18:1 and the lord said
unto aaron, thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee
shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

18:2 and thy brethren also of the tribe of levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be join
 
 ___________________________
 
evites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children
of israel they have no inheritance.

18:24 but the tithes of the children of israel, which they offer as an
heave offering unto the lord, i have given to the levites to inherit:
therefore i have said unto them, among the children of israel they
shall have no inheritance.

18:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:26 thus speak unto the
levites, and say unto them, when ye take of the children of israel the
tithes which i have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the lord, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 and this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of
the winepress.

18:28 thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the lord of all
your 
 
 ___________________________
 
st
thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the levites as the
increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

18:31 and ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

18:32 and ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of
the children of israel, lest ye die.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 19:2 this
is the ordinance of the law which the lord hath commanded, saying,
speak unto the children of israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 and ye shall give her unto eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
19:4 and eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,
and sprinkle of her blood directly before the 
 
 ___________________________
 
; and he that
toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

19:22 and whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 then came the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of zin in the first month: and the people abode in
kadesh; and miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 and there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against moses and against aaron.

20:3 and the people chode with moses, and spake, saying, would god
that we had died when our brethren died before the lord!  20:4 and why
have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 and wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 and moses 
 
 ___________________________
 
and aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the lord appeared unto them.

20:7 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:8 take the rod, and
gather thou the assembly together, thou, and aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

20:9 and moses took the rod from before the lord, as he commanded him.

20:10 and moses and aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock, and he said unto them, hear now, ye rebels; 
 
 ___________________________
 
must we fetch
you water out of this rock?  20:11 and moses lifted up his hand, and
with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

20:12 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which i have given
them.

20:13 this is the water of meribah; because the children of israel
strove with the lord, and he was sanctified in them.

20:14 and moses sent messengers from kadesh unto the king of edom,
thus saith thy brother israel, thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 how our fathers went down into e
 
 ___________________________
 
my cattle drink of thy water, then i will pay for
it: i will only, without doing anything else, go through on my feet.

20:20 and he said, thou shalt not go through. and edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 thus edom refused to give israel passage through his border:
wherefore israel turned away from him.

20:22 and the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from kadesh, and came unto mount hor.

20:23 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in mount hor, by the
coast of the land of edom, saying, 20:24 aaron shall be gathered unto
his people: for he shall not enter into the land which i have given
unto the children of israel, because ye rebelled against my word at
the water of meribah.

20:25 take aaron and eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount
hor: 20:26 and strip aaron of his garments, and put them upon eleazar
his son: and aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die
there.

20:27 and moses
 
 ___________________________
 
 did as the lord commanded: and they went up into mount
hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 and moses stripped aaron of his garments, and put them upon
eleazar his son; and aaron died there in the top of the mount: and
moses and eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 and when all the congregation saw that aaron was dead, they
mourned for aaron thirty days, even all the house of israel.

21:1 and when king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 and israel vowed a vow unto the lord, and said, if thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then i will utterly destroy
the
 
 ___________________________
 
ir cities.

21:3 and the lord hearkened to the voice of israel, and delivered up
the canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and
he called the name of the place hormah.

21:4 and they journeyed from mount hor by the way of the red sea, to
compass the land of edom: and the soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way.

21:5 and the people spake against god, and against moses, wherefore
have ye brought us up out of egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 and the lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit
the people; and much people of israel died.

21:7 therefore the people came to moses, and said, we have sinned, for
we have spoken against the lord, and against thee; pray unto the lord,
that he take away the serpents from us. and moses prayed for the
peo
 
 ___________________________
 
ple.

21:8 and the lord said unto moses, make thee a fiery serpent, and set
it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

21:9 and moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the
serpent of brass, he lived.

21:10 and the children of israel set forward, and pitched in oboth.

21:11 and they journeyed from oboth, and pitched at ijeabarim, in the
wilderness which is before moab, toward the sunrising.

21:12 from thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of zared.

21:13 from thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of
ar
 
 ___________________________
 
non, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the
amorites: for arnon is the border of moab, between moab and the
amorites.

21:14 wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the lord, what
he did in the red sea, and in the brooks of arnon, 21:15 and at the
stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of ar, and lieth
upon the border of moab.

21:16 and from thence they went to beer: that is the well whereof the
lord spake unto moses, gather the people together, and i will give
them water.

21:17 then israel sang this song, spring up, o well; sing ye unto it:
21:18 the princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it,
by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. and from the
wilderness they went to mattanah: 21:19 and from mattanah to nahaliel:
and from nahaliel to bamoth: 21:20 and from bamoth in the valley, that
is in the country of moab, to the top of pisgah, which looketh toward
jeshimon.


 
 ___________________________
 
f heshbon, a flame from the city of sihon: it hath consumed
ar of moab, and the lords of the high places of arnon.

21:29 woe to thee, moab! thou art undone, o people of chemosh: he hath
given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto
sihon king of the amorites.

21:30 we have shot at them; heshbon is perished even unto dibon, and
we have laid them waste even unto nophah, which reacheth unto medeba.

21:31 thus israel dwelt in the land of the amorites.

21:32 and moses sent to spy out jaazer, and they took the villages
thereof, and drove out the amorites that were there.

21:33 and they turned and went up by the way of bashan: and og the
king of bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the
battle at edrei.

21:34 and the lord said unto moses, fear him not: for i have delivered
him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

21:35 s
 
 ___________________________
 
r, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 and balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and
balak also went his way.

25:1 and israel abode in shittim, and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of moab.

25:2 and they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and
the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

25:3 and israel joined himself unto baalpeor: and the anger of the
lord was kindled against israel.

25:4 and the lord said unto moses, take all the heads of the people,
and hang them up before the lord against the sun, that the fierce
anger of the lord may be turned away from israel.

25:5 and moses said unto the judges of israel, slay ye every one his
men that were joined unto baalpeor.

25:6 and, behold, one of the children of israel came and brought unto
his brethren a midianitish woman in the sight of moses, and in the
sight of all the congregation of the children of israel, who were
weeping before the door of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he tabernacle of the congregation.

25:7 and when phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in his hand; 25:8 and he went after the man of israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of israel, and the
woman through her belly. so the plague was stayed from the children of
israel.

25:9 and those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

25:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:11 phinehas, the son
of eleazar, the son of aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away
from the children of israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that i consumed not the children of israel in my jealousy.

25:12 wherefore say, behold, i give unto him my covenant of peace:
25:13 and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his god, and
made an atonement for the children of israel.

2
 
 ___________________________
 
5:14 now the name of the israelite that was slain, even that was
slain with the midianitish woman, was zimri, the son of salu, a prince
of a chief house among the simeonites.

25:15 and the name of the midianitish woman that was slain was cozbi,
the daughter of zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in midian.

25:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:17 vex the midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of peor, and in the matter of
cozbi, the daughter of a prince of midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plague for peor's sake.

26:1 and it came to pass after the plague, that the lord spake unto
moses and unto eleazar the son of aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 take
the sum of all the congregation of the children of israel, from twen
 
 ___________________________
 
ty
years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
able to go to war in israel.

26:3 and moses and eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
moab by jordan near jericho, saying, 26:4 take the sum of the people,
from twenty years old and upward; as the lord commanded moses and the
children of israel, which went forth out of the land of egypt.

26:5 reuben, the eldest son of israel: the children of reuben; hanoch,
of whom cometh the family of the hanochites: of pallu, the family of
the palluites: 26:6 of hezron, the family of the hezronites: of carmi,
the family of the carmites.

26:7 these are the families of the reubenites: and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and
thirty.

26:8 and the sons of pallu; eli
 
 ___________________________
 
ab.

26:9 and the sons of eliab; nemuel, and dathan, and abiram. this is
that dathan and abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who
strove against moses and against aaron in the company of korah, when
they strove against the lord: 26:10 and the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up together with korah, when that company died,
what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 notwithstanding the children of korah died not.

26:12 the sons of simeon after their families: of nemuel, the family
of the nemuelites: of jamin, the family of the jaminites: of jachin,
the family of the jachinites: 26:
 
 ___________________________
 
their families: of jahzeel, the
family of the jahzeelites: of guni, the family of the gunites: 26:49
of jezer, the family of the jezerites: of shillem, the family of the
shillemites.

26:50 these are the families of naphtali according to their families:
and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and
four hundred.

26:51 these were the numbered of the children of israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:52 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 26:53 unto these the land
shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.

26:54 to many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be
given according to those that were numbered of him.

26:55 notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to
the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.

26:56 according to the lot shall the possession thereof be d
 
 ___________________________
 
ilies: of gershon, the family of the gershonites: of kohath, the
family of the kohathites: of merari, the family of the merarites.

26:58 these are the families of the levites: the family of the
libnites, the family of the hebronites, the family of the mahlites,
the family of the mushites, the family of the korathites. and kohath
begat amram.

26:59 and the name of amram's wife was jochebed, the daughter of levi,
whom her mother bare to levi in egypt: and she bare unto amram aaron
and moses, and miriam their sister.

26:60 and unto aaron was born nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

26:61 and nadab and abihu died, when they offered strange fire before
the lord.

26:62 and those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not
numbered among the children of israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of israel.

26:63 these are they that were numbered by moses and eleazar t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
priest, who numbered the children of israel in the plains of moab by
jordan near jericho.

26:64 but among these there was not a man of them whom moses and aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
 
 ___________________________
 

mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood before moses, and before eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the lord in the company of korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, because he hath no son? give unto us therefore a possession
among the brethren
 
 ___________________________
 
 of our father.

27:5 and moses brought their cause before the lord.

27:6 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:7 the daughters of
zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an
inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the
inheritance of their father to pass unto them.

27:8 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, if a
man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass
unto his daughter.

27:9 and if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his brethren.

27:10 and if he have no
 
 ___________________________
 
 brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his father's brethren.

27:11 and if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of israel a
statute of judgment, as the lord commanded moses.

27:12 and the lord said unto moses, get thee up into this mount
abarim, and see the land which i have given unto the children of
israel.

27:13 and when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 for ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and moses spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lord, the
god of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 and the lord said unto moses, take thee joshua the son of nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 and set
him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge in their sight.

27:20 and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congregation of the children of israel may be obedient.

27:21 and he shall stand before eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of urim before the lord: at his
word shall they go ou
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and at his word they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 and moses did as the lord commanded him: and he took joshua, and
set him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
27:23 and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
lord commanded by the hand of moses.

28:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 28:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, my offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 and thou shalt say unto them, this is the offering made by fire
which ye shall offer unto the lord; two lambs of the first year
without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

28:4 the one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
shalt thou offer at e
 
 ___________________________
 
nd their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram,
and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:38 and one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual
burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:39 these things ye shall do unto the lord in your set feasts,
beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings,
and for your peace offerings.

29:40 and moses told the children of israel according to all that the
lord commanded moses.

30:1 and moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the
children of israel, saying, this is the thing which the lord hath
commanded.

30:2 if a man vow a vow unto the lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.

30:3 if a woman also vow a vow unto the lord, and bind herself by a
bond, being in her f
 
 ___________________________
 
oath to afflict the soul, her
husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

30:14 but if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to
day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are
upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the
day that he heard them.

30:15 but if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

30:16 these are the statutes, which the lord commanded moses, between
a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in
her youth in her father's house.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 avenge the children
of israel of the midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy
people.

31:3 and moses spake unto the people, saying, arm some of yourselves
unto the war, and let them go against the midianites, and avenge the
lord of midian.

31:4 of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of israel,

 
 ___________________________
 
shall ye send to the war.

31:5 so there were delivered out of the thousands of israel, a
thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

31:6 and moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them
and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

31:7 and they warred against the midianites, as the lord commanded
moses; and they slew all the males.

31:8 and they slew the kings of midian, beside the rest of them that
were slain; namely, evi, and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, five
kings of midian: balaam also the son of beor they slew with the sword.

31:9 and the children of israel took all the women of midian captives,
and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
their flocks, and all their goods.

31:10 and they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all
the
 
 ___________________________
 
ir goodly castles, with fire.

31:11 and they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and
of beasts.

31:12 and they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
moses, and eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
children of israel, unto the camp at the plains of moab, which are by
jordan near jericho.

31:13 and moses, and eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14 and moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from
the battle.

31:15 and moses said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive?
31:16 behold, these caused the children of israel, through the counsel
of balaam, to commit trespass against the lord in the matter of peor,
and there was a plague among the congregation of the lord.

31:17 now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill
every woman that hath
 
 ___________________________
 
e for yourselves.

31:19 and do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath
killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both
yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.

31:20 and purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and
all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.

31:21 and eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
the battle, this is the ordinance of the law which the lord commanded
moses; 31:22 only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
tin, and the lead, 31:23 every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall
make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it
shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

31:24 and ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall
be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

31:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ent out to battle: one
soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of
the asses, and of the sheep: 31:29 take it of their half, and give it
unto eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the lord.

31:30 and of the children of israel's half, thou shalt take one
portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of
the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the levites,
which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the lord.

31:31 and moses and eleazar the priest did as the lord commanded
moses.

31:32 and the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five
thousand sheep, 31:33 and threescore and twelve thousand beeves, 31:34
and threescore and one thousand asses, 31:35 and thirty and two
thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with
him.

31:36 and the half, which was the portion of them that went out to
war, was in numb
 
 ___________________________
 
ndred thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundred sheep: 31:37 and the lord's tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.

31:38 and the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the lord's
tribute was threescore and twelve.

31:39 and the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which
the lord's tribute was threescore and one.

31:40 and the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the lord's
tribute was thirty and two persons.

31:41 and moses gave the tribute, which was the lord's heave offering,
unto eleazar the priest, as the lord commanded moses.

31:42 and of the children of israel's half, which moses divided from
the men that warred, 31:43 (now the half that pertained unto the
congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven
thousand and five hundred sheep, 31:44 and thirty and six thousand
beeves, 31:45 and thirty thousand asses and five hundred, 31:46 and
sixteen thousand persons;) 31:47 even of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he children of israel's
half, moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gave them unto the levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of
the lord; as the lord commanded moses.

31:48 and the officers which were over thousands of the host, the
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto moses:
31:49 and they said unto moses, thy servants have taken the sum of the
men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man
of us.

31:50 we have therefore brought an oblation for the lord, what every
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the
lord.

31:51 and moses and eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels.

31:52 and all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
lor
 
 ___________________________
 
d, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds,
was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.

31:53 (for the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
31:54 and moses and eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of
the congregation, for a memorial for the children of israel before the
lord.

32:1 now the children of reuben and the children of gad had a very
great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of jazer, and
the land of gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
32:2 the children of gad and the children of reuben came and spake
unto moses, and to el
 
 ___________________________
 
eazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 ataroth, and dibon, and jazer, and nimrah,
and heshbon, and elealeh, and shebam, and nebo, and beon, 32:4 even
the country which the lord smote before the congregation of israel, is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle: 32:5 wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto
thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over jordan.

32:6 and moses said unto the children of gad and to the children of
reuben, shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?  32:7
and wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of israel from
going over into the land which the lord hath given them?  32:8 thus
did your fathers, when i sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the lan
 
 ___________________________
 
nes: 32:17 but we
ourselves will go ready armed before the children of israel, until we
have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in
the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.

32:18 we will not return unto our houses, until the children of israel
have inherited every man his inheritance.

32:19 for we will not inherit with them on yonder side jordan, or
forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side jordan
eastward.

32:20 and moses said unto them, if ye will do this thing, if ye will
go armed before the lord to war, 32:21 and will go all of you armed
over jordan before the lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from
before him, 32:22 and the land be subdued before the lord: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the lord, and
before israel; and this land shall be your possession before the lord.

32:23 but if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
lord: and be sure your sin will
 
 ___________________________
 
 find you out.

32:24 build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

32:25 and the children of gad and the children of reuben spake unto
moses, saying, thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of gilead: 32:27 but thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the lord to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 so concerning them moses commanded eleazar the priest, and
joshua the son of nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel: 32:29 and moses said unto them, if the children of
gad and the child
 
 ___________________________
 
ll be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of gilead for a
possession: 32:30 but if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of canaan.

32:31 and the children of gad and the children of reuben answered,
saying, as the lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

32:32 we will pass over armed before the lord into the land of canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side jordan may be
ours.

32:33 and moses gave unto them, even to the children of gad, and to
the children of reuben, and unto half the tribe of manasseh the son of
joseph, the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, and the kingdom of
og king of bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about.

32:34 and the children of gad built dibon, and ataroth, and aroer,
32:35 and atroth, shophan, and jaazer, and jogbehah, 32:36 and
bethnimrah, and bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for
 
 ___________________________
 
 sheep.

32:37 and the children of reuben built heshbon, and elealeh, and
kirjathaim, 32:38 and nebo, and baalmeon, (their names being changed,)
and shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.

32:39 and the children of machir the son of manasseh went to gilead,
and took it, and dispossessed the amorite which was in it.

32:40 and moses gave gilead unto machir the son of manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 and jair the son of manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them havothjair.

32:42 and nobah went and took kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it nobah, after his own name.

33:1 these are the journeys of the children of israel, which went
forth out of the land of egypt with their armies under the hand of
moses and aaron.

33:2 and moses wrote their goings out according to their j
 
 ___________________________
 
er of moab.

33:45 and they departed from iim, and pitched in dibongad.

33:46 and they removed from dibongad, and encamped in almondiblathaim.

33:47 and they removed from almondiblathaim, and pitched in the
mountains of abarim, before nebo.

33:48 and they departed from the mountains of abarim, and pitched in
the plains of moab by jordan near jericho.

33:49 and they pitched by jordan, from bethjesimoth even unto
abelshittim in the plains of moab.

33:50 and the lord spake unto moses in the plains of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 33:51 speak unto the children of israel, and say
unto them, when ye are passed over jordan into the land of canaan;
33:52 then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places: 33:53 and
ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein:
for i have given you the land to possess it.

33:5
 
 ___________________________
 
eritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to
the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.

33:55 but if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.

33:56 moreover it shall come to pass, that i shall do unto you, as i
thought to do unto them.

34:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land of canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
the land of canaan with the coasts thereof:) 34:3 then your south
quarter shall be from the wilderness of zin along by the coast of
edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 and your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of akrabbim, and pass on to zin: and the going 
 
 ___________________________
 
gs out of it shall be at hazarenan: this shall be your
north border.

34:10 and ye shall point out your east border from hazarenan to
shepham: 34:11 and the coast shall go down from shepham to riblah, on
the east side of ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of chinnereth eastward: 34:12 and the border
shall go down to jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt
sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.

34:13 and moses commanded the children of israel, saying, this is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the lord commanded to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 for the tribe of
the children of reuben according to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 the two tribes and the
half tribe have received their in
 
 ___________________________
 
heritance on this side jordan near
jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:17 these are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: eleazar the priest,
and joshua the son of nun.

34:18 and ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 and the names of the men are these: of the tribe of judah, caleb
the son of jephunneh.

34:20 and of the tribe of the children of simeon, shemuel the son of
ammihud.

34:21 of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.

34:22 and the prince of the trib
 
 ___________________________
 
ibe of the children of zebulun,
elizaphan the son of parnach.

34:26 and the prince of the tribe of the children of issachar, paltiel
the son of azzan.

34:27 and the prince of the tribe of the children of asher, ahihud the
son of shelomi.

34:28 and the prince of the tribe of the children of naphtali, pedahel
the son of ammihud.

34:29 these are they whom the lord commanded to divide the inheritance
unto the children of israel in the land of canaan.

35:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the plains of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 35:2 command the children of israel, that they
give unto the levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the levites suburbs for the
cities round about them.

35:3 and the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of
them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
beasts.

35:4 and the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the
levites, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
em ye shall add forty
and two cities.

35:7 so all the cities which ye shall give to the levites shall be
forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

35:8 and the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of
the children of israel: from them that have many ye shall give many;
but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of
his cities unto the levites according to his inheritance which he
inheriteth.

35:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 35:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come over jordan
into the land of canaan; 35:11 then ye shall appoint you cities to be
cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which
killeth any person at unawares.

35:12 and they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger;
that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in
judgment.

35:13 and of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have
f
 
 ___________________________
 
 ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein i
dwell: for i the lord dwell among the children of israel.

36:1 and the chief fathers of the families of the children of gilead,
the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of the sons of
joseph, came near, and spake before moses, and before the princes, the
chief fathers of the children of israel: 36:2 and they said, the lord
commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the
children of israel: and my lord was commanded by the lord to give the
inheritance of zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

36:3 and if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of
the children of israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the in
 
 ___________________________
 
heritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 and when the jubile of the children of israel shall be, then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away
from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 and moses commanded the children of israel according to the word
of the lord, saying, the tribe of the sons of joseph hath said well.

36:6 this is the thing which the lord doth command concerning the
daughters of zelophehad, saying, let them marry to whom they think
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 so shall not the inheritance of the children of israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of israel shall
keep himself to the inhe
 
 ___________________________
 
ritance of the tribe of his fathers.

36:8 and every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe
of the children of israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
tribe of her father, that the children of israel may enjoy every man
the inheritance of his fathers.

36:9 neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 even as the lord commanded moses, so did the daughters of
zelophehad: 36:11 for mahlah, tirzah, and hoglah, and milcah, and
noah, the daughters of zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 and they were married into the families of the
sons of manasseh the son of joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 these are the commandments and the judgments, which the lord
commanded by the hand of moses unto the children of israel in the
plains of moab by
 
 ___________________________
 
 jordan near jericho.




the fifth book of moses:  called deuteronomy


1:1 these be the words which moses spake unto all israel on this side
jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the red sea,
between paran, and tophel, and laban, and hazeroth, and dizahab.

1:2 (there are eleven days' journey from horeb by the way of mount
seir unto kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 and it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that moses
spake unto the children of israel, according unto all that the lord
had given him in commandment unto them; 1:4 after he had slain sihon
the king of the amorites, which dwelt in heshbon, and og the king of
bashan, which dwelt at astaroth in edrei: 1:5 on this side jordan, in
the land of moab, began moses to declare this law, saying, 1:6 the
lord our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of th
 
 ___________________________
 
 give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is this day.

4:39 know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
lord he is god in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
none else.

4:40 thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,
which i command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon
the earth, which the lord thy god giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 then moses severed three cities on this side jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 that the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: 4:43 namely, bezer in
the wilderness, in the plain country, of the reubenites; and ramoth in
gilead, of the gadites; and golan in bashan, of the manassites.

4:44 and this is the law which moses set before the children of
israel: 4:45 these are the testim
 
 ___________________________
 
onies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which moses spake unto the children of israel, after they
came forth out of egypt.

4:46 on this side jordan, in the valley over against bethpeor, in the
land of sihon king of the amorites, who dwelt at heshbon, whom moses
and the children of israel smote, after they were come forth out of
egypt: 4:47 and they possessed his land, and the land of og king of
bashan, two kings of the amorites, which were on this side jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 from aroer, which is by the bank of the
river arnon, even unto mount sion, which is hermon, 4:49 and all the
plain on this side jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
under the springs of pisgah.

5:1 and moses called all israel, and said unto them, h
 
 ___________________________
 
s day to be thy god, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 and the lord hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 and to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
lord thy god, as he hath spoken.

27:1 and moses with the elders of israel commanded the people, saying,
keep all the commandments which i command you this day.

27:2 and it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over jordan unto
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 and thou shalt
write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, a land that floweth with mi
 
 ___________________________
 
r them with plaister.

27:5 and there shalt thou build an altar unto the lord thy god, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

27:6 thou shalt build the altar of the lord thy god of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the lord thy god:
27:7 and thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoice before the lord thy god.

27:8 and thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.

27:9 and moses and the priests the levites spake unto all israel,
saying, take heed, and hearken, o israel; this day thou art become the
people of the lord thy god.

27:10 thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the lord thy god, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which i command thee this day.

27:11 and moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 these
shall stand upon mount gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over jordan; simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and jose
 
 ___________________________
 
ould god it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
would god it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

28:68 and the lord shall bring thee into egypt again with ships, by
the way whereof i spake unto thee, thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 these are the words of the covenant, which the lord commanded
moses to make with the children of israel in the land of moab, beside
the covenant which he made with them in horeb.

29:2 and moses called unto all israel, and said unto them, ye have
seen all that the lord did before your eyes in the land of egypt unto
pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; 29:3 the
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 yet the lord hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hea
 
 ___________________________
 

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto them as he did to sihon and to og,
 
 ___________________________
 

kings of the amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 and the lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which i have commanded
you.

31:6 be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the lord thy god, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

31:7 and moses called unto joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all israel, be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the lord hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 and the lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed.

31:9 and moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of levi, which
 
 ___________________________
 
 bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, and unto
all the elders of israel.

31:10 and moses commanded them, saying, at the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 when all israel is come to appear before the lord
thy god in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all israel in their hearing.

31:12 gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the lord your god, and observe to do all t
 
 ___________________________
 
he words
of this law: 31:13 and that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the lord your god, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over jordan to possess it.

31:14 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that i may give him a charge. and moses and
joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 and the lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which i have made wit
 
 ___________________________
 
d honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 and it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for i
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before i have
brought them into the land which i sware.

31:22 moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of israel.

31:23 and he gave joshua the son of nun a charge, and said, be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of israel
into the land which i sware unto them: and i will be with thee.

31:24 and it came to pass, when moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 that
moses commanded the levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lo
 
 ___________________________
 
d how much more after my death?  31:28 gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that i may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 for i know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from the way which i have commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil
in the sight of the lord, to provoke him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 and moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of israel
the words of this song, until they were ended.

32:1 give ear, o ye heavens, and i will speak; and hear, o earth, the
words of my mouth.

32:2 my doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 because i will publish the name of the lord: ascribe
ye greatness unto our god.

32:4 he is the rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e hold on
judgment; i will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

32:42 i will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

32:43 rejoice, o ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the
blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries,
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.

32:44 and moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears
of the people, he, and hoshea the son of nun.

32:45 and moses made an end of speaking all these words to all israel:
32:46 and he said unto them, set your hearts unto all the words which
i testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law.

32:47 for it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whith
 
 ___________________________
 
er ye
go over jordan to possess it.

32:48 and the lord spake unto moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
get thee up into this mountain abarim, unto mount nebo, which is in
the land of moab, that is over against jericho; and behold the land of
canaan, which i give unto the children of israel for a possession:
32:50 and die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as aaron thy brother died in mount hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 because ye trespassed against me among the
children of israel at the waters of meribahkade
 
 ___________________________
 
sh, in the wilderness
of zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
israel.

32:52 yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which i give the children of israel.

33:1 and this is the blessing, wherewith moses the man of god blessed
the children of israel before his death.

33:2 and he said, the lord came from sinai, and rose up from seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of jacob.

33:5
 
 ___________________________
 
 arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, destroy them.

33:28 israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 happy art thou, o israel: who is like unto thee, o people saved
by the lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 and moses went up from the plains of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shewed him all the land of gilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the city of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
will give it unto thy
seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 so moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 and the children of israel wept for moses in the plains of moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for moses were ended.

34:9 and joshua the son of nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the lord commanded moses.

34:10 and there arose not a prophet since in israel like 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto moses,
whom the lord knew face to face, 34:11 in all the signs and the
wonders, which the lord sent him to do in the land of egypt to
pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 and in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which moses shewed
in the sight of all israel.




the book of joshua


1:1 now after the death of moses the servant of the lord it came to
pass, that the lord spake unto joshua the son of nun, moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which i do give
to them, even to the children of israel.

1:3 every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
i given unto you, as i said unto moses.

1:4 from the wilderness and this lebanon even unto the great river,
the river euphrates, all the land of the hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1:5 there shall n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life: as i was with moses, so i will be with thee: i will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

1:6 be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
divide for an inheritance the land, which i sware unto their fathers
to give them.

1:7 only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do according to all the law, which moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest.

1:8 this book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 have not i commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou 
 
 ___________________________
 
dismayed: for the lord thy god is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 then joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
pass through the host, and command the people, saying, prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the lord your god giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 and to the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to half the tribe
of manasseh, spake joshua, saying, 1:13 remember the word which moses
the servant of the lord commanded you, saying, the lord your god hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land.

1:14 your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which moses gave you on this side jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 until the lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the lord your
god giveth them: then ye shall r
 
 ___________________________
 
eturn unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which moses the lord's servant gave you on
this side jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 and they answered joshua, saying, all that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 according as we hearkened unto moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the lord thy god be with thee, as he was with
moses.

1:18 whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 and joshua the son of nun sent out of shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, go view the land, even jericho. and they went, and
came into an harlot's house, named rahab, and lodged there.

2:2 and it was told the king of jericho, saying, behold, there came
men in hither to night of t
 
 ___________________________
 
e must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 and joshua said unto the people, sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the lord will do wonders among you.

3:6 and joshua spake unto the priests, saying, take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. and they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 and the lord said unto joshua, this day will i begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all israel, that they may know that, as i was
with moses, so i will be with thee.

3:8 and thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, when ye are come to the brink of the water of
jordan, ye shall stand still in jordan.

3:9 and joshua said unto the children of israel, come hither, and hear
the words of the lord your god.

3:10 and joshua said, hereby ye shall know that the living god is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the hivites, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
the tribes of the children of
israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 and joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day.

4:10 for the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of jordan,
until everything was finished that the lord commanded joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that moses commanded joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over.

4:11 and it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 and the children of reuben, and the children of gad, and half the
tribe of manasseh, passed over armed before the children of israel, as
moses spake unto them: 4:13 about forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the lord unto battle, to the plains of jericho.
 
 ___________________________
 


4:14 on that day the lord magnified joshua in the sight of all israel;
and they feared him, as they feared moses, all the days of his life.

4:15 and the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:16 command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of jordan.

4:17 joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, come ye up out of
jordan.

4:18 and it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the lord were come up out of the midst of jordan, and the
soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of jordan returned unto t
 
 ___________________________
 
h he
commanded joshua.

8:28 and joshua burnt ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 and the king of ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 then joshua built an altar unto the lord god of israel in mount
ebal, 8:31 as moses the servant of the lord commanded the children of
israel, as it is written in the book of the law of moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the lord, and sacrificed peace
offerings.

8:32 and he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of israel.

8:33 and all israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on this side the ark 
 
 ___________________________
 
and on that side before the priests the
levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount gerizim, and half of them over against mount ebal; as moses the
servant of the lord had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of israel.

8:34 and afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 there was not a word of all that moses commanded, which joshua
read not before all the congregation of israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.

9:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings which we
 
 ___________________________
 
regation; as the
princes had promised them.

9:22 and joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, we are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us?  9:23 now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my god.

9:24 and they answered joshua, and said, because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the lord thy god commanded his servant moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 and now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 and so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 and joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregatio
 
 ___________________________
 
0 and joshua at that time turned back, and took hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms.

11:11 and they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt hazor with fire.

11:12 and all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as moses the servant of the lord commanded.

11:13 but as for the cities that stood still in their strength, israel
burned none of them, save hazor only; that did joshua burn.

11:14 and all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe.

11:15 as the lord commanded moses his servant, so did moses command
joshua, and so did j
 
 ___________________________
 
oshua; he left nothing undone of all that the lord
commanded moses.

11:16 so joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 even
from the mount halak, that goeth up to seir, even unto baalgad in the
valley of lebanon under mount hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them.

11:18 joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

11:19 there was not a city that made peace with the children
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
israel, save the hivites the inhabitants of gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 for it was of the lord to harden their hearts, that they should
come against israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
lord commanded moses.

11:21 and at that time came joshua, and cut off the anakims from the
mountains, from hebron, from debir, from anab, and from all the
mountains of judah, and from all the mountains of israel: joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities.

11:22 there was none of the anakims left in the land of the children
of israel: only in gaza, in gath, and in ashdod, there remained.

11:23 so joshua took the whole land, according to all that the lord
said unto moses; and joshua gave it for an
 
 ___________________________
 
m the plain to the sea of chinneroth on the east, and unto
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under ashdothpisgah: 12:4 and the
coast of og king of bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at ashtaroth and at edrei, 12:5 and reigned in mount
hermon, and in salcah, and in all bashan, unto the border of the
geshurites and the maachathites, and half gilead, the border of sihon
king of heshbon.

12:6 them did moses the servant of the lord and the children of israel
smite: and moses the servant of the lord gave it for a possession unto
the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh.

12:7 and these are the kings of the country which joshua and the
children of israel smote on this side jordan on the west, from baalgad
in the valley of lebanon even unto the mount halak, that goeth up to
seir; which joshua gave unto the tribes of israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 1
 
 ___________________________
 
nt hermon unto the entering into
hamath.

13:6 all the inhabitants of the hill country from lebanon unto
misrephothmaim, and all the sidonians, them will i drive out from
before the children of israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
israelites for an inheritance, as i have commanded thee.

13:7 now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of manasseh, 13:8 with whom the reubenites
and the gadites have received their inheritance, which moses gave
them, beyond jordan eastward, even as moses the servant of the lord
gave them; 13:9 from aroer, that is upon the bank of the river arnon,
and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
medeba unto dibon; 13:10 and all the cities of sihon king of the
amorites, which reigned in heshbon, unto the border of the children of
ammon; 13:11 and gilead, and the border of the geshurites and
maachathites, and all mount hermon, and all bashan unto salcah; 13:12
all the kin
 
 ___________________________
 
gdom of og in bashan, which reigned in ashtaroth and in
edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 nevertheless the children of israel expelled not the geshurites,
nor the maachathites: but the geshurites and the maachathites dwell
among the israelites until this day.

13:14 only unto the tribes of levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the lord god of israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 and moses gave unto the tribe of the children of reuben
inheritance according to their families.

13:16 and their 
 
 ___________________________
 
river
arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by medeba; 13:17 heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; dibon, and bamothbaal, and bethbaalmeon, 13:18 and jahaza, and
kedemoth, and mephaath, 13:19 and kirjathaim, and sibmah, and
zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 and bethpeor, and
ashdothpisgah, and bethjeshimoth, 13:21 and all the cities of the
plain, and all the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, which
reigned in heshbon, whom moses smote with the princes of midian, evi,
and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, which were dukes of sihon,
dwelling in the country.

13:22 balaam also the son of beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

13:23 and the border of the children of reuben was jordan, and the
border thereof. this was the inheritance of the children of reuben
after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.

13:24 and moses gave inherit
 
 ___________________________
 
of ammon, unto aroer that is before
rabbah; 13:26 and from heshbon unto ramathmizpeh, and betonim; and
from mahanaim unto the border of debir; 13:27 and in the valley,
betharam, and bethnimrah, and succoth, and zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of sihon king of heshbon, jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of chinnereth on the other side jordan eastward.

13:28 this is the inheritance of the children of gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages.

13:29 and moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of manasseh: and
this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of manasseh
by their families.

13:30 and their coast was from mahanaim, all bashan, all the kingdom
of og king of bashan, and all the towns of jair, which are in bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 and half gilead, and ashtaroth, and edrei,
cities of the kingdom of og in bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of machir the son of manasseh, even to the one half of the
childre
 
 ___________________________
 
n of machir by their families.

13:32 these are the countries which moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of moab, on the other side jordan, by
jericho, eastward.

13:33 but unto the tribe of levi moses gave not any inheritance: the
lord god of israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 and these are the countries which the children of israel
inherited in the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 by lot was their inheritance, as the lord commanded by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for mos
 
 ___________________________
 
es had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side jordan: but unto the levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 as the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
the son of jephunneh the kenezite said unto him, thou knowest the
thing that the lord said unto moses the man of god concerning me and
thee in kadeshbarnea.

14:7 forty years old was i when moses the servant of the lord sent me
from kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and i brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 nevertheless my brethren that
 
 ___________________________
 
 went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but i wholly followed the lord my god.

14:9 and moses sware on that day, saying, surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for
ever, because thou hast wholly followed the lord my god.

14:10 and now, behold, the lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the lord spake this word unto moses,
while the children of israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
i am this day fourscore and five years old.

14:11 as yet i am as strong this day as i was in the day that moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the lord spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the lord wil
 
 ___________________________
 
 the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

17:3 but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of
machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and
tirzah.

17:4 and they came near before eleazar the priest, and before joshua
the son of nun, and before the princes, saying, the lord commanded
moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. therefore
according to the commandment of the lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 and there fell ten portions to manasseh, beside the land of
gilead and bashan, which were on the other side jordan; 17:6 because
the daughters of manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of manasseh's sons had the land of gilead.

17:7 and the coast of manasseh was from asher to michmethah, that
lieth bef
 
 ___________________________
 
udah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that i may cast lots for you here before
the lord our god.

18:7 but the levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond jordan on the east,
which moses the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, and went away: and joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that i may here cast lots for you
before the lord in shiloh.

18:9 and the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to joshua to the
host at shiloh.

18:10 and joshua cast lots for them in shiloh before the lord: 
 
 ___________________________
 
in.

19:51 these are the inheritances, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in shiloh before
the lord, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. so they
made an end of dividing the country.

20:1 the lord also spake unto joshua, saying, 20:2 speak to the
children of israel, saying, appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof i spake unto you by the hand of moses: 20:3 that the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

20:4 and when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the
city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

20:5 and if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
e stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.

21:1 then came near the heads of the fathers of the levites unto
eleazar the priest, and unto joshua the son of nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of israel; 21:2 and they
spake unto them at shiloh in the land of canaan, saying, the lord
commanded by the hand of moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 and the children of israel gave unto the levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the lord, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 and the lot came out for the families of the kohathites: and the
children of aaron the priest, which were of the levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of judah, and out of the tribe of simeon, and out of
the tribe of benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 and the rest of
 
 ___________________________
 
en of gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of issachar, and out of the tribe of asher, and out of the tribe
of naphtali, and out of the half tribe of manasseh in bashan, thirteen
cities.

21:7 the children of merari by their families had out of the tribe of
reuben, and out of the tribe of gad, and out of the tribe of zebulun,
twelve cities.

21:8 and the children of israel gave by lot unto the levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the lord commanded by the hand of moses.

21:9 and they gave out of the tribe of the children of judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

21:10 which the children of aaron, being of the families of the
kohathites, who were of the children of levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot.

21:11 and they gave them the city of arba the father of anak, which
city is hebron, in the hill country of judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it.

21:12 but the fields of
 
 ___________________________
 
 and dwelt therein.

21:44 and the lord gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the lord delivered all their enemies into their
hand.

21:45 there failed not ought of any good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the house of israel; all came to pass.

22:1 then joshua called the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, 22:2 and said unto them, ye have kept all that
moses the servant of the lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that i commanded you: 22:3 ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the lord your god.

22:4 and now the lord your god hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which moses the servant
of the lord gave you on the other side jordan.

22:5 but t
 
 ___________________________
 
ake diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
moses the servant of the lord charged you, to love the lord your god,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 so joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 now to the one half of the tribe of manasseh moses had given
possession in bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave joshua
among their brethren on this side jordan westward. and when joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 and
he spake unto them, saying, return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.

22:9 and the children of reuben and the c
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren of gad and the half
tribe of manasseh returned, and departed from the children of israel
out of shiloh, which is in the land of canaan, to go unto the country
of gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the lord by the hand of moses.

22:10 and when they came unto the borders of jordan, that are in the
land of canaan, the children of reuben and the children of gad and the
half tribe of manasseh built there an altar by jordan, a great altar
to see to.

22:11 and the children of israel heard say, behold, the children of
reuben and the children of gad and the half tribe of manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of canaan, in the borders of
jordan, at the passage of the children of israel.

22:12 and wh
 
 ___________________________
 
you.

23:4 behold, i have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from jordan, with all the
nations that i have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 and the lord your god, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the lord your god hath promised unto you.

23:6 be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 that ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 but cleave unto the lord your
god, as ye have done unto this day.

23:9 for the lord hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day.


 
 ___________________________
 
ord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cried unto the lord, he put darkness between you
and the egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what i have done in egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilder
 
 ___________________________
 
niel the son of kenaz, caleb's younger brother, took it:
and he gave him achsah his daughter to wife.

1:14 and it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and caleb
said unto her, what wilt thou?  1:15 and she said unto him, give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of
water. and caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.

1:16 and the children of the kenite, moses' father in law, went up out
of the city of palm trees with the children of judah into the
wilderness of judah, which lieth in the south of arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people.

1:17 and judah went with simeon his brother, and they slew the
canaanites that inhabited zephath, and utterly destroyed it. and the
name of the city was called hormah.

1:18 also judah took gaza with the coast thereof, and askelon with the
coast thereof, and ekron with the coast thereof.

1:19 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord was with judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron.

1:20 and they gave hebron unto caleb, as moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of anak.

1:21 and the children of benjamin did not drive out the jebusites that
inhabited jerusalem; but the jebusites dwell with the children of
benjamin in jerusalem unto this day.

1:22 and the house of joseph, they also went up against bethel: and
the lord was with them.

1:23 and the house of joseph sent to descry bethel. (now the name of
the city before was luz.)  1:24 and the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they sai
 
 ___________________________
 
anaan;
3:2 only that the generations of the children of israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3:3
namely, five lords of the philistines, and all the canaanites, and the
sidonians, and the hivites that dwelt in mount lebanon, from mount
baalhermon unto the entering in of hamath.

3:4 and they were to prove israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the lord, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of moses.

3:5 and the children of israel dwelt among the canaanites, hittites,
and amorites, and perizzites, and hivites, and jebusites: 3:6 and they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods.

3:7 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
forgat the lord their god, and served baalim and the groves.

3:8 therefore the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he
sold them into the hand of chushanrishathai
 
 ___________________________
 
ilt not go with me, then i will not go.

4:9 and she said, i will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the lord
shall sell sisera into the hand of a woman. and deborah arose, and
went with barak to kedesh.

4:10 and barak called zebulun and naphtali to kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at his feet: and deborah went up with him.

4:11 now heber the kenite, which was of the children of hobab the
father in law of moses, had severed himself from the kenites, and
pitched his tent unto the plain of zaanaim, which is by kedesh.

4:12 and they shewed sisera that barak the son of abinoam was gone up
to mount tabor.

4:13 and sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
harosheth of the gentiles unto the river of kishon.

4:14 and deborah said unto barak, up; for this is the day in which the
lord hath delivered sisera into thine
 
 ___________________________
 
uded? whom have i oppressed? or of whose hand have i
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and i will restore it
you.

12:4 and they said, thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, he is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, it is the lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
 
 ___________________________
 
y brought him down from the altar.
and he came and bowed himself to king solomon: and solomon said unto
him, go to thine house.

2:1 now the days of david drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
solomon his son, saying, 2:2 i go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 and keep the charge of
the lord thy god, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, if thy children take
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
throne of israel.

2:5 moreover thou knowest also what joab the son of zeruiah did to me,
and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of israel, unto abner
 
 ___________________________
 
, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims.

8:7 for the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of
the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof
above.

8:8 and they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were
seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen
without: and there they are unto this day.

8:9 there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which
moses put there at horeb, when the lord made a covenant with the
children of israel, when they came out of the land of egypt.

8:10 and it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud filled the house of the lord, 8:11 so that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the lord had filled the house of the lord.

8:12 then spake solomon, the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 i have surely built th
 
 ___________________________
 
em captive, that they may have compassion on them:
8:51 for they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest forth out of egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
8:52 that thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
and unto the supplication of thy people israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 for thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of moses
thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of egypt, o lord
god.

8:54 and it was so, that when solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication unto the lord, he arose from before the
altar of the lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.

8:55 and he stood, and blessed all the congregation of israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 blessed be the lord, that hath given rest
unto his people israel, according to all that he promised:
 
 ___________________________
 
 there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the
hand of moses his servant.

8:57 the lord our god be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him
not leave us, nor forsake us: 8:58 that he may incline our hearts unto
him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his
statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.

8:59 and let these my words, wherewith i have made supplication before
the lord, be nigh unto the lord our god day and night, that he
maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people israel

 
 ___________________________
 
n the sight of the lord, yet not
like david his father: he did according to all things as joash his
father did.

14:4 howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people
did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

14:5 and it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

14:6 but the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of moses, wherein the
lord commanded, saying, the fathers shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every
man shall be put to death for his own sin.

14:7 he slew of edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took
selah by war, and called the name of it joktheel unto this day.

14:8 then amaziah sent messengers to jehoash, the son of jehoahaz son
of jehu, king of israel, saying, come, let us look one another in the
face.

14:9 and jeh
 
 ___________________________
 
f elah king
of israel, that hezekiah the son of ahaz king of judah began to reign.

18:2 twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. his mother's name also was
abi, the daughter of zachariah.

18:3 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord,
according to all that david his father did.

18:4 he removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that moses had
made: for unto those days the children of israel did burn incense to
it: and he called it nehushtan.

18:5 he trusted in the lord god of israel; so that after him was none
like him among all the kings of judah, nor any that were before him.

18:6 for he clave to the lord, and departed not from following him,
but kept his commandments, which the lord commanded moses.

18:7 and the lord was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went
forth: and he rebelled against the king of 
 
 ___________________________
 
halmaneser king of assyria came up against samaria, and besieged it.

18:10 and at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth
year of hezekiah, that is in the ninth year of hoshea king of israel,
samaria was taken.

18:11 and the king of assyria did carry away israel unto assyria, and
put them in halah and in habor by the river of gozan, and in the
cities of the medes: 18:12 because they obeyed not the voice of the
lord their god, but transgressed his covenant, and all that moses the
servant of the lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

18:13 now in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah did sennacherib king
of assyria come up against all the fenced cities of judah, and took
them.

18:14 and hezekiah king of judah sent to the king of assyria to
lachish, saying, i have offended; return from me: that which thou
puttest on me will i bear. and the king of assyria appointed unto
hezekiah king of judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty
talent
 
 ___________________________
 
 provoke him to
anger.

21:7 and he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the
house, of which the lord said to david, and to solomon his son, in
this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen out of all tribes of
israel, will i put my name for ever: 21:8 neither will i make the feet
of israel move any more out of the land which i gave their fathers;
only if they will observe to do according to all that i have commanded
them, and according to all the law that my servant moses commanded
them.

21:9 but they hearkened not: and manasseh seduced them to do more evil
than did the nations whom the lord destroyed before the children of
israel.

21:10 and the lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying, 21:11
because manasseh king of judah hath done these abominations, and hath
done wickedly above all that the amorites did, which were before him,
and hath made judah also to sin with his idols: 21:12 therefore thus
saith the lord god of israel, behold, i am br
 
 ___________________________
 
ver the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and
the images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in
the land of judah and in jerusalem, did josiah put away, that he might
perform the words of the law which were written in the book that
hilkiah the priest found in the house of the lord.

23:25 and like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to
the lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might, according to all the law of moses; neither after him arose
there any like him.

23:26 notwithstanding the lord turned not from the fierceness of his
great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against judah, because of
all the provocations that manasseh had provoked him withal.

23:27 and the lord said, i will remove judah also out of my sight, as
i have removed israel, and will cast off this city jerusalem which i
have chosen, and the house of which i said, my name shall be there.

23:28 now the rest of the acts of
 
 ___________________________
 
d
before them.

5:26 and the god of israel stirred up the spirit of pul king of
assyria, and the spirit of tilgathpilneser king of assyria, and he
carried them away, even the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, and brought them unto halah, and habor, and hara,
and to the river gozan, unto this day.

6:1 the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

6:2 and the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, and hebron, and uzziel.

6:3 and the children of amram; aaron, and moses, and miriam. the sons
also of aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

6:4 eleazar begat phinehas, phinehas begat abishua, 6:5 and abishua
begat bukki, and bukki begat uzzi, 6:6 and uzzi begat zerahiah, and
zerahiah begat meraioth, 6:7 meraioth begat amariah, and amariah begat
ahitub, 6:8 and ahitub begat zadok, and zadok begat ahimaaz, 6:9 and
ahimaaz begat azariah, and azariah begat johanan, 6:10 and johanan
begat azariah, (he it is that executed the priest's office in the
tem
 
 ___________________________
 
 of hilkiah, 6:46 the son
of amzi, the son of bani, the son of shamer, 6:47 the son of mahli,
the son of mushi, the son of merari, the son of levi.

6:48 their brethren also the levites were appointed unto all manner of
service of the tabernacle of the house of god.

6:49 but aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt
offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the
work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for israel,
according to all that moses the servant of god had commanded.

6:50 and these are the sons of aaron; eleazar his son, phinehas his
son, abishua his son, 6:51 bukki his son, uzzi his son, zerahiah his
son, 6:52 meraioth his son, amariah his son, ahitub his son, 6:53
zadok his son, ahimaaz his son.

6:54 now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles in
their coasts, of the sons of aaron, of the families of the kohathites:
for theirs was the lot.

6:55 and they gave them hebron in the land of judah,
 
 ___________________________
 
 yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that
ye may bring up the ark of the lord god of israel unto the place that
i have prepared for it.

15:13 for because ye did it not at the first, the lord our god made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

15:14 so the priests and the levites sanctified themselves to bring up
the ark of the lord god of israel.

15:15 and the children of the levites bare the ark of god upon their
shoulders with the staves thereon, as moses commanded according to the
word of the lord.

15:16 and david spake to the chief of the levites to appoint their
brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and
harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.

15:17 so the levites appointed heman the son of joel; and of his
brethren, asaph the son of berechiah; and of the sons of merari their
brethren, ethan the son of kushaiah; 15:18 and with them their
brethren of the second degree, zechariah, be
 
 ___________________________
 
weight.

21:26 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the lord; and he
answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

21:27 and the lord commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again
into the sheath thereof.

21:28 at that time when david saw that the lord had answered him in
the threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

21:29 for the tabernacle of the lord, which moses made in the
wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season
in the high place at gibeon.

21:30 but david could not go before it to enquire of god: for he was
afraid because of the sword of the angel of the lord.

22:1 then david said, this is the house of the lord god, and this is
the altar of the burnt offering for israel.

22:2 and david commanded to gather together the strangers that were in
the land of israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build
 
 ___________________________
 
 son, and
i will be his father; and i will establish the throne of his kingdom
over israel for ever.

22:11 now, my son, the lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build
the house of the lord thy god, as he hath said of thee.

22:12 only the lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charge concerning israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the lord
thy god.

22:13 then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the
statutes and judgments which the lord charged moses with concerning
israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.

22:14 now, behold, in my trouble i have prepared for the house of the
lord an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand
talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in
abundance: timber also and stone have i prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cun
 
 ___________________________
 
 sons of shimei; shelomith, and haziel, and haran, three.
these were the chief of the fathers of laadan.

23:10 and the sons of shimei were, jahath, zina, and jeush, and
beriah.

these four were the sons of shimei.

23:11 and jahath was the chief, and zizah the second: but jeush and
beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning,
according to their father's house.

23:12 the sons of kohath; amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel, four.

23:13 the sons of amram; aaron and moses: and aaron was separated,
that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for
ever, to burn incense before the lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name for ever.

23:14 now concerning moses the man of god, his sons were named of the
tribe of levi.

23:15 the sons of moses were, gershom, and eliezer.

23:16 of the sons of gershom, shebuel was the chief.

23:17 and the sons of eliezer were, rehabiah the chief. and eliezer
had none other sons; but the sons of
 
 ___________________________
 
he levites, ahijah was over the treasures of the house
of god, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.

26:21 as concerning the sons of laadan; the sons of the gershonite
laadan, chief fathers, even of laadan the gershonite, were jehieli.

26:22 the sons of jehieli; zetham, and joel his brother, which were
over the treasures of the house of the lord.

26:23 of the amramites, and the izharites, the hebronites, and the
uzzielites: 26:24 and shebuel the son of gershom, the son of moses,
was ruler of the treasures.

26:25 and his brethren by eliezer; rehabiah his son, and jeshaiah his
son, and joram his son, and zichri his son, and shelomith his son.

26:26 which shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.

 
 ___________________________
 
ond book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the lord his god was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 so solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of god, which moses the servant of the lord had made in
the wilderness.

1:4 but the ark of god had david brought up from kirjathjearim to the
place which david had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at jerusalem.

1:5 moreover the brasen altar, that bezaleel the son of uri, the son
of hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the lord: and
solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 and solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the lord,
which was at the tabernacle o
 
 ___________________________
 
rd
unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims: 5:8 for the cherubims spread
forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof above.

5:9 and they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the
staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not
seen without. and there it is unto this day.

5:10 there was nothing in the ark save the two tables which moses put
therein at horeb, when the lord made a covenant with the children of
israel, when they came out of egypt.

5:11 and it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did
not then wait by course: 5:12 also the levites which were the singers,
all of them of asaph, of heman, of jeduthun, with their sons and their
brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries
and harps, stood at the eas
 
 ___________________________
 
rule over the people.

8:11 and solomon brought up the daughter of pharaoh out of the city of
david unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, my wife
shall not dwell in the house of david king of israel, because the
places are holy, whereunto the ark of the lord hath come.

8:12 then solomon offered burnt offerings unto the lord on the altar
of the lord, which he had built before the porch, 8:13 even after a
certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of
moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 and he appointed, according to the order of david his father, the
courses of the priests to their service, and the levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had david the man of
 
 ___________________________
 
ween all the
people, and between the king, that they should be the lord's people.

23:17 then all the people went to the house of baal, and brake it
down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew mattan
the priest of baal before the altars.

23:18 also jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the lord by
the hand of the priests the levites, whom david had distributed in the
house of the lord, to offer the burnt offerings of the lord, as it is
written in the law of moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it
was ordained by david.

23:19 and he set the porters at the gates of the house of the lord,
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

23:20 and he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the
governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought
down the king from the house of the lord: and they came through the
high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of
the kingdom.

23:21 an
 
 ___________________________
 
e house of the lord.

24:5 and he gathered together the priests and the levites, and said to
them, go out unto the cities of judah, and gather of all israel money
to repair the house of your god from year to year, and see that ye
hasten the matter. howbeit the levites hastened it not.

24:6 and the king called for jehoiada the chief, and said unto him,
why hast thou not required of the levites to bring in out of judah and
out of jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of moses
the servant of the lord, and of the congregation of israel, for the
tabernacle of witness?  24:7 for the sons of athaliah, that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of god; and also all the dedicated
things of the house of the lord did they bestow upon baalim.

24:8 and at the king's commandment they made a chest, and set it
without at the gate of the house of the lord.

24:9 and they made a proclamation through judah and jerusalem, to
bring in to the lord the collection that moses t
 
 ___________________________
 
ad.

25:1 amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem. and his mother's name
was jehoaddan of jerusalem.

25:2 and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord, but not
with a perfect heart.

25:3 now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him,
that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.

25:4 but he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the
law in the book of moses, where the lord commanded, saying, the
fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die
for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.

25:5 moreover amaziah gathered judah together, and made them captains
over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of
their fathers, throughout all judah and benjamin: and he numbered them
from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand
choice men, able to go forth to war, th
 
 ___________________________
 
d month, a very great congregation.

30:14 and they arose and took away the altars that were in jerusalem,
and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the
brook kidron.

30:15 then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the
second month: and the priests and the levites were ashamed, and
sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the
house of the lord.

30:16 and they stood in their place after their manner, according to
the law of moses the man of god: the priests sprinkled the blood,
which they received of the hand of the levites.

30:17 for there were many in the congregation that were not
sanctified: therefore the levites had the charge of the killing of the
passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the
lord.

30:18 for a multitude of the people, even many of ephraim, and
manasseh, issachar, and zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did
they eat the passover otherwise than it was writte
 
 ___________________________
 
arved image, the idol which he had made, in the
house of god, of which god had said to david and to solomon his son,
in this house, and in jerusalem, which i have chosen before all the
tribes of israel, will i put my name for ever: 33:8 neither will i any
more remove the foot of israel from out of the land which i have
appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
i have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and
the ordinances by the hand of moses.

33:9 so manasseh made judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem to err,
and to do worse than the heathen, whom the lord had destroyed before
the children of israel.

33:10 and the lord spake to manasseh, and to his people: but they
would not hearken.

33:11 wherefore the lord brought upon them the captains of the host of
the king of assyria, which took manasseh among the thorns, and bound
him with fetters, and carried him to babylon.

33:12 and when he was in affliction, he besought
 
 ___________________________
 
echariah and meshullam, of the sons of the kohathites, to set it
forward; and other of the levites, all that could skill of instruments
of musick.

34:13 also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers
of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the
levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

34:14 and when they brought out the money that was brought into the
house of the lord, hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the
lord given by moses.

34:15 and hilkiah answered and said to shaphan the scribe, i have
found the book of the law in the house of the lord. and hilkiah
delivered the book to shaphan.

34:16 and shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king
word back again, saying, all that was committed to thy servants, they
do it.

34:17 and they have gathered together the money that was found in the
house of the lord, and have delivered it into the hand of the
overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

 
 ___________________________
 
epare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of david king of israel, and according to the writing of
solomon his son.

35:5 and stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the levites.

35:6 so kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to the word of the lord by the
hand of moses.

35:7 and josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all
for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number
of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the
king's substance.

35:8 and his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests,
and to the levites: hilkiah and zechariah and jehiel, rulers of the
house of god, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two
thousand and six hundred small cattle and three hundred ox
 
 ___________________________
 
usand small cattle, and five
hundred oxen.

35:10 so the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their
place, and the levites in their courses, according to the king's
commandment.

35:11 and they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the
blood from their hands, and the levites flayed them.

35:12 and they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give
according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer
unto the lord, as it is written in the book of moses. and so did they
with the oxen.

35:13 and they roasted the passover with fire according to the
ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

35:14 and afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: because the priests the sons of aaron were busied in offering
of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the levites
prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons o
 
 ___________________________
 
ers, and the porters, and the nethinims, dwelt in their cities,
and all israel in their cities.

3:1 and when the seventh month was come, and the children of israel
were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man
to jerusalem.

3:2 then stood up jeshua the son of jozadak, and his brethren the
priests, and zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and his brethren, and
builded the altar of the god of israel, to offer burnt offerings
thereon, as it is written in the law of moses the man of god.

3:3 and they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them
because of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt
offerings thereon unto the lord, even burnt offerings morning and
evening.

3:4 they kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom,
as the duty of every day required; 3:5 and afterward offered the
continual burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the
 
 ___________________________
 
ites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this
house of god with joy.

6:17 and offered at the dedication of this house of god an hundred
bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering
for all israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes
of israel.

6:18 and they set the priests in their divisions, and the levites in
their courses, for the service of god, which is at jerusalem; as it is
written in the book of moses.

6:19 and the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the
fourteenth day of the first month.

6:20 for the priests and the levites were purified together, all of
them were pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the
captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.

6:21 and the children of israel, which were come again out of
captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the
filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek 
 
 ___________________________
 
ow after these things, in the reign of artaxerxes king of persia,
ezra the son of seraiah, the son of azariah, the son of hilkiah, 7:2
the son of shallum, the son of zadok, the son of ahitub, 7:3 the son
of amariah, the son of azariah, the son of meraioth, 7:4 the son of
zerahiah, the son of uzzi, the son of bukki, 7:5 the son of abishua,
the son of phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the chief
priest: 7:6 this ezra went up from babylon; and he was a ready scribe
in the law of moses, which the lord god of israel had given: and the
king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the lord
his god upon him.

7:7 and there went up some of the children of israel, and of the
priests, and the levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the
nethinims, unto jerusalem, in the seventh year of artaxerxes the king.

7:8 and he came to jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the
seventh year of the king.

7:9 for upon the first day of the first month began he
 
 ___________________________
 
his commandments: 1:6 let thine ear now be
attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of
thy servant, which i pray before thee now, day and night, for the
children of israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children
of israel, which we have sinned against thee: both i and my father's
house have sinned.

1:7 we have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou
commandedst thy servant moses.

1:8 remember, i beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
servant moses, saying, if ye transgress, i will scatter you abroad
among the nations: 1:9 but if ye turn unto me, and keep my
commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the
uttermost part of the heaven, yet will i gather them from thence, and
will bring them unto the place that i have chosen to set my name
there.

1:10 now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast
redeemed by thy gre
 
 ___________________________
 
nd two thousand pound of silver, and threescore and
seven priests' garments.

7:73 so the priests, and the levites, and the porters, and the
singers, and some of the people, and the nethinims, and all israel,
dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children
of israel were in their cities.

8:1 and all the people gathered themselves together as one man into
the street that was before the water gate; and they spake unto ezra
the scribe to bring the book of the law of moses, which the lord had
commanded to israel.

8:2 and ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both
of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the
first day of the seventh month.

8:3 and he read therein before the street that was before the water
gate from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and
those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were
attentive unto the book of the law.

8:4 and ezra the scribe stood up
 
 ___________________________
 
peace,
for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

8:12 and all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to
send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood
the words that were declared unto them.

8:13 and on the second day were gathered together the chief of the
fathers of all the people, the priests, and the levites, unto ezra the
scribe, even to understand the words of the law.

8:14 and they found written in the law which the lord had commanded by
moses, that the children of israel should dwell in booths in the feast
of the seventh month: 8:15 and that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in jerusalem, saying, go forth unto the
mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle
branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make
booths, as it is written.

8:16 so the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves
booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ewest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters.

9:12 moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in
the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein
they should go.

9:13 thou camest down also upon mount sinai, and spakest with them
from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good
statutes and commandments: 9:14 and madest known unto them thy holy
sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the
hand of moses thy servant: 9:15 and gavest them bread from heaven for
their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for
their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess
the land which thou hadst sworn to give them.

9:16 but they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
and hearkened not to thy commandments, 9:17 and refused to obey,
neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but
hardened their necks, and in their rebellion a
 
 ___________________________
 

10:26 and ahijah, hanan, anan, 10:27 malluch, harim, baanah.

10:28 and the rest of the people, the priests, the levites, the
porters, the singers, the nethinims, and all they that had separated
themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of god, their
wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge,
and having understanding; 10:29 they clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in god's
law, which was given by moses the servant of god, and to observe and
do all the commandments of the lord our lord, and his judgments and
his statutes; 10:30 and that we would not give our daughters unto the
people of the land, not take their daughters for our sons: 10:31 and
if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath
day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on
the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the
exaction of every debt.

10:32 also we made 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to the commandment of
david, and of solomon his son.

12:46 for in the days of david and asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the days of zerubbabel, and in the days of
nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the levites; and the
levites sanctified them unto the children of aaron.

13:1 on that day they read in the book of moses in the audience of the
people; and therein was found written, that the ammonite and the
moabite should not come into the congregation of god for ever; 13:2
because they met not the children of israel with bread and with water,
but hired balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our
god turned the curse into a blessing.

13:3 now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separated from israel all the mixed multitude.

13:4 and before this, eliashib the pries
 
 ___________________________
 
seph. selah.

77:16 the waters saw thee, o god, the waters saw thee; they were
afraid: the depths also were troubled.

77:17 the clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
arrows also went abroad.

77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings
lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.

77:19 thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

77:20 thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of moses and
aaron.



78:1 give ear, o my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words
of my mouth.

78:2 i will open my mouth in a parable: i will utter dark sayings of
old:

78:3 which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.

78:4 we will not hide them from their children, shewing to the
generation to come the praises of the lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he hath done.

78:5 for he established a testimony in jacob, and appointed a law in
isr
 
 ___________________________
 
the people with equity.



99:1 the lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the lord, and he answered them.

99:7 he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, o lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our god, and worship at his holy hill; for the
lord our god is holy.



100:1 make a joyful nois
 
 ___________________________
 
e, bless his
holy name.

103:2 bless the lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits:

103:3 who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy
diseases;

103:4 who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with
lovingkindness and tender mercies;

103:5 who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is
renewed like the eagle's.

103:6 the lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.

103:7 he made known his ways unto moses, his acts unto the children of
israel.

103:8 the lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous
in mercy.

103:9 he will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for
ever.

103:10 he hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities.

103:11 for as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him.

103:12 as far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us
 
 ___________________________
 
t and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 he made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

105:22 to bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators
wisdom.

105:23 israel also came into egypt; and jacob sojourned in the land of
ham.

105:24 and he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger
than their enemies.

105:25 he turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.

105:26 he sent moses his servant; and aaron whom he had chosen.

105:27 they shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
ham.

105:28 he sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not
against his word.

105:29 he turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.

105:30 their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of
their kings.

105:31 he spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all
their coasts.

105:32 he gave them hail for rain, and flaming
 
 ___________________________
 
nd he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and
redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

106:11 and the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them
left.

106:12 then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

106:13 they soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:

106:14 but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted god in
the desert.

106:15 and he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their
soul.

106:16 they envied moses also in the camp, and aaron the saint of the
lord.

106:17 the earth opened and swallowed up dathan and covered the
company of abiram.

106:18 and a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up
the wicked.

106:19 they made a calf in horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

106:20 thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
eateth grass.

106:21 they forgat god their saviour, which had done great things in
egypt;

106:22 wondrous works in the land 
 
 ___________________________
 
of ham, and terrible things by the
red sea.

106:23 therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them.

106:24 yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his
word:

106:25 but murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice
of the lord.

106:26 therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them
in the wilderness:

106:27 to overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter
them in the lands.

106:28 they joined themselves also unto baalpeor
 
 ___________________________
 
, and ate the
sacrifices of the dead.

106:29 thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the
plague brake in upon them.

106:30 then stood up phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the
plague was stayed.

106:31 and that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore.

106:32 they angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went
ill with moses for their sakes:

106:33 because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly
with his lips.

106:34 they did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the lord
commanded them:

106:35 but were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.

106:36 and they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

106:37 yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
devils,

106:38 and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of
their daughters, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ude of
his lovingkindnesses.

63:8 for he said, surely they are my people, children that will not
lie: so he was their saviour.

63:9 in all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and
he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

63:10 but they rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit: therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

63:11 then he remembered the days of old, moses, and his people,
saying, where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the
shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy spirit within
him?  63:12 that led them by the right hand of moses with his glorious
arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting
name?  63:13 that led them through the deep, as an horse in the
wilderness, that they should not stumble?  63:14 as a beast goeth down
into the valley, the spirit of the lord caused him to rest: so didst
 
 ___________________________
 
e acknowledge, o lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

14:21 do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne
of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

14:22 are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that can cause
rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, o lord our
god?  therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these
things.

15:1 then said the lord unto me, though moses and samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth.

15:2 and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, whither shall
we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, thus saith the lord; such as
are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity.

15:3 and i will appoint over them four kinds, saith the 
 
 ___________________________
 
, to our
princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

9:9 to the lord our god belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we
have rebelled against him; 9:10 neither have we obeyed the voice of
the lord our god, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his
servants the prophets.

9:11 yea, all israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing,
that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon
us, and the oath that is written in the law of moses the servant of
god, because we have sinned against him.

9:12 and he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and
against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil:
for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon
jerusalem.

9:13 as it is written in the law of moses, all this evil is come upon
us: yet made we not our prayer before the lord our god, that we might
turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.

9:14 therefore hat
 
 ___________________________
 
at the lord saith; arise, contend thou before the
mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

6:2 hear ye, o mountains, the lord's controversy, and ye strong
foundations of the earth: for the lord hath a controversy with his
people, and he will plead with israel.

6:3 o my people, what have i done unto thee? and wherein have i
wearied thee? testify against me.

6:4 for i brought thee up out of the land of egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants; and i sent before thee moses, aaron, and
miriam.

6:5 o my people, remember now what balak king of moab consulted, and
what balaam the son of beor answered him from shittim unto gilgal;
that ye may know the righteousness of the lord.

6:6 wherewith shall i come before the lord, and bow myself before the
high god? shall i come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of
a year old?  6:7 will the lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall i give my firstborn for my
tr
 
 ___________________________
 
o wickedly, shall be stubble: and the
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the lord of hosts, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch.

4:2 but unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as
calves of the stall.

4:3 and ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under
the soles of your feet in the day that i shall do this, saith the lord
of hosts.

4:4 remember ye the law of moses my servant, which i commanded unto
him in horeb for all israel, with the statutes and judgments.

4:5 behold, i will send you elijah the prophet before the coming of
the great and dreadful day of the lord: 4:6 and he shall turn the
heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to
their fathers, lest i come and smite the earth with a curse.

