7:6 behold, i will stand before thee there upon the rock in horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the people may drink. and moses did so in the sight of the elders
of israel.

17:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the
lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon;
 
 ___________________________
 
 and aaron and hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the edge of
the sword.

17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write this for a memorial in a
book, and rehearse it in the ears of joshua: for i will utterly put
out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven.

17:15 and moses built an altar, and called the name of it
jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, because the lord hath sworn that the
lord will have war with amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses' father in law, heard of
all that god had done for moses, and for israel his people, and that
the lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses'
father in law, to
 
 ___________________________
 
ael: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which i have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and moses rose up, and his minister joshua: and moses went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight
 
 ___________________________
 
e spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 and the tables were the work of god, and the writing was the
writing of god, graven upon the tables.

32:17 and when joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
he said unto moses, there is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do i hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' anger waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

 
 ___________________________
 
l he was gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 and it came to pass, as moses entered into the tabernacle, the
cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and
the lord talked with moses.

33:10 and all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle
door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent
door.

33:11 and the lord spake unto moses face to face, as a man speaketh
unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp: but his servant
joshua, the son of nun, a young man, departed not out of the
tabernacle.

33:12 and moses said unto the lord, see, thou sayest unto me, bring up
this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with
me. yet thou hast said, i know thee by name, and thou hast also found
grace in my sight.

33:13 now therefore, i pray thee, if i have found grace in thy sight,
shew me now thy way, that i may know thee, that i may find grace in
thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.
 
 ___________________________
 
seventy elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 but there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
one was eldad, and the name of the other medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 and there ran a young man, and told moses, and said, eldad and
medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, my lord moses, forbid them.

11:29 and moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would god
that all the lord's people were prophets, and that the lord would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 and moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of israel.

11:31 and there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on this side
 
 ___________________________
 
ld god that we
had died in the land of egypt! or would god we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then moses and aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the congregation of the children of israel.

14:6 and joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes: 14:7 and they
spake unto all the company of the children of israel, saying, the
land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.

14:8 if the lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 only rebel not ye against the lord, neither fear ye the people of
the land; for they are brea
 
 ___________________________
 
f the children of israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 say unto them, as truly as i live, saith the lord, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will i do to you: 14:29 your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14:30 doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which i
sware to make you dwell therein, save caleb the son of jephunneh, and
joshua the son of nun.

14:31 but your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will
i bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

14:32 but as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness.

14:33 and your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.

14:34 after the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bea
 
 ___________________________
 
reach of promise.

14:35 i the lord have said, i will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 and the men, which moses sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land, 14:37 even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, died by the plague before the lord.

14:38 but joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

14:39 and moses told these sayings unto all the children of israel:
and the people mourned greatly.

14:40 and they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
place which the lord hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 and moses said, wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ren of israel.

26:63 these are they that were numbered by moses and eleazar the
priest, who numbered the children of israel in the plains of moab by
jordan near jericho.

26:64 but among these there was not a man of them whom moses and aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood before moses, and before eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father died in the
wildernes
 
 ___________________________
 
ctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and moses spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let the lord, the
god of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 and the lord said unto moses, take thee joshua the son of nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 and set
him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge in their sight.

27:20 and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congregation of the children of israel may be obedient.

27:21 and he shall stand before eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of urim before the lord: at his
word shall they go out, and at his word
 
 ___________________________
 
 they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 and moses did as the lord commanded him: and he took joshua, and
set him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
27:23 and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
lord commanded by the hand of moses.

28:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 28:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, my offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 and thou shalt say unto them, this is the offering made by fire
 
 ___________________________
 
f eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 surely none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholly followed the lord.

32:13 and the lord's anger was kindled against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, was consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the lord toward
israel.

32:15 for if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them
in the wilderness;
 
 ___________________________
 
and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

32:25 and the children of gad and the children of reuben spake unto
moses, saying, thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of gilead: 32:27 but thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the lord to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 so concerning them moses commanded eleazar the priest, and
joshua the son of nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel: 32:29 and moses said unto them, if the children of
gad and the children of reuben will pass with you over jordan, every
man armed to battle, before the lord, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of gilead for a
possession: 32:30 but if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of canaan.

32:31 and the children of gad and th
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 the two tribes and the
half tribe have received their inheritance on this side jordan near
jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:17 these are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: eleazar the priest,
and joshua the son of nun.

34:18 and ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 and the names of the men are these: of the tribe of judah, caleb
the son of jephunneh.

34:20 and of the tribe of the children of simeon, shemuel the son of
ammihud.

34:21 of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.

34:22 and the prince of the tribe of the children of dan, bukki the
son of jogli.

34:23 the prince of the children of joseph, for the tribe of th
 
 ___________________________
 
he lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 surely there shall not one of these men of this
evil generation see that good land, which i sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 save caleb the son of jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
i give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children,
because he hath wholly followed the lord.

1:37 also the lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying, thou also
shalt not go in thither.

1:38 but joshua the son of nun, which standeth before thee, he shall
go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause israel to inherit it.

1:39 moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will i give it, and they
shall possess it.

1:40 but as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the red sea.

1:41 then ye answered and said unto m
 
 ___________________________
 
your brethren the children of israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 but your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for i
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which i
have given you; 3:20 until the lord have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the lord your god hath given them beyond jordan: and then shall
ye return every man unto his possession, which i have given you.

3:21 and i commanded joshua at that time, saying, thine eyes have seen
all that the lord your god hath done unto these two kings: so shall
the lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

3:22 ye shall not fear them: for the lord your god he shall fight for
you.

3:23 and i besought the lord at that time, saying, 3:24 o lord god,
thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
according to thy works, and according to thy mig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht?  3:25 i pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond jordan, that
goodly mountain, and lebanon.

3:26 but the lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the lord said unto me, let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
me of this matter.

3:27 get thee up into the top of pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this jordan.

3:28 but charge joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
the land which thou shalt see.

3:29 so we abode in the valley over against bethpeor.

4:1 now therefore hearken, o israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments, which i teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the lord god of your fathers giveth you.

4:2 ye shall not add unto the word which i command you, neither shall
ye d
 
 ___________________________
 
yest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto them as he did to sihon and to og,
kings of the amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 and the lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which i have commanded
you.

31:6 be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the lord thy god, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, no
 
 ___________________________
 
r forsake thee.

31:7 and moses called unto joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all israel, be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the lord hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 and the lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed.

31:9 and moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of levi, which bare the ark of th
 
 ___________________________
 
:12 gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the lord your god, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 and that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the lord your god, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over jordan to possess it.

31:14 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that i may give him a charge. and moses and
joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 and the lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the l
 
 ___________________________
 
gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 and it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for i
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before i have
brought them into the land which i sware.

31:22 moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of israel.

31:23 and he gave joshua the son of nun a charge, and said, be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of israel
into the land which i sware unto them: and i will be with thee.

31:24 and it came to pass, when moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 that
moses commanded the levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lord, saying, 31:26 take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the lord
 
 ___________________________
 
e servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 and the children of israel wept for moses in the plains of moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for moses were ended.

34:9 and joshua the son of nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the lord commanded moses.

34:10 and there arose not a prophet since in israel like unto moses,
whom the lord knew face to face, 34:11 in all the signs and the
wonders, which the lord sent him to do in the land of egypt to
pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 and in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror whic
 
 ___________________________
 
h moses shewed
in the sight of all israel.




the book of joshua


1:1 now after the death of moses the servant of the lord it came to
pass, that the lord spake unto joshua the son of nun, moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which i do give
to them, even to the children of israel.

1:3 every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
i given unto you, as i said unto moses.

1:4 from the wilderness and this lebanon even unto the great river,
the river euphrates, all the land of the hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down o
 
 ___________________________
 
 thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest.

1:8 this book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 have not i commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the lord thy god is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 then joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
pass through the host, and command the people, saying, prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the lord your god giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 and to the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to half the tribe
of manasseh, spake joshua, saying, 1:13 remember the word which moses
the servant of the lord commanded you, saying, the lord your god hath
given you rest, a
 
 ___________________________
 
r cattle, shall remain in
the land which moses gave you on this side jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 until the lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the lord your
god giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which moses the lord's servant gave you on
this side jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 and they answered joshua, saying, all that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 according as we hearkened unto moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the lord thy god be with thee, as he was with
moses.

1:18 whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 and joshua the son of nun sent out of shittim
 
 ___________________________
 
 we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.

2:21 and she said, according unto your words, so be it. and she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window.

2:22 and they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

2:23 so the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and
passed over, and came to joshua the son of nun, and told him all
things that befell them: 2:24 and they said unto joshua, truly the
lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.

3:1 and joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
shittim, and came to jordan, he and all the children of israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.

3:2 and it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 and they comm
 
 ___________________________
 
anded the people, saying, when ye
see the ark of the covenant of the lord your god, and the priests the
levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 and joshua said unto the people, sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the lord will do wonders among you.

3:6 and joshua spake unto the priests, saying, take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. and they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 and the lord said unto joshua, this day will i begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all israel, that they may know that, as i was
with moses, so i will be with thee.

3:8 and thou shalt command the priests
 
 ___________________________
 
 that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, when ye are come to the brink of the water of
jordan, ye shall stand still in jordan.

3:9 and joshua said unto the children of israel, come hither, and hear
the words of the lord your god.

3:10 and joshua said, hereby ye shall know that the living god is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the hivites, and the perizzites, and
the girgashites, and the amorites, and the jebusites.

3:11 behold, the ark of the covenant of the lord of all the earth
passeth over before you into jordan.

3:12 now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of israel,
out of every tribe a man.

3:13 and it shall come to pass, as soon as
 
 ___________________________
 
is
beside zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed
over right against jericho.

3:17 and the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the lord
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of jordan, and all the
israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed
clean over jordan.

4:1 and it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
jordan, that the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:2 take you twelve
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 and command ye
them, saying, take you hence out of the midst of jordan, out of the
place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night.

4:4 then joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 and joshua said unto
them, pass over befo
 
 ___________________________
 
unto the number of the tribes of the children of israel: 4:6
that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, what mean ye by these stones?  4:7
then ye shall answer them, that the waters of jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the lord; when it passed over
jordan, the waters of jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
for a memorial unto the children of israel for ever.

4:8 and the children of israel did so as joshua commanded, and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of jordan, as the lord spake unto
joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 and joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day.

4:10 for the priests which bare the ark stood in the mi
 
 ___________________________
 
dst of jordan,
until everything was finished that the lord commanded joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that moses commanded joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over.

4:11 and it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 and the children of reuben, and the children of gad, and half the
tribe of manasseh, passed over armed before the children of israel, as
moses spake unto them: 4:13 about forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the lord unto battle, to the plains of jericho.

4:14 on that 
 
 ___________________________
 
day the lord magnified joshua in the sight of all israel;
and they feared him, as they feared moses, all the days of his life.

4:15 and the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:16 command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of jordan.

4:17 joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, come ye up out of
jordan.

4:18 and it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the lord were come up out of the midst of jordan, and the
soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
banks, as they did before.

4:19 and the people came up out of jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in gilgal, in the east bo
 
 ___________________________
 
rder of jericho.

4:20 and those twelve stones, which they took out of jordan, did
joshua pitch in gilgal.

4:21 and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean
these stones?  4:22 then ye shall let your children know, saying,
israel came over this jordan on dry land.

4:23 for the lord your god dried up the waters of jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the lord your god did to the red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
that all the people of 
 
 ___________________________
 
, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the lord your god for ever.

5:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings of the amorites, which
were on the side of jordan westward, and all the kings of the
canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the lord had dried up
the waters of jordan from before the children of israel, until we were
passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them
any more, because of the children of israel.

5:2 at that time the lord said unto joshua, make thee sharp knives,
and circumcise again the children of israel the second time.

5:3 and joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
israel at the hill of the foreskins.

5:4 and this is the cause why joshua did circumcise: all the people
that came out of egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of egypt.

5:5 now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the
people that were born in t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey came forth
out of egypt, them they had not circumcised.

5:6 for the children of israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of egypt,
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the lord: unto
whom the lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
lord sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

5:7 and their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
circumcised them by the way.

5:8 and it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the
people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were
whole.

5:9 and the lord said unto joshua, this day have i rolled away the
reproach of egypt from off you. wherefore the name of the place is
called gilgal unto this day.

5:10 and the children of israel encamped in gilgal, and kept the
passover on the fourtee
 
 ___________________________
 
nth day of the month at even in the plains of
jericho.

5:11 and they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.

5:12 and the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of canaan that year.

5:13 and it came to pass, when joshua was by jericho, that he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand: and joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, art thou for us, or for our adversaries?  5:14 and he
said, nay; but as captain of the host of the lord am i now come. and
joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, what saith my lord unto his servant?  5:15 and the captain of the
lord's host said unto joshua, loose thy shoe fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy. and joshua did so.

6:1 now jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
israel: none went out, and none came in.

6:2 and the lord said unto joshua, see, i have given into thine hand
jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.

6:3 and ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the city once. thus shalt thou do six days.

6:4 and seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven
times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

6:5 and it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
the ram's horn, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall
fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight
before him.

6:6 and joshua the son of nun called the priests, and said unto them,
take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the lord.

6:7 and he said unto the people, pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the lord.

6:8 and it came to pass, when joshua had spoken unto the people, that
the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
before the lord, and blew with the trumpets: and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the ark of the
covenant of the lord followed them.

6:9 and the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
and blowing with the trumpets.

6:10 and joshua had commanded the people, saying, ye shall not shout,
nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day i bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

6:11 so the ark of the lord compassed the city, going about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.

6:12 and joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the lord.

6:13 and seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before
the ark of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 came after the
ark of the lord, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

6:14 and the second day they compassed the city once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days.

6:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same
manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven
times.

6:16 and it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew
with the trumpets, joshua said unto the people, shout; for the lord
hath given you the city.

6:17 and the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the lord: only rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we
sent.

6:18 and ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest
ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of israel a curse, and trouble it.

6:19 but all the sil
 
 ___________________________
 
asury of the
lord.

6:20 so the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city.

6:21 and they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword.

6:22 but joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

6:23 and the young men that were spies went in, and brought out rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of israel.

6:24 and they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
the silver, and the gold, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
the vessels of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasury of the house of the lord.

6:25 and joshua saved rahab the harlot alive, and her father's
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in israel even unto
this day; because she hid the messengers, which joshua sent to spy out
jericho.

6:26 and joshua adjured them at that time, saying, cursed be the man
before the lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city jericho: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it.

6:27 so the lord was with joshua; and his fame was noised throughout
all the country.

7:1 but the children of israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing: for achan, the son of carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of
zerah, of the tribe of judah, took of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e accursed thing: and the
anger of the lord was kindled against the children of israel.

7:2 and joshua sent men from jericho to ai, which is beside bethaven,
on the east of bethel, and spake unto them, saying, go up and view the
country.

and the men went up and viewed ai.

7:3 and they returned to joshua, and said unto him, let not all the
people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
few.

7:4 so there went up thither of the people about three thousand men:
and they fled before the men of ai.

7:5 and the men of ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d became
as water.

7:6 and joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the lord until the eventide, he and the elders of
israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 and joshua said, alas, o lord god, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
amorites, to destroy us? would to god we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side jordan!  7:8 o lord, what shall i say, when israel
turneth their backs before their enemies!  7:9 for the canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name?  7:10 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the lord said unto joshua, get thee up;
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?  7:11 israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed my covenant which i commanded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 therefore the children of israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will i be with you any more, except ye destr
 
 ___________________________
 
according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the lord taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the lord
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the lord
shall take shall come man by man.

7:15 and it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
transgressed the covenant of the lord, and because he hath wrought
folly in israel.

7:16 so joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of judah was taken: 7:17 and he brought
the family of judah; and he took the family of the zarhites: and he
brought the family of the zarhites man by man; and zabdi was taken:
7:18 and he brought his household man by man; and achan, the son of
carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of zerah, of the tribe of judah, was
taken.

7:19 and joshua said unto achan, my son, give, i pray thee, glory to
the lord god of isr
 
 ___________________________
 
ael, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 and achan answered joshua, and said, indeed i have sinned against
the lord god of israel, and thus and thus have i done: 7:21 when i saw
among the spoils a goodly babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then i coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

7:22 so joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

7:2
 
 ___________________________
 
3 and they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto joshua, and unto all the children of israel, and laid them out
before the lord.

7:24 and joshua, and all israel with him, took achan the son of zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
achor.

7:25 and joshua said, why hast thou troubled us? the lord shall
trouble thee this day. and all israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.

7:26 and they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. so
the lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. wherefore the name
of that place was called, the valley of achor, unto this day.

8:1 and the lord said unto joshua, fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
take all the people of war with thee, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and arise, go up to ai: see, i
have given into thy hand the king of ai, and his people, and his city,
and his land: 8:2 and thou shalt do to ai and her king as thou didst
unto jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it.

8:3 so joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against ai:
and joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent
them away by night.

8:4 and he commanded them, saying, behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 and i, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(for they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
ci
 
 ___________________________
 
ty; for they will say, they flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them.

8:7 then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the lord your god will deliver it into your hand.

8:8 and it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the lord shall ye
do. see, i have commanded you.

8:9 joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between bethel and ai, on the west side of ai: but joshua
lodged that night among the people.

8:10 and joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of israel, before the people to ai.

8:11 and all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the
north side of ai: now there was a valley between t
 
 ___________________________
 
hem and ai.

8:12 and he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between bethel and ai, on the west side of the city.

8:13 and when they had set the people, even all the host that was on
the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the
city, joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

8:14 and it came to pass, when the king of ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against israel to
battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city.

8:15 and joshua and all israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

8:16 and all the people that were in ai 
 
 ___________________________
 
were called together to pursue
after them: and they pursued after joshua, and were drawn away from
the city.

8:17 and there was not a man left in ai or bethel, that went not out
after israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto joshua, stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward ai; for i will give it into thine hand. and joshua
stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.

8:19 and the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.

8:20 and when the men of ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
turned back upon the
 
 ___________________________
 
 pursuers.

8:21 and when joshua and all israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
and slew the men of ai.

8:22 and the other issued out of the city against them; so they were
in the midst of israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

8:23 and the king of ai they took alive, and brought him to joshua.

8:24 and it came to pass, when israel had made an end of slaying all
the inhabitants of ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they
chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the israelites returned unto ai,
and smote it with the edge of the sword.

8:25 and so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of ai.

8:26 for joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he
 
 ___________________________
 
 stretched out the
spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of ai.

8:27 only the cattle and the spoil of that city israel took for a prey
unto themselves, according unto the word of the lord which he
commanded joshua.

8:28 and joshua burnt ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 and the king of ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 then joshua built an altar unto the lord god of israel in mount
ebal, 8:31 as moses the servant of the lord commanded the children of
israel, as it is written in the book of the law of moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offer
 
 ___________________________
 
tes, which bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount gerizim, and half of them over against mount ebal; as moses the
servant of the lord had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of israel.

8:34 and afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 there was not a word of all that moses commanded, which joshua
read not before all the congregation of israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.

9:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side
jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the
great sea over against lebanon, the hittite, and the amorite, the
canaanite, the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 that they gathered themselves together, to fight with joshua and
with isr
 
 ___________________________
 
ael, with one accord.

9:3 and when the inhabitants of gibeon heard what joshua had done unto
jericho and to ai, 9:4 they did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 and old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy.

9:6 and they went to joshua unto the camp at gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of israel, we be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us.

9:7 and the men of israel said unto the hivites, peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you?  9:8 and they said
unto joshua, we are thy servants. and joshua said unto them, who are
ye? and from whence come ye?  9:9 and they said unto him, from a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the lord thy
 
 ___________________________
 
re your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.

9:12 this our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 and these bottles of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes
are become old by reason of the very long journey.

9:14 and the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the lord.

9:15 and joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to
let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.

9:16 and it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 and the children of israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. now their cities were gibeon, and chephirah, and
beeroth, and kirjathjearim.

9:18 and the children of is
 
 ___________________________
 
gation murmured against the princes.

9:19 but all the princes said unto all the congregation, we have sworn
unto them by the lord god of israel: now therefore we may not touch
them.

9:20 this we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 and the princes said unto them, let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes had promised them.

9:22 and joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, we are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us?  9:23 now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my god.

9:24 and they answered joshua, and said, because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the lord thy god commanded his servant moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabit
 
 ___________________________
 
ants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 and now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 and so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 and joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the lord, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose.

10:1 now it came to pass, when adonizedec king of jerusalem had heard
how joshua had taken ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done
to jericho and her king, so he had done to ai and her king; and how
the inhabitants of gibeon had made peace with israel, and were among
them; 10:2 that they feared greatly, because gib
 
 ___________________________
 
eon was a great city,
as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than ai, and
all the men thereof were mighty.

10:3 wherefore adonizedec king of jerusalem, sent unto hoham king of
hebron, and unto piram king of jarmuth, and unto japhia king of
lachish, and unto debir king of eglon, saying, 10:4 come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite gibeon: for it hath made peace with
joshua and with the children of israel.

10:5 therefore the five kings of the amorites, the king of jerusalem,
the king of hebron, the king of jarmuth, the king of lachish, the king
of eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamped before gibeon, and made war against it.

10:6 and the men of gibeon sent unto joshua to the camp to gilgal,
saying, slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the kings of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the amorites that dwell
in the mountains are gathered together against us.

10:7 so joshua ascended from gilgal, he, and all the people of war
with him, and all the mighty men of valour.

10:8 and the lord said unto joshua, fear them not: for i have
delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
before thee.

10:9 joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from gilgal
all night.

10:10 and the lord discomfited them before israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth
up to bethhoron, and smote them to azekah, and unto makkedah.

10:11 and it came to pass, as they fled from before israel, and were
in the going down to bethhoron, that the lord cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto azekah, and they died: they were more which
died w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith hailstones than they whom the children of israel slew with
the sword.

10:12 then spake joshua to the lord in the day when the lord delivered
up the amorites before the children of israel, and he said in the
sight of israel, sun, stand thou still upon gibeon; and thou, moon, in
the valley of ajalon.

10:13 and the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. is not this written in the
book of jasher? so the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day.

10:14 and there was no day like th
 
 ___________________________
 
at before it or after it, that the
lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the lord fought for
israel.

10:15 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

10:16 but these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
makkedah.

10:17 and it was told joshua, saying, the five kings are found hid in
a cave at makkedah.

10:18 and joshua said, roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 and stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the lord your god hath delivered them
into your hand.

10:20 and it came to pass, when joshua and the children of israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced citi
 
 ___________________________
 
es.

10:21 and all the people returned to the camp to joshua at makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of israel.

10:22 then said joshua, open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave.

10:23 and they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out
of the cave, the king of jerusalem, the king of hebron, the king of
jarmuth, the king of lachish, and the king of eglon.

10:24 and it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
joshua, that joshua called for all the men of israel, and said unto
the captains of the men of war which went with him, come near, put
your feet
 
 ___________________________
 
 upon the necks of these kings. and they came near, and put
their feet upon the necks of them.

10:25 and joshua said unto them, fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thus shall the lord do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight.

10:26 and afterward joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them
on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.

10:27 and it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun,
that joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in
the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.

10:28 and that day joshua took makkedah, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all
the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
king of makkedah as he did unto the king of jericho.

10:29 then joshua passed from makkedah, and all
 
 ___________________________
 
 israel with him, unto
libnah, and fought against libnah: 10:30 and the lord delivered it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of israel; and he smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
the king of jericho.

10:31 and joshua passed from libnah, and all israel with him, unto
lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:32 and the
lord delivered lachish into the hand of israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, according to all that he had done to libnah.

10:33 then horam king of gezer came up to help lachish; and joshua
smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:34 and from lachish joshua pa
 
 ___________________________
 
ssed unto eglon, and all israel with
him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:35 and
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day,
according to all that he had done to lachish.

10:36 and joshua went up from eglon, and all israel with him, unto
hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 and they took it, and smote
it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining, according to all that he had done to eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.

10:38 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, to debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 and he took it, and the king t
 
 ___________________________
 
hereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to hebron, so he did to debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to libnah, and to her king.

10:40 so joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the lord god of
israel commanded.

10:41 and joshua smote them from kadeshbarnea even unto gaza, and all
the country of goshen, even unto gibeon.

10:42 and all these kings and their land did joshua take at one time,
because the lord god of israel fought for israel.

10:43 and joshua returned, and all israe
 
 ___________________________
 
and on the west, and to the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, and the jebusite in the mountains, and to
the hivite under hermon in the land of mizpeh.

11:4 and they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
horses and chariots very many.

11:5 and when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
together at the waters of merom, to fight against israel.

11:6 and the lord said unto joshua, be not afraid because of them: for
to morrow about this time will i deliver them up all slain before
israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with
fire.

11:7 so joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

11:8 and the lord delivered them into the hand of israel, who smote
them, and chased them unto great zidon, and unto misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of mizpeh eastward; and they s
 
 ___________________________
 
mote them, until they
left them none remaining.

11:9 and joshua did unto them as the lord bade him: he houghed their
horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

11:10 and joshua at that time turned back, and took hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms.

11:11 and they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt hazor with fire.

11:12 and all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as moses the se
 
 ___________________________
 
rvant of the lord commanded.

11:13 but as for the cities that stood still in their strength, israel
burned none of them, save hazor only; that did joshua burn.

11:14 and all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe.

11:15 as the lord commanded moses his servant, so did moses command
joshua, and so did joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the lord
commanded moses.

11:16 so joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 even
from the mount halak, that goeth up to seir, even unto baalgad in the
valley of lebanon under mount hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them.

11:18 joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

 
 ___________________________
 

11:19 there was not a city that made peace with the children of
israel, save the hivites the inhabitants of gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 for it was of the lord to harden their hearts, that they should
come against israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
lord commanded moses.

11:21 and at that time came joshua, and cut off the anakims from the
mountains, from hebron, from debir, from anab, and from all the
mountains of judah, and from all the mountains of israel: joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities.

11:22 there was none of the anakims left in the land of the children
of israel: only in gaza, in gath, and in ashdod, there remained.

11:23 so joshua took the whole land, according to all that the lord
said unto moses; and joshua gave it for an inheritance unto israel
according to 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the giants,
that dwelt at ashtaroth and at edrei, 12:5 and reigned in mount
hermon, and in salcah, and in all bashan, unto the border of the
geshurites and the maachathites, and half gilead, the border of sihon
king of heshbon.

12:6 them did moses the servant of the lord and the children of israel
smite: and moses the servant of the lord gave it for a possession unto
the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh.

12:7 and these are the kings of the country which joshua and the
children of israel smote on this side jordan on the west, from baalgad
in the valley of lebanon even unto the mount halak, that goeth up to
seir; which joshua gave unto the tribes of israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 12:8 in the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the hittites, the amorites, and the
canaanites, the perizzites, the hivites, and the jebusites: 12:9 the
king of je
 
 ___________________________
 
, one; the king of hepher, one; 12:18 the king of aphek, one;
the king of lasharon, one; 12:19 the king of madon, one; the king of
hazor, one; 12:20 the king of shimronmeron, one; the king of achshaph,
one; 12:21 the king of taanach, one; the king of megiddo, one; 12:22
the king of kedesh, one; the king of jokneam of carmel, one; 12:23 the
king of dor in the coast of dor, one; the king of the nations of
gilgal, one; 12:24 the king of tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and
one.

13:1 now joshua was old and stricken in years; and the lord said unto
him, thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed.

13:2 this is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
philistines, and all geshuri, 13:3 from sihor, which is before egypt,
even unto the borders of ekron northward, which is counted to the
canaanite: five lords of the philistines; the gazathites, and the
ashdothites, the eshkalonites, the gittites, and the ekronites; also
th
 
 ___________________________
 
 son of manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of machir by their families.

13:32 these are the countries which moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of moab, on the other side jordan, by
jericho, eastward.

13:33 but unto the tribe of levi moses gave not any inheritance: the
lord god of israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 and these are the countries which the children of israel
inherited in the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 by lot was their inheritance, as the lord commanded by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side jordan: but unto the levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefore
 
 ___________________________
 
 they gave no part unto the levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 as the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
the son of jephunneh the kenezite said unto him, thou knowest the
thing that the lord said unto moses the man of god concerning me and
thee in kadeshbarnea.

14:7 forty years old was i when moses the servant of the lord sent me
from kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and i brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but i wholly followed the lord my god.

14:9 and moses sw
 
 ___________________________
 
y fourscore and five years old.

14:11 as yet i am as strong this day as i was in the day that moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the lord spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the lord will be
with me, then i shall be able to drive them out, as the lord said.

14:13 and joshua blessed him, and gave unto caleb the son of jephunneh
hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 hebron therefore became the inheritance of caleb the son of
jephunneh the kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the lord god of israel.

14:15 and the name of hebron before was kirjatharba; which arba was a
great man among the anakims. and the land had rest from war.

15:1 this then was the lot of the tribe of the children of judah by
their families; even to the border of edom th
 
 ___________________________
 
he border went out unto the side of ekron northward: and
the border was drawn to shicron, and passed along to mount baalah, and
went out unto jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the
sea.

15:12 and the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.

this is the coast of the children of judah round about according to
their families.

15:13 and unto caleb the son of jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of judah, according to the commandment of the lord to joshua,
even the city of arba the father of anak, which city is hebron.

15:14 and caleb drove thence the three sons of anak, sheshai, and
ahiman, and talmai, the children of anak.

15:15 and he went up thence to the inhabitants of debir: and the name
of debir before was kirjathsepher.

15:16 and caleb said, he that smiteth kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will i give achsah my daughter to wife.

15:17 and othniel the son of kenaz, the brother of caleb, took it: and
he gave him achsah
 
 ___________________________
 
k, and for the children of asriel, and for the children of
shechem, and for the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

17:3 but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of
machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and
tirzah.

17:4 and they came near before eleazar the priest, and before joshua
the son of nun, and before the princes, saying, the lord commanded
moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. therefore
according to the commandment of the lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 and there fell ten portions to manasseh, beside the land of
gilead and bashan, which were on the other side jordan; 17:6 because
the daughters of manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of manasseh's sons had the land of gilead.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
and the inhabitants of endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 yet the children of manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the canaanites would dwell in that land.

17:13 yet it came to pass, when the children of israel were waxen
strong, that they put the canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out.

17:14 and the children of joseph spake unto joshua, saying, why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing i am a
great people, forasmuch as the lord hath blessed me hitherto?  17:15
and joshua answered them, if thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
perizzites and of the giants, if mount ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 and the children of joseph said, the hill is not enough for us:
and all the canaanites that dwell in the land of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of jezreel.

17:17 and joshua spake unto the house of joseph, even to ephraim and
to manasseh, saying, thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 but the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 and the whole congregation of the children of israel assembled
together at shiloh, and set up the tabernac
 
 ___________________________
 
le of the congregation
there. and the land was subdued before them.

18:2 and there remained among the children of israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance.

18:3 and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and i will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 and they shall divide it into seven parts: judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of joseph shall abide in their
coas
 
 ___________________________
 
ts on the north.

18:6 ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that i may cast lots for you here before
the lord our god.

18:7 but the levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond jordan on the east,
which moses the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, and went away: and joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that i may here cast lots for you
before the lord in shiloh.

18:9 and the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to joshua to the
host at shiloh.

18:10 and joshua cast lots for them in shiloh before the lord: and
there joshua divided the land unto the children of israel according to
their divis
 
 ___________________________
 
le for
them: therefore the children of dan went up to fight against leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called leshem, dan, after the name of dan
their father.

19:48 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of dan
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:49 when they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts, the children of israel gave an inheritance to joshua
the son of nun among them: 19:50 according to the word of the lord
they gave him the city which he asked, even timnathserah in mount
ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

19:51 these are the inheritances, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in shiloh before
the lord, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. so they
made an end of dividing the 
 
 ___________________________
 
country.

20:1 the lord also spake unto joshua, saying, 20:2 speak to the
children of israel, saying, appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof i spake unto you by the hand of moses: 20:3 that the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

20:4 and when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into th
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the tribe of reuben, and
ramoth in gilead out of the tribe of gad, and golan in bashan out of
the tribe of manasseh.

20:9 these were the cities appointed for all the children of israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.

21:1 then came near the heads of the fathers of the levites unto
eleazar the priest, and unto joshua the son of nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of israel; 21:2 and they
spake unto them at shiloh in the land of canaan, saying, the lord
commanded by the hand of moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 and the children of israel gave unto the levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the lord, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 and the lot came out for the families of the kohathites: and the
 
 ___________________________
 
e cities.

21:43 and the lord gave unto israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

21:44 and the lord gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the lord delivered all their enemies into their
hand.

21:45 there failed not ought of any good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the house of israel; all came to pass.

22:1 then joshua called the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, 22:2 and said unto them, ye have kept all that
moses the servant of the lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that i commanded you: 22:3 ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the lord your god.

22:4 and now the lord your god hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
ten
 
 ___________________________
 
ts, and unto the land of your possession, which moses the servant
of the lord gave you on the other side jordan.

22:5 but take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
moses the servant of the lord charged you, to love the lord your god,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 so joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 now to the one half of the tribe of manasseh moses had given
possession in bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave joshua
among their brethren on this side jordan westward. and when joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 and
he spake unto them, saying, return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, 
 
 ___________________________
 
m word again.

22:33 and the thing pleased the children of israel; and the children
of israel blessed god, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of reuben and gad
dwelt.

22:34 and the children of reuben and the children of gad called the
altar ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the lord is god.

23:1 and it came to pass a long time after that the lord had given
rest unto israel from all their enemies round about, that joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 and joshua called for all israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, i am old and stricken in age: 23:3 and ye have seen all
that the lord your god hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the lord your god is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 behold, i have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from jordan, with
 
 ___________________________
 
u, which the lord your god promised you; so shall the lord
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:16 when ye have transgressed the covenant of the lord your god,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the lord be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 and joshua gathered all the tribes of israel to shechem, and
called for the elders of israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flo
 
 ___________________________
 
 we should
forsake the lord, to serve other gods; 24:17 for the lord our god, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 and the lord drave out from
before us all the people, even the amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the lord; for he is our god.

24:19 and joshua said unto the people, ye cannot serve the lord: for
he is an holy god; he is a jealous god; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins.

24:20 if ye forsake the lord, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 and the people said unto joshua, nay; but we will serve the
lord.

24:22 and joshua said unto the people, ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the lord, to serve him. an
 
 ___________________________
 
d they
said, we are witnesses.

24:23 now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the lord god of israel.

24:24 and the people said unto joshua, the lord our god will we serve,
and his voice will we obey.

24:25 so joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in shechem.

24:26 and joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of god, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the lord.

24:27 and joshua said unto all the people, behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the lord which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your god.

24:28 so joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

24:29 and it came to pass after these things,
 
 ___________________________
 
 that joshua the son of
nun, the servant of the lord, died, being an hundred and ten years
old.

24:30 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathserah, which is in mount ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of gaash.

24:31 and israel served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived joshua, and which had known all the
works of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bones of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buried they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the sons of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to phinehas his son, which was given him 
 
 ___________________________
 
in mount
ephraim.




the book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children
of israel asked the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
canaanites first, to fight against them?  1:2 and the lord said, judah
shall go up: behold, i have delivered the land into his hand.

1:3 and judah said unto simeon his brother, come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the canaanites; and i likewise will go
with thee into thy lot. so simeon went with him.

1:4 and judah went up; and the lord delivered the canaanites and
 
 ___________________________
 
n their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this?  2:3 wherefore i also said, i will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 and it came to pass, when the angel of the lord spake these words
unto all the children of israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 and they called the name of that place bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the lord.

2:6 and when joshua had let the people go, the children of israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

2:7 and the people served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that outlived joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the lord, that he did for israel.

2:8 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of the lord, died, being an
hundred and ten years old.

2:9 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathheres, in the mount of ephraim, on 
 
 ___________________________
 
s dead, that they returned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel; and he said,
because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which i
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 i
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which joshua left when he died: 2:22 that through them i may prove
israel, whether they will keep the way of the lord to walk therein, as
their fathers did keep it, or not.

2:23 therefore the lord left those nations, without driving them out
hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of joshua.

3:1 now these are the nations which the lord left, to prove israel by
them, even as many of israel as had not known all the wars of canaan;
3:2 only that the generations of the children of israel mig
 
 ___________________________
 
e of gold and the
images of their emerods.

6:12 and the kine took the straight way to the way of bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the philistines went
after them unto the border of bethshemesh.

6:13 and they of bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it.

6:14 and the cart came into the field of joshua, a bethshemite, and
stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of
the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the lord.

6:15 and the levites took down the ark of the lord, and the coffer
that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the lord.

6:16 and when the five lords of the philistines had seen it, they
returned to
 
 ___________________________
 
e same day.

6:17 and these are the golden emerods which the philistines returned
for a trespass offering unto the lord; for ashdod one, for gaza one,
for askelon one, for gath one, for ekron one; 6:18 and the golden
mice, according to the number of all the cities of the philistines
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the lord: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
joshua, the bethshemite.

6:19 and he smote the men of bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the lord had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

6:20 and the men of bethshemesh said, who is able to stand before this
holy lord god? and to whom shall he go up from us?  6:21 and they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of kirjathjearim, saying, the
philist
 
 ___________________________
 
ved baal, and worshipped him.

16:32 and he reared up an altar for baal in the house of baal, which
he had built in samaria.

16:33 and ahab made a grove; and ahab did more to provoke the lord god
of israel to anger than all the kings of israel that were before him.

16:34 in his days did hiel the bethelite build jericho: he laid the
foundation thereof in abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son segub, according to the word of the lord,
which he spake by joshua the son of nun.

17:1 and elijah the tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of gilead,
said unto ahab, as the lord god of israel liveth, before whom i stand,
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

17:2 and the word of the lord came unto him, saying, 17:3 get thee
hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook cherith,
that is before jordan.

17:4 and it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and i have
commanded the ravens to feed t
 
 ___________________________
 
dron,
and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the
graves of the children of the people.

23:7 and he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the
house of the lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove.

23:8 and he brought all the priests out of the cities of judah, and
defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from
geba to beersheba, and brake down the high places of the gates that
were in the entering in of the gate of joshua the governor of the
city, which were on a man's left hand at the gate of the city.

23:9 nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the
altar of the lord in jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened
bread among their brethren.

23:10 and he defiled topheth, which is in the valley of the children
of hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire to molech.

23:11 and he took away the horses that the kings of judah had given to
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
n every land where they have been put
to shame.

3:20 at that time will i bring you again, even in the time that i
gather you: for i will make you a name and a praise among all people
of the earth, when i turn back your captivity before your eyes,
saith the lord.




haggai


1:1 in the second year of darius the king, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the word of the lord by haggai the
prophet unto zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and
to joshua the son of josedech, the high priest, saying, 1:2 thus
speaketh the lord of hosts, saying, this people say, the time is not
come, the time that the lord's house should be built.

1:3 then came the word of the lord by haggai the prophet, saying, 1:4
is it time for you, o ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this
house lie waste?  1:5 now therefore thus saith the lord of hosts;
consider your ways.

1:6 ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the lord of hosts. because of
mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house.

1:10 therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth
is stayed from her fruit.

1:11 and i called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon
that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle,
and upon all the labour of the hands.

1:12 then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
the voice of the lord their god, and the words of haggai the prophet,
as the lord their god had sent him, and the people did fear before the
lord.

1:13 then spake haggai the lord's messenger in the lord's message unto
the people, saying, i am with you, saith the lord.

1:14 and the lord stirred up the spirit of zerubbabel the son of
shealtiel, governor of judah, and the spirit of joshua the son of
josed
 
 ___________________________
 
ech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
people; and they came and did work in the house of the lord of hosts,
their god, 1:15 in the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in
the second year of darius the king.

2:1 in the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month,
came the word of the lord by the prophet haggai, saying, 2:2 speak now
to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and to joshua
the son of josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the
people, saying, 2:3 who is left among you that saw this house in her
first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in
comparison of it as nothing?  2:4 yet now be strong, o zerubbabel,
saith the lord; and be strong, o joshua, son of josedech, the high
priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the lord, and
work: for i am with you, saith the lord of hosts: 2:5 according to the
word that i covena
 
 ___________________________
 
 for, lo, i come, and i will
dwell in the midst of thee, saith the lord.

2:11 and many nations shall be joined to the lord in that day, and
shall be my people: and i will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou
shalt know that the lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.

2:12 and the lord shall inherit judah his portion in the holy land,
and shall choose jerusalem again.

2:13 be silent, o all flesh, before the lord: for he is raised up out
of his holy habitation.

3:1 and he shewed me joshua the high priest standing before the angel
of the lord, and satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

3:2 and the lord said unto satan, the lord rebuke thee, o satan; even
the lord that hath chosen jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand
plucked out of the fire?  3:3 now joshua was clothed with filthy
garments, and stood before the angel.

3:4 and he answered and spake unto those that stood before him,
saying, take away the filthy garments from him. and unto him he said,
beho
 
 ___________________________
 
ld, i have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and i will
clothe thee with change of raiment.

3:5 and i said, let them set a fair mitre upon his head. so they set a
fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. and the angel
of the lord stood by.

3:6 and the angel of the lord protested unto joshua, saying, 3:7 thus
saith the lord of hosts; if thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou
wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt
also keep my courts, and i will give thee places to walk among these
that stand by.

3:8 hear now, o joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit
before thee: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, i will bring
forth my servant the branch.

3:9 for behold the stone that i have laid before joshua; upon one
stone shall be
 
 ___________________________
 
o through the earth.

6:8 then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, behold, these
that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north
country.

6:9 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 6:10 take of them
of the captivity, even of heldai, of tobijah, and of jedaiah, which
are come from babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the
house of josiah the son of zephaniah; 6:11 then take silver and gold,
and make crowns, and set them upon the head of joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest; 6:12 and speak unto him, saying, thus
speaketh the lord of hosts, saying, behold the man whose name is the
branch; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the
temple of the lord: 6:13 even he shall build the temple of the lord;
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne;
and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace
shall be between them both.

6:14 and the crowns shall be to helem, an