less her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people
shall be of her.

17:17 then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?  17:18 and abraham
said unto god, o that ishmael might live before thee!  17:19 and god
said, sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call
his name isaac: and i will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20 and as for ishmael, i have heard thee: behold, i have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and i will make him a great nation.

17:21 but my covenant will i establish with isaac, which sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

17:22 and he left off talking with him, and god went up from ab
 
 ___________________________
 
 abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
abimelech, because of sarah abraham's wife.

21:1 and the lord visited sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto
sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which god had spoken to him.

21:3 and abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom sarah bare to him, isaac.

21:4 and abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old, as
god had commanded him.

21:5 and abraham was an hundred years old, when his son isaac was born
unto him.

21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
will laugh with me.

21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should
have given children suck? for i have born him a son in his old age.

21:8 and the child grew, and was weaned: and abraham made a great
feast the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ame day that isaac was weaned.

21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born
unto abraham, mocking.

21:10 wherefore she said unto abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her
son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with isaac.

21:11 and the thing was very grievous in abraham's sight because of
his son.

21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy
seed be called.

21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will i make a nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and ga
 
 ___________________________
 
heba: then abimelech rose up,
and phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the
land of the philistines.

21:33 and abraham planted a grove in beersheba, and called there on
the name of the lord, the everlasting god.

21:34 and abraham sojourned in the philistines' land many days.

22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt
abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here i am.

22:2 and he said, take now thy son, thine only son isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of.

22:3 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and isaac his son, and clave
the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which god had told him.

22:4 then on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.

22:5 and abraham
 
 ___________________________
 
 said unto his young men, abide ye here with the ass;
and i and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham his father, and said, my father: and
he said, here am i, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 and abraham said, my
son, god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 a
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and well stricken in age: and the lord had
blessed abraham in all things.

24:2 and abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
over all that he had, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3
and i will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
isaac.

24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be
willing to follow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again
unto the land from whence thou camest?  24:6 and abraham said unto
him, beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, unto thy seed will i give this land; he shall send
his angel b
 
 ___________________________
 
 and he said o lord god of my master abraham, i pray thee, send
me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master abraham.

24:13 behold, i stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom i shall say, let down thy pitcher, i
pray thee, that i may drink; and she shall say, drink, and i will give
thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant isaac; and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed
kindness unto my master.

24:15 and it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold,
rebekah came out, who was born to bethuel, son of milcah, the wife of
nahor, abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16 and the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had
any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her
pitcher, and came up.

24:17 and the servant ran to meet her, and said, let
 
 ___________________________
 
 wilt thou go with
this man? and she said, i will go.

24:59 and they sent away rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
abraham's servant, and his men.

24:60 and they blessed rebekah, and said unto her, thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed
possess the gate of those which hate them.

24:61 and rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the man: and the servant took rebekah, and went
his way.

24:62 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.

24:63 and isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and
he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

24:64 and rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw isaac, she
lighted off the camel.

24:65 for she had said unto the servant, what man is this that walketh
in the field to meet us? and the servant had said, it is my master:
therefore she took a vail, and covered her
 
 ___________________________
 
self.

24:66 and the servant told isaac all things that he had done.

24:67 and isaac brought her into his mother sarah's tent, and took
rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and isaac was
comforted after his mother's death.

25:1 then again abraham took a wife, and her name was keturah.

25:2 and she bare him zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and
ishbak, and shuah.

25:3 and jokshan begat sheba, and dedan. and the sons of dedan were
asshurim, and letushim, and leummim.

25:4 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abidah,
and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah.

25:5 and abraham gave all that he had unto isaac.

25:6 bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t unto the sons of the concubines, which abraham had, abraham
gave gifts, and sent them away from isaac his son, while he yet lived,
eastward, unto the east country.

25:7 and these are the days of the years of abraham's life which he
lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

25:9 and his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of
machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which
is before mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchased of the sons
of heth: there was abraham buried, and sarah his wife.

25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed
his son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi.

25:12 now these are the generations of ishmael, abraham's son, whom
hagar the egyptian, sarah's handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 a
 
 ___________________________
 
hese are the sons
of ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

25:17 and these are the years of the life of ishmael, an hundred and
thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gathered unto his people.

25:18 and they dwelt from havilah unto shur, that is before egypt, as
thou goest toward assyria: and he died in the presence of all his
brethren.

25:19 and these are the generations of isaac, abraham's son: abraham
begat isaac: 25:20 and isaac was forty years old when he took rebekah
to wife, the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padanaram, the sister
to laban the syrian.

25:21 and isaac intreated the lord for his wife, because she was
barren: and the lord was intreated of him, and rebekah his wife
conceived.

25:22 and the children struggled together within her; and she said, if
it be so, why am i thus? and she went to enquire of the lord.

25:23 and the lord said unt
 
 ___________________________
 
are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serve the younger.

25:24 and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there
were twins in her womb.

25:25 and the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and
they called his name esau.

25:26 and after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
esau's heel; and his name was called jacob: and isaac was threescore
years old when she bare them.

25:27 and the boys grew: and esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field; and jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

25:28 and isaac loved esau, because he did eat of his venison: but
rebekah loved jacob.

25:29 and jacob sod pottage: and esau came from the field, and he was
faint: 25:30 and esau said to jacob, feed me, i pray thee, with that
same red pottage; for i am faint: therefore was his name called edom.

25:31 and jacob sa
 
 ___________________________
 
is day thy birthright.

25:32 and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit
shall this birthright do to me?  25:33 and jacob said, swear to me
this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
jacob.

25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus esau despised his
birthright.

26:1 and there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that
was in the days of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the
philistines unto gerar.

26:2 and the lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into egypt;
dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this
land, and i will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and
unto thy seed, i will give all these countries, and i will perform the
oath which i sware unto abraham thy father; 26:4 and i will make thy
seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
all these count
 
 ___________________________
 
ries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; 26:5 because that abraham obeyed my voice, and kept
my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

26:6 and isaac dwelt in gerar: 26:7 and the men of the place asked him
of his wife; and he said, she is my sister: for he feared to say, she
is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for
rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.

26:8 and it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
abimelech king of the philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, isaac was sporting with rebekah his wife.

26:9 and abimelech called isaac, and said, behold, of a surety
 
 ___________________________
 
 she is
thy wife; and how saidst thou, she is my sister? and isaac said unto
him, because i said, lest i die for her.

26:10 and abimelech said, what is this thou hast done unto us? one of
the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest
have brought guiltiness upon us.

26:11 and abimelech charged all his people, saying, he that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

26:12 then isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
hundredfold: and the lord blessed him.

26:13 and the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he
became very great: 26:14 for he had possession of flocks, and
possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the philistines
envied him.

26:15 for all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the
days of abraham his father, the philistines had stopped them, and
filled them with earth.

26:16 and abimelech s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid unto isaac, go from us; for thou art much
mightier than we.

26:17 and isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of
gerar, and dwelt there.

26:18 and isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged
in the days of abraham his father; for the philistines had stopped
them after the death of abraham: and he called their names after the
names by which his father had called them.

26:19 and isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a
well of springing water.

26:20 and the herdmen of gerar did strive with isaac's herdmen,
saying, the water is ours: and he called the name of the well esek;
because they strove with him.

26:21 and they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it sitnah.

26:22 and he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove not: and he called the name of it rehoboth; and he
said, for no
 
 ___________________________
 
w the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 and he went up from thence to beersheba.

26:24 and the lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, i am
the god of abraham thy father: fear not, for i am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant abraham's sake.

26:25 and he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
lord, and pitched his tent there: and there isaac's servants digged a
well.

26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his
friends, and phichol the chief captain of his army.

26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me away from you?  26:28 and they said, we saw
certainly that the lord was with thee: and we said, let there be now
an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a
covenant with thee; 26:29 that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not
 
 ___________________________
 

touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have
sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the lord.

26:30 and he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

26:31 and they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to
another: and isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in
peace.

26:32 and it came to pass the same day, that isaac's servants came,
and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, we have found water.

26:33 and he called it shebah: therefore the name of the city is
beersheba unto this day.

26:34 and esau was forty years old when he took to wife judith the
daughter of beeri the hittite, and bashemath the daughter of elon the
hittite: 26:35 which were a grief of mind unto isaac and to rebekah.

27:1 and it came to pass, that when isaac was old, and his eyes were
dim, s
 
 ___________________________
 
o that he could not see, he called esau his eldest son, and said
unto him, my son: and he said unto him, behold, here am i.

27:2 and he said, behold now, i am old, i know not the day of my
death: 27:3 now therefore take, i pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver
and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4
and make me savoury meat, such as i love, and bring it to me, that i
may eat; that my soul may bless thee before i die.

27:5 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau his son. and esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

27:6 and rebekah spake unto jacob her son, saying, behold, i heard thy
father speak unto esau thy brother, saying, 27:7 bring me venison, and
make me savoury meat, that i may eat, and bless thee before the lord
before my death.

27:8 now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which i
command thee.

27:9 go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats; and i w
 
 ___________________________
 
put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his neck: 27:17 and she gave the savoury meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob.

27:18 and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said,
here am i; who art thou, my son?  27:19 and jacob said unto his
father, i am esau thy first born; i have done according as thou badest
me: arise, i pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

27:20 and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? and he said, because the lord thy god brought it
to me.

27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, i pray thee, that i may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son esau or not.

27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac his father; and he felt him, and
said, the voice is jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of esau.

27:23 and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother esau's han
 
 ___________________________
 
ds: so he blessed him.

27:24 and he said, art thou my very son esau? and he said, i am.

27:25 and he said, bring it near to me, and i will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 and his father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me,
my son.

27:27 and he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of
his raiment, and blessed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefore god
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 let people serve thee, and nations bow
down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee: cursed b
 
 ___________________________
 
e every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of
blessing jacob, and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
isaac his father, that esau his brother came in from his hunting.

27:31 and he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

27:32 and isaac his father said unto him, who art thou? and he said, i
am thy son, thy firstborn esau.

27:33 and isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, who? where is he
that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and i have eaten of all
before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be
blessed.

27:34 and when esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, bless me,
even me also, o my father.

27:35 and he said, thy br
 
 ___________________________
 
other came with subtilty, and hath taken away
thy blessing.

27:36 and he said, is not he rightly named jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and,
behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said, hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me?  27:37 and isaac answered and said unto
esau, behold, i have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have i
given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have i sustained
him: and what shall i do now unto thee, my son?  27:38 and esau said
unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even
me also, o my father. and esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

27:39 and isaac his father answered and said unto him, behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of h
 
 ___________________________
 
to him, behold,
thy brother esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to
kill thee.

27:43 now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban
my brother to haran; 27:44 and tarry with him a few days, until thy
brother's fury turn away; 27:45 until thy brother's anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then i will
send, and fetch thee from thence: why should i be deprived also of you
both in one day?  27:46 and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my
life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the
daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac called jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 
 
 ___________________________
 
and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee
the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him away to
padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
he gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughers of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau seeing that the
daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father; 28:9 then went esau
unto ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had mahalath the
daughter of ishmael abraham's son, the sister of neba
 
 ___________________________
 
d haran.

28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending
and descending on it.

28:13 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord
god of abraham thy father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i
will not leave thee, until i have done that which i have s
 
 ___________________________
 
's house?  31:15 are we not
counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured
also our money.

31:16 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever god hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 then jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
padanaram, for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan.

31:19 and laban went to shear his sheep: and rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.

31:20 and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

31:21 so he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over
the river, and set his face toward the mount gilead.

31:22 and it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled.

31:23 and he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him s
 
 ___________________________
 
 brought not unto thee; i bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 thus i was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, i and th
 
 ___________________________
 
, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which i have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him.

32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, this is god's host: and he
called the name of that place mahanaim.

32:3 and
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

32:6 and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy
brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred, and i will deal well with thee: 32:10 i am not worthy of
the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan;
and now i am become two bands.

32:11 deliver me, i pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of esau: for i fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the children.

32:12 and thou said
 
 ___________________________
 
me of it was called allonbachuth.

35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave
abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will i give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

35:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to ephrath: and rach
 
 ___________________________
 
en
went and lay with bilhah his father's concubine: and israel heard it.
now the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben,
jacob's firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
sons of bilhah, rachel's handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
sons of zilpah, leah's handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people, being old and full of days: and his sons esau and jacob buried
him.

36:1 now these are the generations of esau, who is edom.

36:2 esau took his wives of the daughters of canaan; adah the daughter
of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daug
 
 ___________________________
 
all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down
into egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will
go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried
jacob their father, and their little ones, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 with his face to the earth.

48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward
israel's left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from ephraim's head unto manasseh's head.

48:18 and joseph said
 
 ___________________________
 
d them; every one according to
his blessing he blessed them.

49:29 and he charged them, and said unto them, i am to be gathered
unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the
field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 in the cave that is in the field of
machpelah, which is before mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah.

49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 and joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.

50:2 and joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father: and the physicians embalm
 
 ___________________________
 
 and your little
ones.

and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 
 
 ___________________________
 
 was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and moses said, i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters; for i know their sorrows; 3:8 and i am come down to
deliver them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites,
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring
you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and the hittites, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
 hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into
thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearke
 
 ___________________________
 
so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i
will bring you out from under the burde
 
 ___________________________
 
ns of the egyptians, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, w
 
 ___________________________
 
thee a great nation.

32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
32:12 wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.

32:13 remember abraham, isaac, and israel, thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, i will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one 
 
 ___________________________
 
 blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i consume thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 for the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ne away with them.

26:40 if they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 and that i also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 then will i
remember my covenant with jacob, and also my covenant with isaac, and
also my covenant with abraham will i remember; and i will remember the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will i abhor them, to destroy the
 
 ___________________________
 
thus
did your fathers, when i sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 surely none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholly followed the lord.

32:13 and the lord's anger was kindled against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, was consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce ang
 
 ___________________________
 
our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, and jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and i spake unto you at that time, saying, i am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take you wise 
 
 ___________________________
 
iligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thy god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 then beware lest thou forget the lord, which brought
thee forth out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thy god, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.


 
 ___________________________
 
 god hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness the lord
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the lord doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the lord thy god doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thy fathers,
abraham, isaac, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thy god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thy god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angry with you to hav
 
 ___________________________
 
voice.

9:24 ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that i knew
you.

9:25 thus i fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights, as
i fell down at the first; because the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 i prayed therefore unto the lord, and said, o lord god, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 remember thy servants, abraham, isaac, and jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, because the
lord was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 at that time the lord said unto 
 
 ___________________________
 
r officers, with all the
men of israel, 29:11 your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy
god, and into his oath, which the lord thy god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you only do i make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us this day before the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among you man, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ou passest over
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord s
 
 ___________________________
 
ir high places.

34:1 and moses went up from the plains of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shewed him all the land of gilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the city of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i will give it unto thy
seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 so moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abate
 
 ___________________________
 
r their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cried unto the lord, he put dar
 
 ___________________________
 
on the wood, and said, fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 and he said, do it the second time. and they did it the second
time.

and he said, do it the third time. and they did it the third time.

18:35 and the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the
trench also with water.

18:36 and it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, that elijah the prophet came near, and said, lord god of
abraham, isaac, and of israel, let it be known this day that thou art
god in israel, and that i am thy servant, and that i have done all
these things at thy word.

18:37 hear me, o lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou
art the lord god, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

18:38 then the fire of the lord fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up
the water that was in the trench.

18:39 and when all the people saw it,
 
 ___________________________
 
he coming in of the year.

13:21 and it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of
elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

13:22 but hazael king of syria oppressed israel all the days of
jehoahaz.

13:23 and the lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with abraham,
isaac, and jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from his presence as yet.

13:24 so hazael king of syria died; and benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.

13:25 and jehoash the son of jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
benhadad the son of hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of jehoahaz his father by war. three times did joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of israel.

14:1 in the second year of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel
reigned amazi
 
 ___________________________
 
n two sons: the name of the one was peleg;
because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother's name was
joktan.

1:20 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 1:21 hadoram also, and uzal, and diklah, 1:22 and ebal, and
abimael, and sheba, 1:23 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab. all these
were the sons of joktan.

1:24 shem, arphaxad, shelah, 1:25 eber, peleg, reu, 1:26 serug, nahor,
terah, 1:27 abram; the same is abraham.

1:28 the sons of abraham; isaac, and ishmael.

1:29 these are their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebaioth;
then kedar, and adbeel, and mibsam, 1:30 mishma, and dumah, massa,
hadad, and tema, 1:31 jetur, naphish, and kedemah. these are the sons
of ishmael.

1:32 now the sons of keturah, abraham's concubine: she bare zimran,
and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and ishbak, and shuah. and the
sons of jokshan; sheba, and dedan.

1:33 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher, and henoch, and abida,
and eldaah.
 
 ___________________________
 
 all these are the sons of keturah.

1:34 and abraham begat isaac. the sons of isaac; esau and israel.

1:35 the sons of esau; eliphaz, reuel, and jeush, and jaalam, and
korah.

1:36 the sons of eliphaz; teman, and omar, zephi, and gatam, kenaz,
and timna, and amalek.

1:37 the sons of reuel; nahath, zerah, shammah, and mizzah.

1:38 and the sons of seir; lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah,
and dishon, and ezar, and dishan.

1:39 and the sons of lotan; hori, and homam: and timna was lotan's
sister.

1:40 the sons of shobal; alian, and manahath, and ebal, sh
 
 ___________________________
 


16:11 seek the lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth; 16:13 o ye seed of israel his servant,
ye children of jacob, his chosen ones.

16:14 he is the lord our god; his judgments are in all the earth.

16:15 be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; 16:16 even of the covenant which
he made with abraham, and of his oath unto isaac; 16:17 and hath
confirmed the same to jacob for a law, and to israel for an
everlasting covenant, 16:18 saying, unto thee will i give the land of
canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 when ye were but few, even
a few, and strangers in it.

16:20 and when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to another people; 16:21 he suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he
reproved kings for their sakes, 16:22 saying, touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophets no harm.

16:2
 
 ___________________________
 
s a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 o lord our god, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thine own.

29:17 i know also, my god, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. as for me, in the uprightness of mine heart i
have willingly offered all these things: and now have i seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 o lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which i have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congregation blessed the lord god of their fathers,
 
 ___________________________
 
on.

30:5 so they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all
israel, from beersheba even to dan, that they should come to keep the
passover unto the lord god of israel at jerusalem: for they had not
done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

30:6 so the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes
throughout all israel and judah, and according to the commandment of
the king, saying, ye children of israel, turn again unto the lord god
of abraham, isaac, and israel, and he will return to the remnant of
you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of assyria.

30:7 and be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which
trespassed against the lord god of their fathers, who therefore gave
them up to desolation, as ye see.

30:8 now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield
yourselves unto the lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath
sanctified for ever: and serve the lord your god, that the fierceness
 
 ___________________________
 
ek the lord.

105:4 seek the lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

105:5 remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth;

105:6 o ye seed of abraham his servant, ye children of jacob his
chosen.

105:7 he is the lord our god: his judgments are in all the earth.

105:8 he hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

105:9 which covenant he made with abraham, and his oath unto isaac;

105:10 and confirmed the same unto jacob for a law, and to israel for
an everlasting covenant:

105:11 saying, unto thee will i give the land of canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
strangers in it.

105:13 when they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
another people;

105:14 he suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for
their sakes;

105:15 saying, touch not mine anointed, a
 
 ___________________________
 
rest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two
families which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
before them.

33:25 thus saith the lord; if my covenant be not with day and night,
and if i have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 33:26
then will i cast away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for i will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 thus saith
the lord, the god of israel; go and speak to zedekiah king of judah,
and tell him, thus saith the lord; behold, i will give this city into
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
se, i beseech thee: by whom shall
jacob arise? for he is small.

7:6 the lord repented for this: this also shall not be, saith the lord
god.

7:7 thus he shewed me: and, behold, the lord stood upon a wall made by
a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.

7:8 and the lord said unto me, amos, what seest thou? and i said, a
plumbline. then said the lord, behold, i will set a plumbline in the
midst of my people israel: i will not again pass by them any more: 7:9
and the high places of isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of
israel shall be laid waste; and i will rise against the house of
jeroboam with the sword.

7:10 then amaziah the priest of bethel sent to jeroboam king of
israel, saying, amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the
house of israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.

7:11 for thus amos saith, jeroboam shall die by the sword, and israel
shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.

7:12 also amaziah said unto amos,
 
 ___________________________
 
not again any more at bethel: for it is the king's chapel,
and it is the king's court.

7:14 then answered amos, and said to amaziah, i was no prophet,
neither was i a prophet's son; but i was an herdman, and a gatherer of
sycomore fruit: 7:15 and the lord took me as i followed the flock, and
the lord said unto me, go, prophesy unto my people israel.

7:16 now therefore hear thou the word of the lord: thou sayest,
prophesy not against israel, and drop not thy word against the house
of isaac.

7:17 therefore thus saith the lord; thy wife shall be an harlot in the
city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy
land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land:
and israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.

8:1 thus hath the lord god shewed unto me: and behold a basket of
summer fruit.

8:2 and he said, amos, what seest thou? and i said, a basket of summer
fruit. then said the lord unto me, the end is come upon my pe