more appear to manoah and to
his wife. then manoah knew that he was an angel of the lord.

13:22 and manoah said unto his wife, we shall surely die, because we
have seen god.

13:23 but his wife said unto him, if the lord were pleased to kill us,
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
at this time have told us such things as these.

13:24 and the woman bare a son, and called his name samson: and the
child grew, and the lord blessed him.

13:25 and the spirit of the lord began to move him at times in the
camp of dan between zorah and eshtaol.

14:1 and samson went down to timnath, and saw a woman in timnath of
the daughters of the philistines.

14:2 and he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, i
have seen a woman in timnath of the daughters of the philistines: now
therefore get her for me to wife.

14:3 then his father and his mother said unto him, is 
 
 ___________________________
 
there never a
woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people,
that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised philistines? and
samson said unto his father, get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

14:4 but his father and his mother knew not that it was of the lord,
that he sought an occasion against the philistines: for at that time
the philistines had dominion over israel.

14:5 then went samson down, and his father and his mother, to timnath,
and came to the vineyards of timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
against him.

14:6 and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him, and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but
he told not his father or his mother what he had done.

14:7 and he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased
samson well.

14:8 and after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to
see the ca
 
 ___________________________
 
rcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees
and honey in the carcase of the lion.

14:9 and he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to
his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told
not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

14:10 so his father went down unto the woman: and samson made there a
feast; for so used the young men to do.

14:11 and it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companions to be with him.

14:12 and samson said unto them, i will now put forth a riddle unto
you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the
feast, and find it out, then i will give you thirty sheets and thirty
change of garments: 14:13 but if ye cannot declare it me, then shall
ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. and t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey said
unto him, put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.

14:14 and he said unto them, out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness. and they could not in three days
expound the riddle.

14:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto
samson's wife, entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the
riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye
called us to take that we have? is it not so?  14:16 and samson's wife
wept before him, and said, thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not:
thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast
not told it me. and he said unto her, behold, i have not told it my
father nor my mother, and shall i tell it thee?  14:17 and she wept
before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to
pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon
him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.

14:18 and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ity said unto him on the seventh day before
the sun went down, what is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger
than a lion?  and he said unto them, if ye had not plowed with my
heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

14:19 and the spirit of the lord came upon him, and he went down to
ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. and his anger
was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.

14:20 but samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used
as his friend.

15:1 but it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, i will
go in to my wife into the chamber. but her father would not suffer him
to go in.

15:2 and her father said, i verily thought that thou hadst utterly
hated her; therefore i gave her to thy companion: is not her younger
sister fairer than she? take her, i pray thee, instead of her.

 
 ___________________________
 

15:3 and samson said concerning them, now shall i be more blameless
than the philistines, though i do them a displeasure.

15:4 and samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took
firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst
between two tails.

15:5 and when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the
standing corn of the philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

15:6 then the philistines said, who hath done this? and they answered,
samson, the son in law of the timnite, because he had taken his wife,
and given her to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s companion. and the philistines came up, and burnt
her and her father with fire.

15:7 and samson said unto them, though ye have done this, yet will i
be avenged of you, and after that i will cease.

15:8 and he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock etam.

15:9 then the philistines went up, and pitched in judah, and spread
themselves in lehi.

15:10 and the men of judah said, why are ye come up against us? and
they answered, to bind samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath
done to us.

15:11 then three thousand 
 
 ___________________________
 
men of judah went to the top of the rock
etam, and said to samson, knowest thou not that the philistines are
rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? and he said
unto them, as they did unto me, so have i done unto them.

15:12 and they said unto him, we are come down to bind thee, that we
may deliver thee into the hand of the philistines. and samson said
unto them, swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

15:13 and they spake unto him, saying, no; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee.
and they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.

15:14 and when he came unto lehi, the philistines shouted against him:
and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him, and the cords that
were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his
bands loosed from off his hands.

15:15 and he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand,
and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

15:16 and samson said, with the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have i slain a thousand men.

15:17 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
ramathlehi.

15:18 and he was sore athirst, and called on the lord, and said, thou
hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and
now shall i die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised?  15:19 but god clave an hol
 
 ___________________________
 
low place that was in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit
came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof
enhakkore, which is in lehi unto this day.

15:20 and he judged israel in the days of the philistines twenty
years.

16:1 then went samson to gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 and it was told the gazites, saying, samson is come hither. and
they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of
the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, in the morning, when
it is day, we shall kill him.

16:3 and samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them
up to the top of an hill that is before hebron.

16:4 and it came to pass afterward, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
he loved a woman in the
valley of sorek, whose name was delilah.

16:5 and the lords of the philistines came up unto her, and said unto
her, entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what
means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him;
and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

16:6 and delilah said to samson, tell me, i pray thee, wherein thy
great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict
thee.

16:7 and samson said unto her, if they bind me with seven green withs
that were never dried, then shall i be weak, and be as another man.

16:8 then the lords of the philistines brought up to her seven green
withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

16:9 now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the
chamber.

and she said unto him, the phil
 
 ___________________________
 
istines be upon thee, samson. and he
brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
fire. so his strength was not known.

16:10 and delilah said unto samson, behold, thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: now tell me, i pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be
bound.

16:11 and he said unto her, if they bind me fast with new ropes that
never were occupied, then shall i be weak, and be as another man.

16:12 delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him, the philistines be upon thee, samson. and there were
liers in wait abiding in the chamber. and he brake them from off his
arms like a thread.

16:13 and delil
 
 ___________________________
 
ah said unto samson, hitherto thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. and he said
unto her, if thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

16:14 and she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, the
philistines be upon thee, samson. and he awaked out of his sleep, and
went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 and she said unto him, how canst thou say, i love thee, when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

16:16 and it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,
and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 16:17 that he
told her all his heart, and said unto her, there hath not come a razor
 
 ___________________________
 
h saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the philistines, saying, come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. then the lords of the
philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 and she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she
began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

16:20 and she said, the philistines be upon thee, samson. and he awoke
out of his sleep, and said, i will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. and he wist not that the lord was departed from him.

16:21 but the philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 then the lords of the philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrific
 
 ___________________________
 
e unto dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, our god hath delivered samson our enemy into our hand.

16:24 and when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

16:25 and it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, call for samson, that he may make us sport. and they called for
samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars.

16:26 and samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, suffer
me that i may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that i
may lean upon them.

16:27 now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while samson made sport.

16:28 and samson called unto the lord, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
said, o lord god, remember
me, i pray thee, and strengthen me, i pray thee, only this once, o
god, that i may be at once avenged of the philistines for my two eyes.

16:29 and samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 and samson said, let me die with the philistines. and he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. so the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

16:31 then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between zorah and eshtaol
in the buryingplace of manoah his father. and he judged israel twenty
years.

17:1 and there was a man