e three hundred sixty and five years: 5:24 and enoch walked with
god: and he was not; for god took him.

5:25 and methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat
lamech.

5:26 and methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty
and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:27 and all the days of
methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

5:28 and lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a
son: 5:29 and he called his name noah, saying, this same shall comfort
us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the lord hath cursed.

5:30 and lamech lived after he begat noah five hundred ninety and five
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:31 and all the days of lamech
were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

5:32 and noah was five hundred years old: and noah begat shem, ham,
and japheth.

6:1 and it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
earth,
 
 ___________________________
 
of old, men of
renown.

6:5 and god saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.

6:6 and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart.

6:7 and the lord said, i will destroy man whom i have created from the
face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and
the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that i have made them.

6:8 but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord.

6:9 these are the generations of noah: noah was a just man and perfect
in his generations, and noah walked with god.

6:10 and noah begat three sons, shem, ham, and japheth.

6:11 the earth also was corrupt before god, and the earth was filled
with violence.

6:12 and god looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

6:13 and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come before me;

 
 ___________________________
 

6:19 and of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt
thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be
male and female.

6:20 of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort
shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21 and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22 thus did noah; according to all that god commanded him, so did
he.

7:1 and the lord said unto noah, come thou and all thy house into the
ark; for thee have i seen righteous before me in this generation.

7:2 of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and
his female.

7:3 of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to
keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

7:4 for yet seven days, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d i will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that i have
made will i destroy from off the face of the earth.

7:5 and noah did according unto all that the lord commanded him.

7:6 and noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth.

7:7 and noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8 of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 there went in two
and two unto noah into the ark, the male and the female, as god had
commanded noah.

7:10 and it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.

7:11 in the six hundredth year of noah's life, in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains
of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

7:12 and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13 in the selfsame day entered noah, and shem, and ham, and japheth,
the sons of noah, and noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons
with them, into the ark; 7:14 they, and every beast after his kind,
and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind,
every bird of every sort.

7:15 and they went in unto noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16 and they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
god had commanded him: and the lord shut hi
 
 ___________________________
 
he mountains
were covered.

7:21 and all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and
of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth, and every man: 7:22 all in whose nostrils was the
breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

7:23 and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face
of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the
fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and noah
only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24 and the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.

8:1 and god remembered noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the ark: and god made a wind to pass over
the earth, and the waters asswaged; 8:2 the fountains also of the deep
and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was
restrained; 8:3 and the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and af
 
 ___________________________
 
ter the end of the hundred and fifty days the
waters were abated.

8:4 and the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
the month, upon the mountains of ararat.

8:5 and the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the
tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the
mountains seen.

8:6 and it came to pass at the end of forty days, that noah opened the
window of the ark which he had made: 8:7 and he sent forth a raven,
which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off
the earth.

8:8 also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground; 8:9 but the dove found no rest
for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for
the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his
hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into t
 
 ___________________________
 
he ark.

8:10 and he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the
dove out of the ark; 8:11 and the dove came in to him in the evening;
and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so noah knew that
the waters were abated from off the earth.

8:12 and he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.

8:13 and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from
off the earth: and noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked,
and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

8:14 and in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
 
 ___________________________
 

month, was the earth dried.

8:15 and god spake unto noah, saying, 8:16 go forth of the ark, thou,
and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

8:17 bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of
all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the
earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

8:18 and noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him: 8:19 every beast, every creeping thing, and every
fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went
forth out of the ark.

8:20 and noah builded an altar unto the lord; and took of every clean
beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
altar.

8:21 and the lord smelled a sweet savour; and the lord said in his
heart, i will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake
 
 ___________________________
 
; for
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will i
again smite any more every thing living, as i have done.

8:22 while the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

9:1 and god blessed noah and his sons, and said unto them, be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2 and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast
of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are
they delivered.

9:3 every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have i given you all things.

9:4 but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall
ye not eat.

9:5 and surely your blood of your lives will i require; at the hand of
every beast will i require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
every man's brother will i require the life of man.

9:6 whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
the image of god made he man.

9:7 and you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in
the earth, and multiply therein.

9:8 and god spake unto noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 9:9 and
i, behold, i establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after
you; 9:10 and with every living creature that is with you, of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from
all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

9:11 and i will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall
there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

9:1
 
 ___________________________
 
14 and it shall come to pass, when i bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 and i will remember my
covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all
flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all
flesh.

9:16 and the bow shall be in the cloud; and i will look upon it, that
i may remember the everlasting covenant between god and every living
creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17 and god said unto noah, this is the token of the covenant, which
i have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18 and the sons of noah, that went forth of the ark, were shem, and
ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan.

9:19 these are the three sons of noah: and of them was the whole earth
overspread.

9:20 and noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
9:21 and he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered
within his tent.

9:22 and ham, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the father of canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
and told his two brethren without.

9:23 and shem and japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness.

9:24 and noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had
done unto him.

9:25 and he said, cursed be canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

9:26 and he said, blessed be the lord god of shem; and canaan shall be
his servant.

9:27 god shall enlarge japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of
shem; and canaan shall be his servant.

9:28 and noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29 and all the days of noah were nine hundred and fifty years:
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
he died.

10:1 now these are the generations of the sons of noah, shem, ham, and
japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

10:2 the sons of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and
tubal, and meshech, and tiras.

10:3 and the sons of gomer; ashkenaz, and riphath, and togarmah.

10:4 and the sons of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and
dodanim.

10:5 by these were the isles of the gentiles divided in their lands;
every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

10:6 and the sons of ham; cush, an
 
 ___________________________
 
oktan.

10:26 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 10:27 and hadoram, and uzal, and diklah, 10:28 and obal, and
abimael, and sheba, 10:29 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab: all these
were the sons of joktan.

10:30 and their dwelling was from mesha, as thou goest unto sephar a
mount of the east.

10:31 these are the sons of shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32 these are the families of the sons of noah, after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided
in the earth after the flood.

11:1 and the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

11:2 and it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they
found a plain in the land of shinar; and they dwelt there.

11:3 and they said one to another, go to, let us make brick, and burn
them thoroughly. and they had brick for stone, and slime had they for
morter.

11:4 and they said, go to, le
 
 ___________________________
 
: of gilead come the family of the
gileadites.

26:30 these are the sons of gilead: of jeezer, the family of the
jeezerites: of helek, the family of the helekites: 26:31 and of
asriel, the family of the asrielites: and of shechem, the family of
the shechemites: 26:32 and of shemida, the family of the shemidaites:
and of hepher, the family of the hepherites.

26:33 and zelophehad the son of hepher had no sons, but daughters: and
the names of the daughters of zelophehad were mahlah, and noah,
hoglah, milcah, and tirzah.

26:34 these are the families of manasseh, and those that were numbered
of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 these are the sons of ephraim after their families: of
shuthelah, the family of the shuthalhites: of becher, the family of
the bachrites: of tahan, the family of the tahanites.

26:36 and these are the sons of shuthelah: of eran, the family of the
eranites.

26:37 these are the families of the sons of ephraim according to tho
 
 ___________________________
 

the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood before moses, and before eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the lord in the company of korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, becaus
 
 ___________________________
 
in any tribe
of the children of israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
tribe of her father, that the children of israel may enjoy every man
the inheritance of his fathers.

36:9 neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 even as the lord commanded moses, so did the daughters of
zelophehad: 36:11 for mahlah, tirzah, and hoglah, and milcah, and
noah, the daughters of zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 and they were married into the families of the
sons of manasseh the son of joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 these are the commandments and the judgments, which the lord
commanded by the hand of moses unto the children of israel in the
plains of moab by jordan near jericho.




the fifth book of moses:  called deuteronomy


1:1 these be the 
 
 ___________________________
 
dattah, and kerioth, and hezron, which is hazor, 15:26 amam, and
shema, and moladah, 15:27 and hazargaddah, and heshmon, and bethpalet,
15:28 and hazarshual, and beersheba, and bizjothjah, 15:29 baalah, and
iim, and azem, 15:30 and eltolad, and chesil, and hormah, 15:31 and
ziklag, and madmannah, and sansannah, 15:32 and lebaoth, and shilhim,
and ain, and rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 and in the valley, eshtaol, and zoreah, and ashnah,
15:34 and zanoah, and engannim, tappuah, and enam, 15:35 jarmuth, and
adullam, socoh, and azekah, 15:36 and sharaim, and adithaim, and
gederah, and gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages: 15:37
zenan, and hadashah, and migdalgad, 15:38 and dilean, and mizpeh, and
joktheel, 15:39 lachish, and bozkath, and eglon, 15:40 and cabbon, and
lahmam, and kithlish, 15:41 and gederoth, bethdagon, and naamah, and
makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages: 15:42 libnah, and ether,
and ashan, 15:43 and jip
 
 ___________________________
 
thereof: 15:48
and in the mountains, shamir, and jattir, and socoh, 15:49 and dannah,
and kirjathsannah, which is debir, 15:50 and anab, and eshtemoh, and
anim, 15:51 and goshen, and holon, and giloh; eleven cities with their
villages: 15:52 arab, and dumah, and eshean, 15:53 and janum, and
bethtappuah, and aphekah, 15:54 and humtah, and kirjatharba, which is
hebron, and zior; nine cities with their villages: 15:55 maon, carmel,
and ziph, and juttah, 15:56 and jezreel, and jokdeam, and zanoah,
15:57 cain, gibeah, and timnah; ten cities with their villages: 15:58
halhul, bethzur, and gedor, 15:59 and maarath, and bethanoth, and
eltekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, and rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 in
the wilderness, betharabah, middin, and secacah, 15:62 and nibshan,
and the city of salt, and engedi; six cities with their villages.

15:63 as for the jebusites the inhabitants of jerusalem, the children
of judah co
 
 ___________________________
 
 children of manasseh by
their families; for the children of abiezer, and for the children of
helek, and for the children of asriel, and for the children of
shechem, and for the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

17:3 but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of
machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and
tirzah.

17:4 and they came near before eleazar the priest, and before joshua
the son of nun, and before the princes, saying, the lord commanded
moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. therefore
according to the commandment of the lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 and there fell ten portions to manasseh, beside the land of
gilead and bashan, which were on the other side jordan; 17:6 because
the daughters of man
 
 ___________________________
 
d forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on
threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged israel eight years.

12:15 and abdon the son of hillel the pirathonite died, and was buried
in pirathon in the land of ephraim, in the mount of the amalekites.

13:1 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord; and the lord delivered them into the hand of the philistines
forty years.

13:2 and there was a certain man of zorah, of the family of the
danites, whose name was manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

13:3 and the angel of the lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto
her, behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 now therefore beware, i pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 13:5 for, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a nazarite unto god from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliver i
 
 ___________________________
 
he hand of the philistines.

13:6 then the woman came and told her husband, saying, a man of god
came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel
of god, very terrible: but i asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name: 13:7 but he said unto me, behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
any unclean thing: for the child shall be a nazarite to god from the
womb to the day of his death.

13:8 then manoah intreated the lord, and said, o my lord, let the man
of god which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shall do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 and god hearkened to the voice of manoah; and the angel of god
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but manoah her
husband was not with her.

13:10 and the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and
said unto him, behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto
me the other day.

1
 
 ___________________________
 
3:11 and manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? and
he said, i am.

13:12 and manoah said, now let thy words come to pass. how shall we
order the child, and how shall we do unto him?  13:13 and the angel of
the lord said unto manoah, of all that i said unto the woman let her
beware.

13:14 she may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither
let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all
that i commanded her let her observe.

13:15 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, i pray thee, let us
detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

13:16 and the angel of the lord said unto manoah, though thou detain
me, i will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burn
 
 ___________________________
 
t
offering, thou must offer it unto the lord. for manoah knew not that
he was an angel of the lord.

13:17 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, what is thy name,
that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?  13:18 and
the angel of the lord said unto him, why askest thou thus after my
name, seeing it is secret?  13:19 so manoah took a kid with a meat
offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the lord: and the angel did
wonderously; and manoah and his wife looked on.

13:20 for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the lord ascended in the flame of the
altar. and manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 but the angel of the lord did no more appear to manoah and to
his wife. then manoah knew that he was an angel of the lord.

13:22 and manoah said unto his wife, we shall surely die, because we
have seen god.

13:23 but his wife sa
 
 ___________________________
 
he one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 and samson said, let me die with the philistines. and he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. so the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

16:31 then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between zorah and eshtaol
in the buryingplace of manoah his father. and he judged israel twenty
years.

17:1 and there was a man of mount ephraim, whose name was micah.

17:2 and he said unto his mother, the eleven hundred shekels of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; i took it. and his
mother said, blessed be thou of the lord, my son.

17:3 and when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, i had wholly de
 
 ___________________________
 
are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
israel.

15:27 in the two and fiftieth year of azariah king of judah pekah the
son of remaliah began to reign over israel in samaria, and reigned
twenty years.

15:28 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord: he
departed not from the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin.

15:29 in the days of pekah king of israel came tiglathpileser king of
assyria, and took ijon, and abelbethmaachah, and janoah, and kedesh,
and hazor, and gilead, and galilee, all the land of naphtali, and
carried them captive to assyria.

15:30 and hoshea the son of elah made a conspiracy against pekah the
son of remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his
stead, in the twentieth year of jotham the son of uzziah.

15:31 and the rest of the acts of pekah, and all that he did, behold,
they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel.

15:32 in the second year of pekah the so
 
 ___________________________
 
son; 25:28 and he spake kindly to
him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with
him in babylon; 25:29 and changed his prison garments: and he did eat
bread continually before him all the days of his life.

25:30 and his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the
king, a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.




the first book of the chronicles


1:1 adam, sheth, enosh, 1:2 kenan, mahalaleel, jered, 1:3 henoch,
methuselah, lamech, 1:4 noah, shem, ham, and japheth.

1:5 the sons of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and
tubal, and meshech, and tiras.

1:6 and the sons of gomer; ashchenaz, and riphath, and togarmah.

1:7 and the sons of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and dodanim.

1:8 the sons of ham; cush, and mizraim, put, and canaan.

1:9 and the sons of cush; seba, and havilah, and sabta, and raamah,
and sabtecha. and the sons of raamah; sheba, and dedan.

1:10 and cush begat nimrod: he began 
 
 ___________________________
 
valley of charashim; for they were craftsmen.

4:15 and the sons of caleb the son of jephunneh; iru, elah, and naam:
and the sons of elah, even kenaz.

4:16 and the sons of jehaleleel; ziph, and ziphah, tiria, and asareel.

4:17 and the sons of ezra were, jether, and mered, and epher, and
jalon: and she bare miriam, and shammai, and ishbah the father of
eshtemoa.

4:18 and his wife jehudijah bare jered the father of gedor, and heber
the father of socho, and jekuthiel the father of zanoah. and these are
the sons of bithiah the daughter of pharaoh, which mered took.

4:19 and the sons of his wife hodiah the sister of naham, the father
of keilah the garmite, and eshtemoa the maachathite.

4:20 and the sons of shimon were, amnon, and rinnah, benhanan, and
tilon.

and the sons of ishi were, zoheth, and benzoheth.

4:21 the sons of shelah the son of judah were, er the father of lecah,
and laadah the father of mareshah, and the families of the house of
them that wrought f
 
 ___________________________
 
 half part of jerusalem.

3:10 and next unto them repaired jedaiah the son of harumaph, even
over against his house. and next unto him repaired hattush the son of
hashabniah.

3:11 malchijah the son of harim, and hashub the son of pahathmoab,
repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.

3:12 and next unto him repaired shallum the son of halohesh, the ruler
of the half part of jerusalem, he and his daughters.

3:13 the valley gate repaired hanun, and the inhabitants of zanoah;
they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and
the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung
gate.

3:14 but the dung gate repaired malchiah the son of rechab, the ruler
of part of bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof,
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

3:15 but the gate of the fountain repaired shallun the son of
colhozeh, the ruler of part of mizpah; he built it, and covered it,
and set up the doors thereof, the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
ing the
people.

11:25 and for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of
judah dwelt at kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at dibon,
and in the villages thereof, and at jekabzeel, and in the villages
thereof, 11:26 and at jeshua, and at moladah, and at bethphelet, 11:27
and at hazarshual, and at beersheba, and in the villages thereof,
11:28 and at ziklag, and at mekonah, and in the villages thereof,
11:29 and at enrimmon, and at zareah, and at jarmuth, 11:30 zanoah,
adullam, and in their villages, at lachish, and the fields thereof, at
azekah, and in the villages thereof. and they dwelt from beersheba
unto the valley of hinnom.

11:31 the children also of benjamin from geba dwelt at michmash, and
aija, and bethel, and in their villages.

11:32 and at anathoth, nob, ananiah, 11:33 hazor, ramah, gittaim,
11:34 hadid, zeboim, neballat, 11:35 lod, and ono, the valley of
craftsmen.

11:36 and of the levites were divisions in judah, and in benjamin.
 
 ___________________________
 
mer the holy one of israel; the god of the whole earth
shall he be called.

54:6 for the lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy god.

54:7 for a small moment have i forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will i gather thee.

54:8 in a little wrath i hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will i have mercy on thee, saith the lord thy
redeemer.

54:9 for this is as the waters of noah unto me: for as i have sworn
that the waters of noah should no more go over the earth; so have i
sworn that i would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

54:10 for the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
peace be removed, saith the lord that hath mercy on thee.

54:11 o thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, i will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy
founda
 
 ___________________________
 
l may go no more astray
from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions;
but that they may be my people, and i may be their god, saith the lord
god.

14:12 the word of the lord came again to me, saying, 14:13 son of man,
when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will
i stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast
from it: 14:14 though these three men, noah, daniel, and job, were in
it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith the lord god.

14:15 if i cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because
of the beasts: 14:16 though these three men were in it, as i live,
saith the lord god, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters;
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

14:17 or if i bring a sword upon that l
 
 ___________________________
 
and, and say, sword, go through
the land; so that i cut off man and beast from it: 14:18 though these
three men were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered
themselves.

14:19 or if i send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: 14:20 though noah,
daniel, and job were in it, as i live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.

14:21 for thus saith the lord god; how much more when i send my four
sore judgments upon jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
14:22 yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they