:19 and leah conceived again, and bare jacob the sixth son.

30:20 and leah said, god hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, because i have born him six sons: and she
called his name zebulun.

30:21 and afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name dinah.

30:22 and god remembered rachel, and god hearkened to her, and opened
her womb.

30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away
my reproach: 30:24 and she called his name joseph; and said, the lord
shall add to me another son.

30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob
said unto laban, send me away, that i may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 give me my wives and my children, for whom i have served thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my service which i have done thee.

30:27 and laban said unto him, i pray thee, if i have found favour in
thine eyes, tarry: for i have learned by experience that the lord hath
blesse
 
 ___________________________
 
 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because
he touched the hollow of jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

33:1 and jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, esau came,
and with him four hundred men. and he divided the children unto leah,
and unto rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

33:2 and he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and leah
and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost.

33:3 and he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him: and they wept.

33:5 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, who are those with thee? and he said, the children which god
hath graciously given thy servant.

33:6 then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
bowed 
 
 ___________________________
 
themselves.

33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bowed themselves.

33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met? and
he said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 and esau said, i have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 and jacob said, nay, i pray thee, if now i have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore i have
seen thy face, as though i had seen the face of god, and thou wast
pleased with me.

33:11 t
 
 ___________________________
 


35:20 and jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
rachel's grave unto this day.

35:21 and israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of
edar.

35:22 and it came to pass, when israel dwelt in that land, that reuben
went and lay with bilhah his father's concubine: and israel heard it.
now the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben,
jacob's firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
sons of bilhah, rachel's handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
sons of zilpah, leah's handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people
 
 ___________________________
 

according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36:41 duke aholibamah, duke elah,
duke pinon, 36:42 duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 36:43 duke
magdiel, duke iram: these be the dukes of edom, according to their
habitations in the land of their possession: he is esau the father of
the edomites.

37:1 and jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in
the land of canaan.

37:2 these are the generations of jacob. joseph, being seventeen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
sons of bilhah, and with the sons of zilpah, his father's wives: and
joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

37:3 now israel loved joseph more than all his children, because he
was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

37:4 and when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than
all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto

 
 ___________________________
 
him.

37:5 and joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they
hated him yet the more.

37:6 and he said unto them, hear, i pray you, this dream which i have
dreamed: 37:7 for, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and,
lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

37:8 and his brethren said to him, shalt thou indeed reign over us? or
shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? and they hated him yet the
more for
 
 ___________________________
 
, behold, the sun and
the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.

37:10 and he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his
father rebuked him, and said unto him, what is this dream that thou
hast dreamed?  shall i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to
bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?  37:11 and his brethren
envied him; but his father observed the saying.

37:12 and his brethren went to feed their father's flock in shechem.

37:13 and israel said unto joseph, do not thy brethren feed the flock
in shechem? come, and i will send thee unto them. and he said to him,
here am i.

37:14 and he said to him, go, i pray thee, see whether it be well with
thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. so he
sent him out of the vale of hebron, and he came to shechem.

37:15 and a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in
the field: and the man asked him, saying, what seekest thou?  37:16
and he said, i seek my brethren:
 
 ___________________________
 
 tell me, i pray thee, where they feed
their flocks.

37:17 and the man said, they are departed hence; for i heard them say,
let us go to dothan. and joseph went after his brethren, and found
them in dothan.

37:18 and when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto
them, they conspired against him to slay him.

37:19 and they said one to another, behold, this dreamer cometh.

37:20 come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some
pit, and we will say, some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall
see what will become of his dreams.

37:21 and reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands;
and said
 
 ___________________________
 
, let us not kill him.

37:22 and reuben said unto them, shed no blood, but cast him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might
rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.

37:23 and it came to pass, when joseph was come unto his brethren,
that they stript joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that
was on him; 37:24 and they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the
pit was empty, there was no water in it.

37:25 and they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes
and looked, and, behold, a company of ishmeelites came from gilead
with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry
it down to egypt.

37:26 and judah said unto his brethren, what profit is it if we slay
our brother, and conceal his blood?  3
 
 ___________________________
 
7:27 come, and let us sell him
to the ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our
brother and our flesh. and his brethren were content.

37:28 then there passed by midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
lifted up joseph out of the pit, and sold joseph to the ishmeelites
for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought joseph into egypt.

37:29 and reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, joseph was not in
the pit; and he rent his clothes.

37:30 and he returned unto his brethren, and said, the child is not;
and i, whither shall i go?  37:31 and they took joseph's coat, and
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood; 37:32 and
they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their
father; and said, this have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
coat or no.

37:33 and he knew it, and said, it is my son's coat; an evil beast
hath devoured him; 
 
 ___________________________
 
joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

37:34 and jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.

37:35 and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, for i will go down into
the grave unto my son mourning. thus his father wept for him.

37:36 and the midianites sold him into egypt unto potiphar, an officer
of pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

38:1 and it came to pass at that tim
 
 ___________________________
 
8 and it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out
his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet
thread, saying, this came out first.

38:29 and it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his
brother came out: and she said, how hast thou broken forth? this
breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called pharez.

38:30 and afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread
upon his hand: and his name was called zarah.

39:1 and joseph was brought down to egypt; and potiphar, an officer of
pharaoh, captain of the guard, an egyptian, bought him of the hands of
the ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

39:2 and the lord was with joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he
was in the house of his master the egyptian.

39:3 and his master saw that the lord was with him, and that the lord
made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

39:4 and joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he
made hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his
hand.

39:5 and it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer
in his house, and over all that he had, that the lord blessed the
egyptian's house for joseph's sake; and the blessing of the lord was
upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

39:6 and he left all that he had in joseph's hand; and he knew not
ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. and joseph was a goodly
person, and well favoured.

39:7 and it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife
cast her eyes upon joseph; and she said, lie with me.

39:8 but he refused, and said unto his master's wife, behold, my
master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed
all that he hath to my hand; 39:9 there is none greater in this house
than i; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can i do this great w
 
 ___________________________
 
ickedness, and sin
against god?  39:10 and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by
day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

39:11 and it came to pass about this time, that joseph went into the
house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house
there within.

39:12 and she caught him by his garment, saying, lie with me: and he
left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

39:13 and it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment
in her hand, and was fled forth, 39:14 that she called unto the men of
her house, and spake unto them, saying, see, he hath brought in an
hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with
 
 ___________________________
 
 his garment by her, until his lord came home.

39:17 and she spake unto him according to these words, saying, the
hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to
mock me: 39:18 and it came to pass, as i lifted up my voice and cried,
that he left his garment with me, and fled out.

39:19 and it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his
wife, which she spake unto him, saying, after this manner did thy
servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.

39:20 and joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a
place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the
prison.

39:21 but the lord was with joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him
favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

39:22 and the keeper of the prison committed to joseph's hand all the
prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he
was the doer of it.

39:23 the keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under
his hand
 
 ___________________________
 
; because the lord was with him, and that which he did, the
lord made it to prosper.

40:1 and it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the
king of egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of egypt.

40:2 and pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the
chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

40:3 and he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard,
into the prison, the place where joseph was bound.

40:4 and the captain of the guard charged joseph with them, and he
served them: and they continued a season in ward.

40:5 and they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one
night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the
butler and the baker of the king of egypt, which were bound in the
prison.

40:6 and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.

40:7 and he asked pharaoh's officers that w
 
 ___________________________
 
ere with him in the ward of
his lord's house, saying, wherefore look ye so sadly to day?  40:8 and
they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream, and there is no
interpreter of it. and joseph said unto them, do not interpretations
belong to god? tell me them, i pray you.

40:9 and the chief butler told his dream to joseph, and said to him,
in my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 40:10 and in the vine were
three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot
forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 and
pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and i took the grapes, and pressed them
into pharaoh's cup, and i gave the cup into pharaoh's hand.

40:12 and joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it: the
three branches are three days: 40:13 yet within three days shal
 
 ___________________________
 
d thou
shalt deliver pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner
when thou wast his butler.

40:14 but think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew
kindness, i pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto pharaoh,
and bring me out of this house: 40:15 for indeed i was stolen away out
of the land of the hebrews: and here also have i done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon.

40:16 when the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he
said unto joseph, i also was in my dream, and, behold, i had three
white baskets on my head: 40:17 and in the uppermost basket there was
of all manner of bakemeats for pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out
of the basket upon my head.

40:18 and joseph answered and said, this is the interpretation
thereof: the three baskets are three days: 40:19 yet within three days
shall pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a
tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

40:20 an
 
 ___________________________
 
d it came to pass the third day, which was pharaoh's birthday,
that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head
of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.

40:21 and he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and
he gave the cup into pharaoh's hand: 40:22 but he hanged the chief
baker: as joseph had interpreted to them.

40:23 yet did not the chief butler remember joseph, but forgat him.

41:1 and it came to pass at the end of two full years, that pharaoh
dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

41:2 and, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured
kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

41:3 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the
river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon
the brink of the river.

41:4 and the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favo
 
 ___________________________
 
e chief
baker: 41:11 and we dreamed a dream in one night, i and he; we dreamed
each man according to the interpretation of his dream.

41:12 and there was there with us a young man, an hebrew, servant to
the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us
our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.

41:13 and it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he
restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

41:14 then pharaoh sent and called joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his
raiment, and came in unto pharaoh.

41:15 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i have dreamed a dream, and there
is none that can interpret it: and i have heard say of thee, that thou
canst understand a dream to interpret it.

41:16 and joseph answered pharaoh, saying, it is not in me: god shall
give pharaoh an answer of peace.

41:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, in my dream, behold, i stood upon
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and when they had
eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. so i awoke.

41:22 and i saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one
stalk, full and good: 41:23 and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,
and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 and the
thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and i told this unto the
magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

41:25 and joseph said unto pharaoh, the dream of pharaoh is one: god
hath shewed pharaoh what he is about to do.

41:26 the seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are
seven years: the dream is one.

41:27 and the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them
are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind
shall be seven years of famine.

41:28 this is the thing which i have spoken unto pharaoh: what god is
about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh.

41:29
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
and lay up corn under the hand of pharaoh, and let them keep food in
the cities.

41:36 and that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
years of famine, which shall be in the land of egypt; that the land
perish not through the famine.

41:37 and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.

41:38 and pharaoh said unto his servants, can we find such a one as
this is, a man in whom the spirit of god is?  41:39 and pharaoh said
unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath shewed thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 thou shalt be over my house,
and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the
throne will i be greater than thou.

41:41 and pharaoh said unto joseph, see, i have set thee over all the
land of egypt.

41:42 and pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a
gold chain about his neck; 41:43 
 
 ___________________________
 
and he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cried before him, bow the knee: and he
made him ruler over all the land of egypt.

41:44 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i am pharaoh, and without thee
shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of egypt.

41:45 and pharaoh called joseph's name zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave
him to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on. and
joseph went out over all the land of egypt.

41:46 and joseph was thirty years old when he stood before pharaoh
king of egypt. and joseph went out from the presence of pharaoh, and
went throughout all the land of egypt.

41:47 and in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
handfuls.

41:48 and he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were
in the land of egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of
the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

41:49 and joseph gathered corn as the sand 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the sea, very much,
until he left numbering; for it was without number.

41:50 and unto joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare unto
him.

41:51 and joseph called the name of the firstborn manasseh: for god,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

41:52 and the name of the second called he ephraim: for god hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

41:53 and the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of
egypt, were ended.

41:54 and the seven years of dearth began to come, according as joseph
had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of
egypt there was brea
 
 ___________________________
 
d.

41:55 and when all the land of egypt was famished, the people cried to
pharaoh for bread: and pharaoh said unto all the egyptians, go unto
joseph; what he saith to you, do.

41:56 and the famine was over all the face of the earth: and joseph
opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyptians; and the
famine waxed sore in the land of egypt.

41:57 and all countries came into egypt to joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

42:1 now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt, jacob said unto
his sons, why do ye look one upon another?  42:2 and he said, behold,
i have heard that there is corn in egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

42:3 and joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt.

42:4 but benjamin, joseph's brother, jacob sent not with his brethren;
for he said, lest per
 
 ___________________________
 
adventure mischief befall him.

42:5 and the sons of israel came to buy corn among those that came:
for the famine was in the land of canaan.

42:6 and joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that
sold to all the people of the land: and joseph's brethren came, and
bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.

42:7 and joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself
strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them,
whence come ye? and they said, from the land of canaan to buy food.

42:8 and joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

42:9 and joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and
said unto them, ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are
come.

42:10 and they said unto him, nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
servants come.

42:11
 
 ___________________________
 
 we are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no
spies.

42:12 and he said unto them, nay, but to see the nakedness of the land
ye are come.

42:13 and they said, thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one
man in the land of canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with
our father, and one is not.

42:14 and joseph said unto them, that is it that i spake unto you,
saying, ye are spies: 42:15 hereby ye shall be proved: by the life of
pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither.

42:16 send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any
truth in you: or else by the life of pharaoh surely ye are spies.

42:17 and he put them all together into ward three days.

42:18 and joseph said un
 
 ___________________________
 
unto me; so shall your
words be verified, and ye shall not die. and they did so.

42:21 and they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

42:22 and reuben answered them, saying, spake i not unto you, saying,
do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore,
behold, also his blood is required.

42:23 and they knew not that joseph understood them; for he spake unto
them by an interpreter.

42:24 and he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to
them again, and communed with them, and took from them simeon, and
bound him before their eyes.

42:25 then joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to
restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision
for the way: and thus did he unto them.

42:26 and they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

42:27 and as 
 
 ___________________________
 
our households, and be gone: 42:34
and bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall i know that ye are
no spies, but that ye are true men: so will i deliver you your
brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

42:35 and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold,
every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and
their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

42:36 and jacob their father said unto them, me have ye bereaved of my
children: joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin
away: all these things are against me.

42:37 and reuben spake unto his father, saying, slay my two sons, if i
bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and i will bring him
to thee again.

42:38 and he said, my son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in
the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to
the grave.

43:1 and the fam
 
 ___________________________
 
e money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 43:13 take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 and god
almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your
other brother, and benjamin. if i be bereaved of my children, i am
bereaved.

43:15 and the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and
stood before joseph.

43:16 and when joseph saw benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of
his house, bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these
men shall dine with me at noon.

43:17 and the man did as joseph bade; and the man brought the men into
joseph's house.

43:18 and the men were afraid, because they were brought into joseph's
house; and they said, because of the money that was returned in our
sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion
against us, and f
 
 ___________________________
 
all upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

43:19 and they came near to the steward of joseph's house, and they
communed with him at the door of the house, 43:20 and said, o sir, we
came indeed down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 and it came to
pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full
weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

43:22 and other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food:
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

43:23 and he said, peace be 
 
 ___________________________
 
to you, fear not: your god, and the god of
your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: i had your money.
and he brought simeon out unto them.

43:24 and the man brought the men into joseph's house, and gave them
water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

43:25 and they made ready the present against joseph came at noon: for
they heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26 and when joseph came home, they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the
earth.

43:27 and he asked them of their welfare, and said, is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet alive?  43:28 and they
answered, thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
and they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

43:29 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, is this your you
 
 ___________________________
 
nger brother, of whom ye spake
unto me? and he said, god be gracious unto thee, my son.

43:30 and joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his
brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber,
and wept there.

43:31 and he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and
said, set on bread.

43:32 and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves,
and for the egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because
the egyptians might not eat bread with the hebrews; for that is an
abomination unto the egyptians.

43:33 and they sat be
 
 ___________________________
 

marvelled one at another.

43:34 and he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but
benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. and they
drank, and were merry with him.

44:1 and he commanded the steward of his house, saying, fill the men's
sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money
in his sack's mouth.

44:2 and put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the
youngest, and his corn money. and he did according to the word that
joseph had spoken.

44:3 as soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they
and their asses.

44:4 and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for
good?  44:5 is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

44:6 and he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same wo
 
 ___________________________
 
:10 and he said, now also let it be according unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

44:11 then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground,
and opened every man his sack.

44:12 and he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the
youngest: and the cup was found in benjamin's sack.

44:13 then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
returned to the city.

44:14 and judah and his brethren came to joseph's house; for he was
yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

44:15 and joseph said unto them, what deed is this that ye have done?
wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine?  44:16 and judah
said, what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how
shall we clear ourselves? god hath found out the iniquity of thy
servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with
whom the cup is found.

44:17 and he said, god forbid that i should do so
 
 ___________________________
 
 thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

44:32 for thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father,
saying, if i bring him not unto thee, then i shall bear the blame to
my father for ever.

44:33 now therefore, i pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the
lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

44:34 for how shall i go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
lest peradventure i see the evil that shall come on my father.

45:1 then joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood
by him; and he cried, cause every man to go out from me. and there
stood no man with him, while joseph made himself known unto his
brethren.

45:2 and he wept aloud: and the egyptians and the house of pharaoh
heard.

45:3 and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father
yet live? and his brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubled at his presence.

45:4 and joseph said unto his brethren, come near to me, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
pray you.
and they came near. and he said, i am joseph your brother, whom ye
sold into egypt.

45:5 now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye
sold me hither: for god did send me before you to preserve life.

45:6 for these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet
there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor
harvest.

45:7 and god sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

45:8 so now it was not you that sent me hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ther, but god: and he hath
made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of egypt.

45:9 haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, thus saith
thy son joseph, god hath made me lord of all egypt: come down unto me,
tarry not: 45:10 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen, and thou
shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11
and there will i nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine;
lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

45:12 and, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother benjamin,
that it is my 
 
 ___________________________
 
mouth that speaketh unto you.

45:13 and ye shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt, and of all
that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

45:14 and he fell upon his brother benjamin's neck, and wept; and
benjamin wept upon his neck.

45:15 moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and
after that his brethren talked with him.

45:16 and the fame thereof was heard in pharaoh's house, saying,
joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased pharaoh well, and his
servants.

45:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, say unto thy brethren, this do ye;
lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of canaan; 45:18 and
take your father and your households, and come unto me: and i will
give you the good of the land of egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of
the land.

45:19 now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the
land of egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring
 
 ___________________________
 
 your
father, and come.

45:20 also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of
egypt is your's.

45:21 and the children of israel did so: and joseph gave them wagons,
according to the commandment of pharaoh, and gave them provision for
the way.

45:22 to all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to
benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of
raiment.

45:23 and to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden
with the good things of egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and
bread and meat for his father by the way.

45:24 so he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said
 
 ___________________________
 

unto them, see that ye fall not out by the way.

45:25 and they went up out of egypt, and came into the land of canaan
unto jacob their father, 45:26 and told him, saying, joseph is yet
alive, and he is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down
into
 
 ___________________________
 
 egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will
go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried
jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the
wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him.

46:6 and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his
seed with him: 46:7 his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his
daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with
him
 
 ___________________________
 
 his daughter dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty and three.

46:16 and the sons of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri,
and arodi, and areli.

46:17 and the sons of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah,
and serah their sister: and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel.

46:18 these are the sons of zilpah, whom laban gave to leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto jacob, even sixteen souls.

46:19 the sons of rachel jacob's wife; joseph, and benjamin.

46:20 and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and
ephraim, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare
unto him.

46:21 and the sons of benjamin were belah, and becher, and ashbel,
gera, and naaman, ehi, and rosh, muppim, and huppim, and ard.

46:22 these are the sons of rachel, which were born to jacob: all the
souls were fourteen.

46:23 and the sons of dan; hushim.

46:24 and the sons of naphtali; jahzeel, and guni, and jezer, and
 
 ___________________________
 

shillem.

46:25 these are the sons of bilhah, which laban gave unto rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto jacob: all the souls were seven.

46:26 all the souls that came with jacob into egypt, which came out of
his loins, besides jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore
and six; 46:27 and the sons of joseph, which were born him in egypt,
were two souls: all the souls of the house of jacob, which came into
egypt, were threescore and ten.

46:28 and he sent judah before him unto joseph, to direct his face
unto goshen; and they came into the land of goshen.

46:29 and joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet israel
his father, to goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on
his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

46:30 and israel said unto joseph, now let me die, 
 
 ___________________________
 
since i have seen
thy face, because thou art yet alive.

46:31 and joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house,
i will go up, and shew pharaoh, and say unto him, my brethren, and my
father's house, which were in the land of canaan, are come unto me;
46:32 and the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have.

46:33 and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and
shall say, what is your occupation?  46:34 that ye shall say, thy
servants' trad
 
 ___________________________
 
e hath been about cattle from our youth even until now,
both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of
goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the egyptians.

47:1 then joseph came and told pharaoh, and said, my father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
are come out of the land of canaan; and, behold, they are in the land
of goshen.

47:2 and he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto pharaoh.

47:3 and pharaoh said unto his brethren, what is your occupation? and
they said unto pharaoh, thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also
our fathers.

47:4 they said morever unto pharaoh, for to 
 
 ___________________________
 
sojourn in the land are we
come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the
famine is sore in the land of canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let
thy servants dwell in the land of goshen.

47:5 and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thy father and thy
brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 the land of egypt is before thee; in
the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

47:7 and joseph brought in jacob his father, and set him before
pharaoh: and jacob blessed pharaoh.

47:8 and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou?  47:9 and jacob
said unto pharaoh, the days of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of
my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

47:10 and jacob blessed pharaoh, and went out from before pharaoh.

47:11 and joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a
possession in the land of egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
of rameses, as pharaoh had commanded.

47:12 and joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his
father's household, with bread, according to their families.

47:13 and there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very
sore, so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan fainted by
reason of the famine.

47:14 and joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of egypt, and in the land of canaan, for the corn which they bought:
and joseph brought the money into pharaoh's house.

47:15 and when money
 
 ___________________________
 
 failed in the land of egypt, and in the land of
canaan, all the egyptians came unto joseph, and said, give us bread:
for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.

47:16 and joseph said, give your cattle; and i will give you for your
cattle, if money fail.

47:17 and they brought their cattle unto joseph: and joseph gave them
bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle
of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all
their cattle for that year.

47:18 when that year was ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him, we will not hide it from my lord, how that our
money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not
ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
47:19 wherefore shall we die before thine eye
 
 ___________________________
 
s, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants
unto pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that
the land be not desolate.

47:20 and joseph bought all the land of egypt for pharaoh; for the
egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over
them: so the land became pharaoh's.

47:21 and as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of
the borders of egypt even to the other end thereof.

47:22 only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had
a portion assigned them of pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.

47:23 then j
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have bought you this
day and your land for pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall
sow the land.

47:24 and it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give
the fifth part unto pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for
seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households,
and for food for your little ones.

47:25 and they said, thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in
the sight of my lord, and we will be pharaoh's servants.

47:26 and joseph made it a law over the land of egypt unto this day,
that pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priests only, which became not pharaoh's.

47:27 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt, in the country of goshen;
and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly.

47:28 and jacob lived in the land of egypt seventeen years: so the
whole age of jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

47:29 and the time drew nigh that israel must die: and he ca
 
 ___________________________
 
lled his
son joseph, and said unto him, if now i have found grace in thy sight,
put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly
with me; bury me not, i pray thee, in egypt: 47:30 but i will lie with
my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of egypt, and bury me in their
buryingplace. and he said, i will do as thou hast said.

47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.

48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told
 
 ___________________________
 
 joseph,
behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons,
manasseh and ephraim.

48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thy son joseph cometh unto
thee: and israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighty appeared unto me at luz
in the land of canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold,
i will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and i will make of thee
a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee
for an everlasting possession.

48:5 and now thy two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto
thee in the land of egypt before i came unto thee into egypt, are
mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 and thy issue, whic
 
 ___________________________
 
h thou begettest after them, shall be thine,
and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their
inheritance.

48:7 and as for me, when i came from padan, rachel died by me in the
land of canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come
unto ephrath: and i buried her there in the way of ephrath; the same
is bethlehem.

48:8 and israel beheld joseph's sons, and said, who are these?  48:9
and joseph said unto his father, they are my sons, whom god hath given
me in this place. and he said, bring them, i pray thee, unto me, and i
will bless them.

48:10 now the eyes of israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see.

and he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced
them.

48:11 and israel said unto joseph, i had not thought to see thy face:
and, lo, god hath shewed me also thy seed.

48:12 and joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
hi
 
 ___________________________
 
mself with his face to the earth.

48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward
israel's left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from eph
 
 ___________________________
 
raim's head unto manasseh's head.

48:18 and joseph said unto his father, not so, my father: for this is
the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

48:19 and his father refused, and said, i know it, my son, i know it:
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall
become a multitude of nations.

48:20 and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall israel
bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set
ephraim before ma
 
 ___________________________
 
nasseh.

48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, i die: but god shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 and jacob called unto his sons, and said, gather yourselves
together, that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last
days.

49:2 gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of jacob; and
hearken unto israel your father.

49:3 
 
 ___________________________
 
nto
tribute.

49:16 dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of israel.

49:17 dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

49:18 i have waited for thy salvation, o lord.

49:19 gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.

49:20 out of asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

49:22 joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 the archers have sorely
grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 but his bow abode
in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty god of jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of
israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thy father, who shall help thee; and
by the almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep th
 
 ___________________________
 
at lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 the blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

49:27 benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour
the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

49:28 all these are the twelve tribes of israel: and this is it that
their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to
his blessing he blessed them.

49:29 and he charged them, and said unto them, i am to be gathered
unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave tha
 
 ___________________________
 
, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah.

49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 and joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.

50:2 and joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father: and the physicians embalmed israel.

50:3 and forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the
days of those which are embalmed: and the egyptians mourned for him
threescore and ten days.

50:4 and when the days of his mourning were past, joseph spake unto
the house of pharaoh, saying, if now i have found grace in your eyes,
speak, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 pray you, in the ears of pharaoh, saying, 50:5 my father made
me swear, saying, lo, i die: in my grave which i have digged for me in
the land of canaan, there shalt thou bury me. now therefore let me go
up, i pray thee, and bury my father, and i will come again.

50:6 and pharaoh said, go up, and bury thy father, according as he
made thee swear.

50:7 and joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all
the servants of pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders
of the land of egypt, 50:8 and all the house of joseph, and his
brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of goshen.

50:9 and there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was
a very great company.

50:10 and they came to the threshingfloor of atad, which is beyond
jordan, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
the land, the canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of atad, they said, this is a grievous mourning
to the egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called abelmizraim,
which is beyond jordan.

50:12 and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them: 50:13
for his sons carried him into the land of canaan, and buried him in
the cave of the field of machpelah, which abraham bought with the
field for a possession of a buryingplace of ephron the hittite, before
mamre.

50:14 and joseph returned into egypt, he, and his brethren, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his
father.

50:15 and when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
said, joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
all the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 and they sent a messenger unto joseph, saying, thy father did
command before he died, saying, 50:17 so shall ye say unto joseph,
forgive, i pray thee now, the trespass of thy breth
 
 ___________________________
 
ren, and their sin;
for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the
trespass of the servants of the god of thy father. and joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

50:18 and his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, behold, we be thy servants.

50:19 and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am i in the place of
god?  50:20 but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but god meant
it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people
alive.

50:21 now therefore fear ye not: i will nourish you, and your little
ones.

and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third 
 
 ___________________________
 
generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebulun, and
benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher.

1:5 and all the souls that came out of the loins of jacob were seventy
souls: for joseph was in 
 
 ___________________________
 
egypt already.

1:6 and joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land
was filled with them.

1:8 now there arose up a new king over egypt, which knew not joseph.

1:9 and he said unto his people, behold, the people of the children of
israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 come on, let us deal wisely
with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there
falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight
against us, and so get them up out of the land.

1:11 therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
their burdens. and they built for pharaoh treasure cities, pithom and
raamses.

1:12 but t
 
 ___________________________
 
hand the lord brought us forth
out of egypt.

13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the people go, that
god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines,
although that was near; for god said, lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the red sea:
and the children of israel went up harnessed out of the land of egypt.

13:19 and moses took the bones of joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you; and
ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

13:20 and they took their journey from succoth, and encamped in etham,
in the edge of the wilderness.

13:21 and the lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night: 13:22 he took not away the pillar of
the cloud by day, nor the pillar o
 
 ___________________________
 
n israel:
thou and aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 and with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head
of the house of his fathers.

1:5 and these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of
the tribe of reuben; elizur the son of shedeur.

1:6 of simeon; shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

1:7 of judah; nahshon the son of amminadab.

1:8 of issachar; nethaneel the son of zuar.

1:9 of zebulun; eliab the son of helon.

1:10 of the children of joseph: of ephraim; elishama the son of
ammihud: of manasseh; gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

1:11 of benjamin; abidan the son of gideoni.

1:12 of dan; ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

1:13 of asher; pagiel the son of ocran.

1:14 of gad; eliasaph the son of deuel.

1:15 of naphtali; ahira the son of enan.

1:16 these were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in israel.

1:17 and moses and aaron took these men which are expressed 
 
 ___________________________
 
rth to war; 1:29 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

1:30 of the children of zebulun, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:31 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

1:32 of the children of joseph, namely, of the children of ephraim, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war; 1:33 those that
were numbered of them, even of the tribe of ephraim, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

1:34 of the children of manasseh, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty 
 
 ___________________________
 
ildren of
israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one
a ruler among them.

13:3 and moses by the commandment of the lord sent them from the
wilderness of paran: all those men were heads of the children of
israel.

13:4 and these were their names: of the tribe of reuben, shammua the
son of zaccur.

13:5 of the tribe of simeon, shaphat the son of hori.

13:6 of the tribe of judah, caleb the son of jephunneh.

13:7 of the tribe of issachar, igal the son of joseph.

13:8 of the tribe of ephraim, oshea the son of nun.

13:9 of the tribe of benjamin, palti the son of raphu.

13:10 of the tribe of zebulun, gaddiel the son of sodi.

13:11 of the tribe of joseph, namely, of the tribe of manasseh, gaddi
the son of susi.

13:12 of the tribe of dan, ammiel the son of gemalli.

13:13 of the tribe of asher, sethur the son of michael.

13:14 of the tribe of naphtali, nahbi the son of vophsi.

13:15 of the tribe of gad, geuel the son of machi.

13
 
 ___________________________
 
family of the
shimronites.

26:25 these are the families of issachar according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.

26:26 of the sons of zebulun after their families: of sered, the
family of the sardites: of elon, the family of the elonites: of
jahleel, the family of the jahleelites.

26:27 these are the families of the zebulunites according to those
that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.

26:28 the sons of joseph after their families were manasseh and
ephraim.

26:29 of the sons of manasseh: of machir, the family of the
machirites: and machir begat gilead: of gilead come the family of the
gileadites.

26:30 these are the sons of gilead: of jeezer, the family of the
jeezerites: of helek, the family of the helekites: 26:31 and of
asriel, the family of the asrielites: and of shechem, the family of
the shechemites: 26:32 and of shemida, the family of the shemidaites:
and of hepher, the family of 
 
 ___________________________
 
umbered
of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 these are the sons of ephraim after their families: of
shuthelah, the family of the shuthalhites: of becher, the family of
the bachrites: of tahan, the family of the tahanites.

26:36 and these are the sons of shuthelah: of eran, the family of the
eranites.

26:37 these are the families of the sons of ephraim according to those
that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.
these are the sons of joseph after their families.

26:38 the sons of benjamin after their families: of bela, the family
of the belaites: of ashbel, the family of the ashbelites: of ahiram,
the family of the ahiramites: 26:39 of shupham, the family of the
shuphamites: of hupham, the family of the huphamites.

26:40 and the sons of bela were ard and naaman: of ard, the family of
the ardites: and of naaman, the family of the naamites.

26:41 these are the sons of benjamin after their families: and they
that were n
 
 ___________________________
 
mong these there was not a man of them whom moses and aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood before moses, and before eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the lord in the company of korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 why should the name 
 
 ___________________________
 
you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of canaan.

32:31 and the children of gad and the children of reuben answered,
saying, as the lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

32:32 we will pass over armed before the lord into the land of canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side jordan may be
ours.

32:33 and moses gave unto them, even to the children of gad, and to
the children of reuben, and unto half the tribe of manasseh the son of
joseph, the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, and the kingdom of
og king of bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about.

32:34 and the children of gad built dibon, and ataroth, and aroer,
32:35 and atroth, shophan, and jaazer, and jogbehah, 32:36 and
bethnimrah, and bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.

32:37 and the children of reuben built heshbon, and elealeh, and
kirjathaim, 32:38 and nebo, and baalmeon, (their names 
 
 ___________________________
 
zar the priest,
and joshua the son of nun.

34:18 and ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 and the names of the men are these: of the tribe of judah, caleb
the son of jephunneh.

34:20 and of the tribe of the children of simeon, shemuel the son of
ammihud.

34:21 of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.

34:22 and the prince of the tribe of the children of dan, bukki the
son of jogli.

34:23 the prince of the children of joseph, for the tribe of the
children of manasseh, hanniel the son of ephod.

34:24 and the prince of the tribe of the children of ephraim, kemuel
the son of shiphtan.

34:25 and the prince of the tribe of the children of zebulun,
elizaphan the son of parnach.

34:26 and the prince of the tribe of the children of issachar, paltiel
the son of azzan.

34:27 and the prince of the tribe of the children of asher, ahihud the
son of shelomi.

34:28 and the prince of the tribe of the children o
 
 ___________________________
 
the death of the priest.

35:33 so ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein i
dwell: for i the lord dwell among the children of israel.

36:1 and the chief fathers of the families of the children of gilead,
the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of the sons of
joseph, came near, and spake before moses, and before the princes, the
chief fathers of the children of israel: 36:2 and they said, the lord
commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the
children of israel: and my lord was commanded by the lord to give the
inheritance of zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

36:3 and if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of
the children of israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
inheritance of our 
 
 ___________________________
 
e put to the inheritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 and when the jubile of the children of israel shall be, then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away
from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 and moses commanded the children of israel according to the word
of the lord, saying, the tribe of the sons of joseph hath said well.

36:6 this is the thing which the lord doth command concerning the
daughters of zelophehad, saying, let them marry to whom they think
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 so shall not the inheritance of the children of israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of israel shall
keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

36:8 and every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe
 
 ___________________________
 
ance of his fathers.

36:9 neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 even as the lord commanded moses, so did the daughters of
zelophehad: 36:11 for mahlah, tirzah, and hoglah, and milcah, and
noah, the daughters of zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 and they were married into the families of the
sons of manasseh the son of joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 these are the commandments and the judgments, which the lord
commanded by the hand of moses unto the children of israel in the
plains of moab by jordan near jericho.




the fifth book of moses:  called deuteronomy


1:1 these be the words which moses spake unto all israel on this side
jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the red sea,
between paran, and tophel, and laban, and hazerot
 
 ___________________________
 
oses and the priests the levites spake unto all israel,
saying, take heed, and hearken, o israel; this day thou art become the
people of the lord thy god.

27:10 thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the lord thy god, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which i command thee this day.

27:11 and moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 these
shall stand upon mount gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over jordan; simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and joseph,
and benjamin: 27:13 and these shall stand upon mount ebal to curse;
reuben, gad, and asher, and zebulun, dan, and naphtali.

27:14 and the levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of israel
with a loud voice, 27:15 cursed be the man that maketh any graven or
molten image, an abomination unto the lord, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. and all the people
shall answer and say, amen.

27:16 cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his
 
 ___________________________
 
 jacob thy judgments, and israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar.

33:11 bless, lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 and of benjamin he said, the beloved of the lord shall dwell in
safety by him; and the lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders.

33:13 and of joseph he said, blessed of the lord be his land, for the
precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,
and for the precious things put forth by the moon, 33:15 and for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of
the lasting hills, 33:16 and for the precious things of the earth and
fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the blessing come u
 
 ___________________________
 
pon the head of joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren.

33:17 his glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of
ephraim, and they are the thousands of manasseh.

33:18 and of zebulun he said, rejoice, zebulun, in thy going out; and,
issachar, in thy tents.

33:19 they shall call the people unto the mountain; there they
 
 ___________________________
 
the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 by lot was their inheritance, as the lord commanded by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side jordan: but unto the levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 as the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
the son of jephunneh the kenezite said unto him, thou knowest the
thing that the lord said unto moses the man of god concerning me and
thee i
 
 ___________________________
 
tekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, and rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 in
the wilderness, betharabah, middin, and secacah, 15:62 and nibshan,
and the city of salt, and engedi; six cities with their villages.

15:63 as for the jebusites the inhabitants of jerusalem, the children
of judah could not drive them out; but the jebusites dwell with the
children of judah at jerusalem unto this day.

16:1 and the lot of the children of joseph fell from jordan by
jericho, unto the water of jericho on the east, to the wilderness that
goeth up from jericho throughout mount bethel, 16:2 and goeth out from
bethel to luz, and passeth along unto the borders of archi to ataroth,
16:3 and goeth down westward to the coast of japhleti, unto the coast
of bethhoron the nether, and to gezer; and the goings out thereof are
at the sea.

16:4 so the children of joseph, manasseh and ephraim, took their
inheritance.

16:5 and the border of 
 
 ___________________________
 
of were at the sea. this is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of ephraim by their families.

16:9 and the separate cities for the children of ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of manasseh, all the cities with their
villages.

16:10 and they drave not out the canaanites that dwelt in gezer: but
the canaanites dwell among the ephraimites unto this day, and serve
under tribute.

17:1 there was also a lot for the tribe of manasseh; for he was the
firstborn of joseph; to wit, for machir the firstborn of manasseh, the
father of gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had gilead
and bashan.

17:2 there was also a lot for the rest of the children of manasseh by
their families; for the children of abiezer, and for the children of
helek, and for the children of asriel, and for the children of
shechem, and for the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

 
 ___________________________
 
r and her
towns, and the inhabitants of endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 yet the children of manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the canaanites would dwell in that land.

17:13 yet it came to pass, when the children of israel were waxen
strong, that they put the canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out.

17:14 and the children of joseph spake unto joshua, saying, why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing i am a
great people, forasmuch as the lord hath blessed me hitherto?  17:15
and joshua answered them, if thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
perizzites and of the giants, if mount ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 and the children of joseph said, the hill is not enough for us:
and all the canaanites that dwell i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of jezreel.

17:17 and joshua spake unto the house of joseph, even to ephraim and
to manasseh, saying, thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 but the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 and the whole congregation of the children of israel assembled
together at shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. 
 
 ___________________________
 
r inheritance.

18:3 and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and i will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 and they shall divide it into seven parts: judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that i may cast lots for you here before
the lord our god.

18:7 but the levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond jordan on the east,
which moses the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, an
 
 ___________________________
 
and the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to joshua to the
host at shiloh.

18:10 and joshua cast lots for them in shiloh before the lord: and
there joshua divided the land unto the children of israel according to
their divisions.

18:11 and the lot of the tribe of the children of benjamin came up
according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of judah and the children of joseph.

18:12 and their border on the north side was from jordan; and the
border went up to the side of jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
wilderness of bethaven.

18:13 and the border went over from thence toward luz, to the side of
luz, which is bethel, southward; and the border descended to
atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
bethhoron.

18:14 and the border was drawn thence, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 it came to pass after these things, that joshua the son of
nun, the servant of the lord, died, being an hundred and ten years
old.

24:30 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathserah, which is in mount ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of gaash.

24:31 and israel served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived joshua, and which had known all the
works of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bones of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buried they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the sons of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
ephraim.




the book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the
 
 ___________________________
 
ast thereof.

1:19 and the lord was with judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron.

1:20 and they gave hebron unto caleb, as moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of anak.

1:21 and the children of benjamin did not drive out the jebusites that
inhabited jerusalem; but the jebusites dwell with the children of
benjamin in jerusalem unto this day.

1:22 and the house of joseph, they also went up against bethel: and
the lord was with them.

1:23 and the house of joseph sent to descry bethel. (now the name of
the city before was luz.)  1:24 and the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, shew us, we pray thee, the
entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

1:25 and when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all
his family.

1:26 and the ma
 
 ___________________________
 
1:33 neither did naphtali drive out the inhabitants of bethshemesh,
nor the inhabitants of bethanath; but he dwelt among the canaanites,
the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of
bethshemesh and of bethanath became tributaries unto them.

1:34 and the amorites forced the children of dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 but
the amorites would dwell in mount heres in aijalon, and in shaalbim:
yet the hand of the house of joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.

1:36 and the coast of the amorites was from the going up to akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward.

2:1 and an angel of the lord came up from gilgal to bochim, and said,
i made you to go up out of egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which i sware unto your fathers; and i said, i will never break my
covenant with you.

2:2 and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver the king's
household, and to do what he thought good. and shimei the son of gera
fell down before the king, as he was come over jordan; 19:19 and said
unto the king, let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do
thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my
lord the king went out of jerusalem, that the king should take it to
his heart.

19:20 for thy servant doth know that i have sinned: therefore, behold,
i am come the first this day of all the house of joseph to go down to
meet my lord the king.

19:21 but abishai the son of zeruiah answered and said, shall not
shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the lord's
anointed?  19:22 and david said, what have i to do with you, ye sons
of zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in israel? for do not i know
that i am this day king over israel?  19:23 therefore the king said
unto shimei, thou shalt not die. and the king sware u
 
 ___________________________
 
and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephrathite of zereda,
solomon's servant, whose mother's name was zeruah, a widow woman, even
he lifted up his hand against the king.

11:27 and this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
king: solomon built millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of
david his father.

11:28 and the man jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and solomon
seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over
all the charge of the house of joseph.

11:29 and it came to pass at that time when jeroboam went out of
jerusalem, that the prophet ahijah the shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 and ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pieces: 11:31 and he said to jeroboam, take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the lord, the god of israel, behold, i will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of solomon, and will give ten tribes
t
 
 ___________________________
 
s dead, hadad reigned in his stead: and the
name of his city was pai; and his wife's name was mehetabel, the
daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

1:51 hadad died also. and the dukes of edom were; duke timnah, duke
aliah, duke jetheth, 1:52 duke aholibamah, duke elah, duke pinon, 1:53
duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 1:54 duke magdiel, duke iram.
these are the dukes of edom.

2:1 these are the sons of israel; reuben, simeon, levi, and judah,
issachar, and zebulun, 2:2 dan, joseph, and benjamin, naphtali, gad,
and asher.

2:3 the sons of judah; er, and onan, and shelah: which three were born
unto him of the daughter of shua the canaanitess. and er, the
firstborn of judah, was evil in the sight of the lord; and he slew
him.

2:4 and tamar his daughter in law bore him pharez and zerah. all the
sons of judah were five.

2:5 the sons of pharez; hezron, and hamul.

2:6 and the sons of zerah; zimri, and ethan, and heman, and calcol,
and dara: five of them in all.
 
 ___________________________
 
ere was pasture there for their flocks.

4:42 and some of them, even of the sons of simeon, five hundred men,
went to mount seir, having for their captains pelatiah, and neariah,
and rephaiah, and uzziel, the sons of ishi.

4:43 and they smote the rest of the amalekites that were escaped, and
dwelt there unto this day.

5:1 now the sons of reuben the firstborn of israel, (for he was the
firstborn; but forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his
birthright was given unto the sons of joseph the son of israel: and
the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.

5:2 for judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief
ruler; but the birthright was joseph's:) 5:3 the sons, i say, of
reuben the firstborn of israel were, hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and
carmi.

5:4 the sons of joel; shemaiah his son, gog his son, shimei his son,
5:5 micah his son, reaia his son, baal his son, 5:6 beerah his son,
whom tilgathpilneser king of assyria carried away captive: 
 
 ___________________________
 
 son.

7:26 laadan his son, ammihud his son, elishama his son.

7:27 non his son, jehoshuah his son.

7:28 and their possessions and habitations were, bethel and the towns
thereof, and eastward naaran, and westward gezer, with the towns
thereof; shechem also and the towns thereof, unto gaza and the towns
thereof: 7:29 and by the borders of the children of manasseh,
bethshean and her towns, taanach and her towns, megiddo and her towns,
dor and her towns. in these dwelt the children of joseph the son of
israel.

7:30 the sons of asher; imnah, and isuah, and ishuai, and beriah, and
serah their sister.

7:31 and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel, who is the father of
birzavith.

7:32 and heber begat japhlet, and shomer, and hotham, and shua their
sister.

7:33 and the sons of japhlet; pasach, and bimhal, and ashvath. these
are the children of japhlet.

7:34 and the sons of shamer; ahi, and rohgah, jehubbah, and aram.

7:35 and the sons of his brother helem; zoph
 
 ___________________________
 
ons of
aaron in the presence of david the king, and zadok, and ahimelech, and
the chief of the fathers of the priests and levites, even the
principal fathers over against their younger brethren.

25:1 moreover david and the captains of the host separated to the
service of the sons of asaph, and of heman, and of jeduthun, who
should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the
number of the workmen according to their service was: 25:2 of the sons
of asaph; zaccur, and joseph, and nethaniah, and asarelah, the sons of
asaph under the hands of asaph, which prophesied according to the
order of the king.

25:3 of jeduthun: the sons of jeduthun; gedaliah, and zeri, and
jeshaiah, hashabiah, and mattithiah, six, under the hands of their
father jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to
praise the lord.

25:4 of heman: the sons of heman: bukkiah, mattaniah, uzziel, shebuel,
and jerimoth, hananiah, hanani, eliathah, giddalti, and romamtiezer,
josh
 
 ___________________________
 
her for song in the
house of the lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the
service of the house of god, according to the king's order to asaph,
jeduthun, and heman.

25:7 so the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed
in the songs of the lord, even all that were cunning, was two hundred
fourscore and eight.

25:8 and they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the
great, the teacher as the scholar.

25:9 now the first lot came forth for asaph to joseph: the second to
gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve: 25:10 the third
to zaccur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:11 the
fourth to izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:12 the
fifth to nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:13
the sixth to bukkiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
25:14 the seventh to jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
twelve: 25:15 the eighth to jeshaiah, he, his sons, and his br
 
 ___________________________
 
meon, 10:32 benjamin, malluch, and shemariah.

10:33 of the sons of hashum; mattenai, mattathah, zabad, eliphelet,
jeremai, manasseh, and shimei.

10:34 of the sons of bani; maadai, amram, and uel, 10:35 benaiah,
bedeiah, chelluh, 10:36 vaniah, meremoth, eliashib, 10:37 mattaniah,
mattenai, and jaasau, 10:38 and bani, and binnui, shimei, 10:39 and
shelemiah, and nathan, and adaiah, 10:40 machnadebai, shashai, sharai,
10:41 azareel, and shelemiah, shemariah, 10:42 shallum, amariah, and
joseph.

10:43 of the sons of nebo; jeiel, mattithiah, zabad, zebina, jadau,
and joel, benaiah.

10:44 all these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by
whom they had children.




the book of nehemiah


1:1 the words of nehemiah the son of hachaliah. and it came to pass
in the month chisleu, in the twentieth year, as i was in shushan the
palace, 1:2 that hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men
of judah; and i asked them concerning the jews that had escaped
 
 ___________________________
 
 over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.

12:9 also bakbukiah and unni, their brethren, were over against them
in the watches.

12:10 and jeshua begat joiakim, joiakim also begat eliashib, and
eliashib begat joiada, 12:11 and joiada begat jonathan, and jonathan
begat jaddua.

12:12 and in the days of joiakim were priests, the chief of the
fathers: of seraiah, meraiah; of jeremiah, hananiah; 12:13 of ezra,
meshullam; of amariah, jehohanan; 12:14 of melicu, jonathan; of
shebaniah, joseph; 12:15 of harim, adna; of meraioth, helkai; 12:16 of
iddo, zechariah; of ginnethon, meshullam; 12:17 of abijah, zichri; of
miniamin, of moadiah, piltai: 12:18 of bilgah, shammua; of shemaiah,
jehonathan; 12:19 and of joiarib, mattenai; of jedaiah, uzzi; 12:20 of
sallai, kallai; of amok, eber; 12:21 of hilkiah, hashabiah; of
jedaiah, nethaneel.

12:22 the levites in the days of eliashib, joiada, and johanan, and
jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
reign 
 
 ___________________________
 
my infirmity: but i will remember the years
of the right hand of the most high.

77:11 i will remember the works of the lord: surely i will remember
thy wonders of old.

77:12 i will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

77:13 thy way, o god, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as
our god?

77:14 thou art the god that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy
strength among the people.

77:15 thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of jacob
and joseph. selah.

77:16 the waters saw thee, o god, the waters saw thee; they were
afraid: the depths also were troubled.

77:17 the clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
arrows also went abroad.

77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings
lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.

77:19 thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

77:20 thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of mose
 
 ___________________________
 
e gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with
his inheritance.

78:63 the fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not
given to marriage.

78:64 their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no
lamentation.

78:65 then the lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man
that shouteth by reason of wine.

78:66 and he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a
perpetual reproach.

78:67 moreover he refused the tabernacle of joseph, and chose not the
tribe of ephraim:

78:68 but chose the tribe of judah, the mount zion which he loved.

78:69 and he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth
which he hath established for ever.

78:70 he chose david also his servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds:

78:71 from following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed
jacob his people, and israel his inheritance.

78:72 so he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and
guided them by th
 
 ___________________________
 
hy servants which is shed.

79:11 let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to
die;

79:12 and render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their
reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, o lord.

79:13 so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks
for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations.



80:1 give ear, o shepherd of israel, thou that leadest joseph like a
flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.

80:2 before ephraim and benjamin and manasseh stir up thy strength,
and come and save us.

80:3 turn us again, o god, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall
be saved.

80:4 o lord god of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the
prayer of thy people?

80:5 thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears
to drink in great measure.

80:6 thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and ou
 
 ___________________________
 
 we will call
upon thy name.

80:19 turn us again, o lord god of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and
we shall be saved.



81:1 sing aloud unto god our strength: make a joyful noise unto the
god of jacob.

81:2 take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp
with the psaltery.

81:3 blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on
our solemn feast day.

81:4 for this was a statute for israel, and a law of the god of jacob.

81:5 this he ordained in joseph for a testimony, when he went out
through the land of egypt: where i heard a language that i understood
not.

81:6 i removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered
from the pots.

81:7 thou calledst in trouble, and i delivered thee; i answered thee
in the secret place of thunder: i proved thee at the waters of
meribah.

selah.

81:8 hear, o my people, and i will testify unto thee: o israel, if
thou wilt hearken unto me;

81:9 there shall no strange god be in thee
 
 ___________________________
 
he lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
strangers in it.

105:13 when they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
another people;

105:14 he suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for
their sakes;

105:15 saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

105:16 moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the
whole staff of bread.

105:17 he sent a man before them, even joseph, who was sold for a
servant:

105:18 whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:

105:19 until the time that his word came: the word of the lord tried
him.

105:20 the king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 he made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

105:22 to bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators
wisdom.

105:23 israel also came into egypt; and jacob sojourned in the land of
ham.

 
 ___________________________
 
e opened your
graves, o my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 37:14 and
shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and i shall place you
in your own land: then shall ye know that i the lord have spoken it,
and performed it, saith the lord.

37:15 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 37:16 moreover,
thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for judah,
and for the children of israel his companions: then take another
stick, and write upon it, for joseph, the stick of ephraim and for all
the house of israel his companions: 37:17 and join them one to another
into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

37:18 and when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?  37:19 say
unto them, thus saith the lord god; behold, i will take the stick of
joseph, which is in the hand of ephraim, and the tribes of israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stic
 
 ___________________________
 
by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that
side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade,
neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
thereof for medicine.

47:13 thus saith the lord god; this shall be the border, whereby ye
shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of israel:
joseph shall have two portions.

47:14 and ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the
which i lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this
land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

47:15 and this shall be the border of the land toward the north side,
from the great sea, the way of hethlon, as men go to zedad; 47:16
hamath, berothah, sibraim, which is between the border of damascus and
the border of hamath; hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of hauran.

47:1
 
 ___________________________
 
d which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of
israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the lord
god.

48:30 and these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four
thousand and five hundred measures.

48:31 and the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes
of israel: three gates northward; one gate of reuben, one gate of
judah, one gate of levi.

48:32 and at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
gates; and one gate of joseph, one gate of benjamin, one gate of dan.

48:33 and at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures:
and three gates; one gate of simeon, one gate of issachar, one gate of
zebulun.

48:34 at the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their
three gates; one gate of gad, one gate of asher, one gate of naphtali.

48:35 it was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of
the city from that day shall be, the lord is there.




the book of daniel


1:1 in
 
 ___________________________
 
or thus saith the lord god; the city that went out by a thousand
shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred shall
leave ten, to the house of israel.

5:4 for thus saith the lord unto the house of israel, seek ye me, and
ye shall live: 5:5 but seek not bethel, nor enter into gilgal, and
pass not to beersheba: for gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and
bethel shall come to nought.

5:6 seek the lord, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in
the house of joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in
bethel.

5:7 ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in
the earth, 5:8 seek him that maketh the seven stars and orion, and
turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark
with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them
out upon the face of the earth: the lord is his name: 5:9 that
strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled
shall come against the fort
 
 ___________________________
 
essions and your mighty sins:
they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor
in the gate from their right.

5:13 therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is
an evil time.

5:14 seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the lord, the
god of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

5:15 hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
gate: it may be that the lord god of hosts will be gracious unto the
remnant of joseph.

5:16 therefore the lord, the god of hosts, the lord, saith thus;
wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the
highways, alas! alas!  and they shall call the husbandman to mourning,
and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.

5:17 and in all vineyards shall be wailing: for i will pass through
thee, saith the lord.

5:18 woe unto you that desire the day of the lord! to what end is it
for you? the day of the lord is darkness, and not light.

5:19 as if a ma
 
 ___________________________
 
reater than your border?
6:3 ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence
to come near; 6:4 that lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves
out of the midst of the stall; 6:5 that chant to the sound of the
viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like david; 6:6
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of joseph.

6:7 therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed.

6:8 the lord god hath sworn by himself, saith the lord the god of
hosts, i abhor the excellency of jacob, and hate his palaces:
therefore will i deliver up the city with all that is therein.

6:9 and it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house,
that they shall die.

6:10 and a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burnet
 
 ___________________________
 
eathen: as thou
hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon
thine own head.

1:16 for as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the
heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall
swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.

1:17 but upon mount zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness; and the house of jacob shall possess their possessions.

1:18 and the house of jacob shall be a fire, and the house of joseph a
flame, and the house of esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
them, and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the
house of esau; for the lord hath spoken it.

1:19 and they of the south shall possess the mount of esau; and they
of the plain the philistines: and they shall possess the fields of
ephraim, and the fields of samaria: and benjamin shall possess gilead.

1:20 and the captivity of this host of the children of israel shall
possess that of the canaanites, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the house of
judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.

10:4 out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him
the battle bow, out of him every oppressor together.

10:5 and they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies
in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight,
because the lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be
confounded.

10:6 and i will strengthen the house of judah, and i will save the
house of joseph, and i will bring them again to place them; for i have
mercy upon them: and they shall be as though i had not cast them off:
for i am the lord their god, and will hear them.

10:7 and they of ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart
shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and
be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the lord.

10:8 i will hiss for them, and gather them; for i have redeemed them:
and they shall increase as they have increased.

10:9 an