iashib the high priest, was son in
law to sanballat the horonite: therefore i chased him from me.

13:29 remember them, o my god, because they have defiled the
priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the levites.

13:30 thus cleansed i them from all strangers, and appointed the wards
of the priests and the levites, every one in his business; 13:31 and
for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the firstfruits.
remember me, o my god, for good.




the book of esther


1:1 now it came to pass in the days of ahasuerus, (this is ahasuerus
which reigned, from india even unto ethiopia, over an hundred and
seven and twenty provinces:) 1:2 that in those days, when the king
ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in shushan the
palace, 1:3 in the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all
his princes and his servants; the power of persia and media, the
nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him: 1:4 when he
shewed the rich
 
 ___________________________
 
4 and let the maiden which pleaseth the
king be queen instead of vashti.

and the thing pleased the king; and he did so.

2:5 now in shushan the palace there was a certain jew, whose name was
mordecai, the son of jair, the son of shimei, the son of kish, a
benjamite; 2:6 who had been carried away from jerusalem with the
captivity which had been carried away with jeconiah king of judah,
whom nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon had carried away.

2:7 and he brought up hadassah, that is, esther, his uncle's daughter:
for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and
beautiful; whom mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took
for his own daughter.

2:8 so it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was
heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto shushan the
palace, to the custody of hegai, that esther was brought also unto the
king's house, to the custody of hegai, keeper of the women.

2:9 and the maiden pleased him, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
he obtained kindness of him; and
he speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as
belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her,
out of the king's house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the
best place of the house of the women.

2:10 esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for mordecai
had charged her that she should not shew it.

2:11 and mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's
house, to know how esther did, and what should become of her.

2:12 now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king ahasuerus,
after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the
women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to
wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours,
and with other things for the purifying of the women;) 2:13 then thus
came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her
to go with her out of the house of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e women unto the king's house.

2:14 in the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the
second house of the women, to the custody of shaashgaz, the king's
chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no
more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by
name.

2:15 now when the turn of esther, the daughter of abihail the uncle of
mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto
the king, she required nothing but what hegai the king's chamberlain,
the keeper of the women, appointed. and esther obtained favour in the
sight of all them that looked upon her.

2:16 so esther was taken unto king ahasuerus into his house royal in
the tenth month, which is the month tebeth, in the seventh year of his
reign.

2:17 and the king loved esther above all the women, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd she obtained
grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he
set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of
vashti.

2:18 then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his
servants, even esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces,
and gave gifts, according to the state of the king.

2:19 and when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
mordecai sat in the king's gate.

2:20 esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as mordecai
had charged her: for esther did the commandment of mordecai, like as
when she was brought up with him.

2:21 in those days, while mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the
king's chamberlains, bigthan and teresh, of those which kept the door,
were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king ahasuerus.

2:22 and the thing was known to mordecai, who told it unto esther the
queen; and esther certified the king thereof in mordecai
 
 ___________________________
 
 perceived all that was done, mordecai rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst
of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry; 4:2 and came even
before the king's gate: for none might enter into the king's gate
clothed with sackcloth.

4:3 and in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and
his decree came, there was great mourning among the jews, and fasting,
and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

4:4 so esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. then
was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe
mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it
not.

4:5 then called esther for hatach, one of the king's chamberlains,
whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment
to mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was.

4:6 so hatach went forth to mordecai unto the street of the city,
which was before the king's gate.

4
 
 ___________________________
 
:7 and mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of
the sum of the money that haman had promised to pay to the king's
treasuries for the jews, to destroy them.

4:8 also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was
given at shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto esther, and to
declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the
king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him
for her people.

4:9 and hatach came and told esther the words of mordecai.

4:10 again esther spake unto hatach, and gave him commandment unto
mordecai; 4:11 all the king's servants, and the people of the king's
provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shall come
unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there 
 
 ___________________________
 
is one
law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall
hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but i have not been
called to come in unto the king these thirty days.

4:12 and they told to mordecai esther's words.

4:13 then mordecai commanded to answer esther, think not with thyself
that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the jews.

4:14 for if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement and deliverance arise to the jews from another
place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who
knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
4:15 then esther bade them return mordecai this answer, 4:16 go,
gather together all the jews that are present in shushan, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: i also and
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will i go in unto the king,
which is not according to the law: and if i perish, i perish.

4:17 so mordecai went his way, and did according to all that esther
had commanded him.

5:1 now it came to pass on the third day, that esther put on her royal
apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over
against the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in
the royal house, over against the gate of the house.

5:2 and it was so, when the king saw esther the queen standing in the
court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to
esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. so esther drew near,
and touched the top of the sceptre.

5:3 then said the king unto her, what w
 
 ___________________________
 
ilt thou, queen esther? and
what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the
kingdom.

5:4 and esther answered, if it seem good unto the king, let the king
and haman come this day unto the banquet that i have prepared for him.

5:5 then the king said, cause haman to make haste, that he may do as
esther hath said. so the king and haman came to the banquet that
esther had prepared.

5:6 and the king said unto esther at the banquet of wine, what is thy
petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even
to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.

5:7 then answered esther, and said, my petition and my request is; 5:8
if i have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the
king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and
haman come to the banquet that i shall prepare for them, and i will do
to morrow as the king hath said.

5:9 then went h
 
 ___________________________
 
aw mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up, nor
moved for him, he was full of indignation against mordecai.

5:10 nevertheless haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he
sent and called for his friends, and zeresh his wife.

5:11 and haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude
of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him,
and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the
king.

5:12 haman said moreover, yea, esther the queen did let no man come in
with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and
to morrow am i invited unto her also with the king.

5:13 yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as i see mordecai the
jew sitting at the king's gate.

5:14 then said zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, let a
gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto
the king that mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily
with the king unto the banq
 
 ___________________________
 
e. but haman hasted to
his house mourning, and having his head covered.

6:13 and haman told zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing
that had befallen him. then said his wise men and zeresh his wife unto
him, if mordecai be of the seed of the jews, before whom thou hast
begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely
fall before him.

6:14 and while they were yet talking with him, came the king's
chamberlains, and hasted to bring haman unto the banquet that esther
had prepared.

7:1 so the king and haman came to banquet with esther the queen.

7:2 and the king said again unto esther on the second day at the
banquet of wine, what is thy petition, queen esther? and it shall be
granted thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even
to the half of the kingdom.

7:3 then esther the queen answered and said, if i have found favour in
thy sight, o king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me
at my petition, and my people a
 
 ___________________________
 
t my request: 7:4 for we are sold, i
and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. but if we
had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, i had held my tongue,
although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage.

7:5 then the king ahasuerus answered and said unto esther the queen,
who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?
7:6 and esther said, the adversary and enemy is this wicked haman.
then haman was afraid before the king and the queen.

7:7 and the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went
into the palace garden: and haman stood up to make request for his
life to esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined
against him by the king.

7:8 then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of
the banquet of wine; and haman was fallen upon the bed whereon esther
was. then said
 
 ___________________________
 
 of king's mouth, they covered haman's
face.

7:9 and harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king,
behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which haman had made for
mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of
haman. then the king said, hang him thereon.

7:10 so they hanged haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
mordecai. then was the king's wrath pacified.

8:1 on that day did the king ahasuerus give the house of haman the
jews' enemy unto esther the queen. and mordecai came before the king;
for esther had told what he was unto her.

8:2 and the king took off his ring, which he had taken from haman, and
gave it unto mordecai. and esther set mordecai over the house of
haman.

8:3 and esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his
feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of haman
the agagite, and his device that he had devised against the jews.

8:4 then the king held out the golden sceptre towar
 
 ___________________________
 
d esther. so esther
arose, and stood before the king, 8:5 and said, if it please the king,
and if i have favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the
king, and i be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the
letters devised by haman the son of hammedatha the agagite, which he
wrote to destroy the jews which are in all the king's provinces: 8:6
for how can i endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people?
or how can i endure to see the destruction of my kindred?  8:7 then
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
king ahasuerus said unto esther the queen and to mordecai the jew,
behold, i have given esther the house of haman, and him they have
hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the jews.

8:8 write ye also for the jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name,
and seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is written in
the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.

8:9 then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third
month, that is, the month sivan, on the three and twentieth day
thereof; and it was written according to all 
 
 ___________________________
 

9:6 and in shushan the palace the jews slew and destroyed five hundred
men.

9:7 and parshandatha, and dalphon, and aspatha, 9:8 and poratha, and
adalia, and aridatha, 9:9 and parmashta, and arisai, and aridai, and
vajezatha, 9:10 the ten sons of haman the son of hammedatha, the enemy
of the jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.

9:11 on that day the number of those that were slain in shushan the
palace was brought before the king.

9:12 and the king said unto esther the queen, the jews have slain and
destroyed five hundred men in shushan the palace, and the ten sons of
haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now
what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy
request further? and it shall be done.

9:13 then said esther, if it please the king, let it be granted to the
jews which are in shushan to do to morrow also according unto this
day's decree, and let haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.

9:1
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto them from sorrow to joy, and from
mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting
and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the
poor.

9:23 and the jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as mordecai
had written unto them; 9:24 because haman the son of hammedatha, the
agagite, the enemy of all the jews, had devised against the jews to
destroy them, and had cast pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and
to destroy them; 9:25 but when esther came before the king, he
commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against
the jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons
should be hanged on the gallows.

9:26 wherefore they called these days purim after the name of pur.

therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had
seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them, 9:27 the
jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all
such as joined t
 
 ___________________________
 
hemselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that
they would keep these two days according to their writing, and
according to their appointed time every year; 9:28 and that these days
should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every
family, every province, and every city; and that these days of purim
should not fail from among the jews, nor the memorial of them perish
from their seed.

9:29 then esther the queen, the daughter of abihail, and mordecai the
jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of purim.

9:30 and he sent the letters unto all the jews, to the hundred twenty
and seven provinces of the kingdom of ahasuerus, with words of peace
and truth, 9:31 to confirm these days of purim in their times
appointed, according as mordecai the jew and esther the queen had
enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their
seed, the matters of the fastin
 
 ___________________________
 
gs and their cry.

9:32 and the decree of esther confirmed these matters of purim; and it
was written in the book.

10:1 and the king ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the
isles of the sea.

10:2 and all the acts of his power and of his might, and the
declaration of the greatness of mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of media and persia?  10:3 for mordecai the jew was next unto king
ahasuerus, and great among the jews, and accepted of the multitud