within the hour. he wore a well-pressed brown suit and
there was a black pearl in his tie. he had the long nervous fingers of a
man with a quick brain. he looked ready for a fight.

ohls pulled a chair up and sat down and said: "evening, cronjager. meet
phil marlowe, a private eye who's in a jam." ohls grinned.

cronjager looked at me without nodding. he looked me over as if he was
looking at a photograph. then he nodded his chin about an inch. wilde
said: "sit down, marlowe. i'll try to handle captain cronjager, but you
know how it is. this is a big city now."

i sat down and lit a cigarette. ohls looked at cronjager and asked:
"what did you get on the randall place killing?"

the hatchet-faced man pulled one of his fingers until the knuckle
cracked. he spoke without looking up. "a stiff, two slugs in him. two
guns that hadn't been fired. down on the street we got a blonde trying
to start a car that didn't belong to her. hers was right next to it, the
same model. she acted rattled so the boys brought 
 
 ___________________________
 
aper and went to bed. i had a bellyful of the sternwood family.

i read all three of the morning papers over my eggs and bacon the next
morning. their accounts of the affair came as close to the truth as
newspaper stories usually come--as close as mars is to saturn. none of
the three connected owen taylor, driver of the lido pier suicide car,
with the laurel canyon exotic bungalow slaying. none of them mentioned
the sternwoods, bernie ohls or me. owen taylor was "chauffeur to a
wealthy family." captain cronjager of the hollywood division got all the
credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed
to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service
maintained by one geiger in the back of the bookstore on hollywood
boulevard. brody had shot geiger and carol lundgren had shot brody in
revenge. police were holding carol lundgren in custody. he had
confessed. he had a bad record--probably in high school. police were
also holding one agnes lozelle, geiger's secretary, as 
 
 ___________________________
 
a material
witness.

it was a nice write-up. it gave the impression that geiger had been
killed the night before, that brody had been killed about an hour later,
and that captain cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a
cigarette. the suicide of taylor made page one of section ii. there was
a photo of the sedan on the deck of the power lighter, with the license
plate blacked out, and something covered with a cloth lying on the deck
beside the running board. owen taylor had been despondent and in poor
health. his family lived in dubuque, and his body would be shipped
there. there would be no inquest.

[20]

captain gregory of the missing persons bureau laid my card down 