 and blew out the black candles and
let them smoke. when i got back to the living room ohls had the boy up
on his feet. the boy stood glaring at him with sharp black eyes in a
face as hard and white as cold mutton fat.

"let's go," ohls said and took him by the arm as if he didn't like
touching him. i put the lamps out and followed them out of the house. we
got into our cars and i followed ohls' twin tail-lights down the long
curving hill. i hoped this would be my last trip to laverne terrace.

taggart wilde, the district attorney, lived at the comer of fourth and
lafayette park, in a white frame house the size of a carbarn, with a red
sandstone porte-cochere built on to one side and a couple of acres of
soft rolling lawn in front. it was one of those solid old-fashioned
houses which it used to be the thing to move bodily to new locations as
the city grew westward. wilde came of an old los angeles family and had
probably been born in the house when it was on west adams or figueroa or
st. james park
 
 ___________________________
 
and through a huge sunken
living room crowded with heavy dark furniture and along another hall on
the far side of it. he knocked at a door and stepped inside, then held
the door wide and we went into a paneled study with an open french door
at the end and a view of dark garden and mysterious trees. a smell of
wet earth and flowers came in at the window. there were large dim oils
on the walls, easy chairs, books, a smell of good cigar smoke which
blended with the smell of wet earth and flowers.

taggart wilde sat behind a desk, a middle-aged plump man with clear blue
eyes that managed to have a friendly expression without really having
any expression at all. he had a cup of black coffee in front of him and
he held a dappled thin cigar between the neat careful fingers of his
left hand. another man sat at the corner of the desk in a blue leather
chair, a cold-eyed hatchet-faced man, as lean as a rake and as hard as
the manager of a loan office. his neat well-kept face looked as if it
had been shaved w