ay washed clean by the rain, past low rolling hills of yellow-white
sand terraced with pink moss. seaward a few gulls wheeled and swooped
over something in the surf and far out a white yacht looked as if it was
hanging in the sky.

ohls cocked his chin at me and said: "know him?"

"sure. the sternwood chauffeur. i saw him dusting that very car out
there yesterday."

"i don't want to crowd you, marlowe. just tell me, did the job have
anything to do with him?"

"no. i don't even know his name."

"owen taylor. how do i know? funny about that. about a year or so back
we had him in the cooler on a mann act rap. it seems he run sternwood's
hotcha daughter, the young one, off to yuma. the sister ran after them
and brought them back and had owen heaved into the icebox. then next day
she comes down to the d.a. and gets him to beg the kid off with the u.
s. 'cutor. she says the kid meant to marry her sister and wanted to,
only the sister can't see it. all she wanted was to kick a few high ones
off the bar 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. regan."

"oh, go to hell, marlowe." she went on out and didn't look back.

i let the door shut and stood with my hand on it, staring at the hand.
my face felt a little hot. i went back to the desk and put the whiskey
away and rinsed out the two pony glasses and put them away.

i took my hat off the phone and called the d.a.'s office and asked for
bernie ohls.

he was back in his cubbyhole. "well, i let the old man alone," he said.
"the butler said he or one of the girls would tell him. this owen taylor
lived over the garage and i went through his stuff. parents at dubuque,
iowa. i wired the chief of police there to find out what they want done.
the sternwood family will pay for it."

"suicide?" i asked.

"no can tell. he didn't leave any notes. he had no leave to take the
car. everybody was home last night but mrs. regan. she was down at las
olindas with a playboy named larry cobb. i checked on that. i know a lad
on one of the tables."

"you ought to stop some of that flash gambling," i said.
 
 ___________________________
 
t buick is now?"

"why would i?"

"in the sheriff's garage. it was lifted out of twelve feet of water off
lido fish pier this a.m. there was a dead man in it. he had been sapped
and the car pointed out the pier and the hand throttle pulled down."

brody was breathing hard. one of his feet tapped restlessly. "jesus,
guy, you can't pin that one on me," he said thickly.

"why not? this buick was down back of geiger's according to you. well,
mrs. regan didn't have it out. her chauffeur, a lad named owen taylor,
had it out. he went over to geiger's place to have words with him,
because owen taylor was sweet on carmen, and he didn't like the kind of
games geiger was playing with her. he let himself in the back way with a
jimmy and a gun and he caught geiger taking a photo of carmen without
any clothes on. so his gun went off, as guns will, and geiger fell down
dead and owen ran away, but not without the photo negative geiger had
just taken. so you ran after him and took the photo from him. how else
wou
 
 ___________________________
 
alked and what she said. if she
talked about geiger, the police would be there any minute. but she might
not talk for hours. she might even have got away.

i looked down at the boy. "want to sit up, son?"

he closed his eye and pretended to go to sleep. i went over to the desk
and scooped up the mulberry-colored phone and dialed bernie ohls'
office. he had left to go home at six o'clock. i dialed the number of
his home. he was there.

"this is marlowe," i said. "did your boys find a revolver on owen taylor
this morning?"

i could hear him clearing his throat and then i could hear him trying to
keep the surprise out of his voice. "that would come under the heading
of police business," he said.

"if they did, it had three empty shells in it."

"how the hell did you know that?" ohls asked quietly.

"come over to 7244 laverne terrace, off laurel canyon boulevard. i'll
show you where the slugs went."

"just like that, huh?"

"just like that."

ohls said: "look out the window and you'll see me coming r
 
 ___________________________
 
 trying to do. i talked to
brody for a long time. he was a crook, but not a killer type. he had two
guns, but he wasn't wearing either of them. he was trying to find a way
to cut in on geiger's racket, which naturally he knew all about from the
girl. he says he was watching geiger off and on to see if he had any
tough backers. i believe him. to suppose he killed geiger in order to
get his books, then scrammed with the nude photo geiger had just taken
of carmen sternwood, then planted the gun on owen taylor and pushed
taylor into the ocean off lido, is to suppose a hell of a lot too much.
taylor had the motive, jealous rage, and the opportunity to kill geiger.
he was out in one of the family cars without permission. he killed
geiger right in front of the girl, which brody would never have done,
even if he had been a killer. i can't see anybody with a purely
commercial interest in geiger doing that. but taylor would have done it.
the nude photo business was just what would have made him do it."

wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 the telephone ringing. it was ringing when i came back. it
rang at intervals until half-past twelve. at that time i put my lights
out and opened the windows up and muffled the phone bell with a piece of
paper and went to bed. i had a bellyful of the sternwood family.

i read all three of the morning papers over my eggs and bacon the next
morning. their accounts of the affair came as close to the truth as
newspaper stories usually come--as close as mars is to saturn. none of
the three connected owen taylor, driver of the lido pier suicide car,
with the laurel canyon exotic bungalow slaying. none of them mentioned
the sternwoods, bernie ohls or me. owen taylor was "chauffeur to a
wealthy family." captain cronjager of the hollywood division got all the
credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed
to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service
maintained by one geiger in the back of the bookstore on hollywood
boulevard. brody had shot geiger and carol lun
 
 ___________________________
 
lle, geiger's secretary, as a material
witness.

it was a nice write-up. it gave the impression that geiger had been
killed the night before, that brody had been killed about an hour later,
and that captain cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a
cigarette. the suicide of taylor made page one of section ii. there was
a photo of the sedan on the deck of the power lighter, with the license
plate blacked out, and something covered with a cloth lying on the deck
beside the running board. owen taylor had been despondent and in poor
health. his family lived in dubuque, and his body would be shipped
there. there would be no inquest.

[20]

captain gregory of the missing persons bureau laid my card down on his
wide flat desk and arranged it so that its edges exactly paralleled the
edges of the desk. he studied it with his head on one side, grunted,
swung around in his swivel chair and looked out of his window at the
barred top floor of the hall of justice half a block away. he was a
burly man 
 
 ___________________________
 
l as hell one of us kept
his head the night before last. it's bad enough to have a bootlegger in
my past. why don't you for christ's sake say something?"

"how is she?"

"oh, she's all right, i suppose. fast asleep. she always goes to sleep.
what did you do to her?"

"not a thing. i came out of the house after seeing your father and she
was out in front. she had been throwing darts at a target on a tree. i
went down to speak to her because i had something that belonged to her.
a little revolver owen taylor gave her once. she took it over to brody's
place the other evening, the evening he was killed. i had to take it
away from her there. i didn't mention it, so perhaps you didn't know
it."

the black sternwood eyes got large and empty. it was her turn not to
say anything.

"she was pleased to get her little gun back and she wanted me to teach
her how to shoot and she wanted to show me the old oil wells down the
hill where your family made some of its money. so we went down there and
the place was 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd using him for a cat's-paw.
your father sent for me instead of paying up, which showed he wasn't
scared about anything. eddie mars wanted to know that. he had something
on you and he wanted to know if he had it on the general too. if he had,
he could collect a lot of money in a hurry. if not, he would have to
wait until you got your share of the family fortune, and in the meantime
be satisfied with whatever spare cash he could take away from you across
the roulette table. geiger was killed by owen taylor, who was in love
with your silly little sister and didn't like the kind of games geiger
played with her. that didn't mean anything to eddie. he was playing a
deeper game than geiger knew anything about, or than brody knew anything
about, or anybody except you and eddie and a tough guy named canino.
your husband disappeared and eddie, knowing everybody knew there had
been bad blood between him and regan, hid his wife out at realito and
put canino to guard her, so that it would look as if she had