lded loosely on the rug, purple-nailed. a few locks of dry white hair
clung to his scalp, like wild flowers fighting for life on a bare rock.

the butler stood in front of him and said: "this is mr. marlowe,
general."

the old man didn't move or speak, or even nod. he just looked at me
lifelessly. the butler pushed a damp wicker chair against the backs of
my legs and i sat down. he took my hat with a deft scoop.

then the old man dragged his voice up from the bottom of a well and
said: "brandy, norris. how do you like your brandy, sir?"

"any way at all," i said.

the butler went away among the abominable plants. the general spoke
again, slowly, using his strength as carefully as an out-of-work
showgirl uses her last good pair of stockings.

"i used to like mine with champagne. the champagne as cold as valley
forge and about a third of a glass of brandy beneath it. you may take
your coat off, sir. it's too hot in here for a man with blood in his
veins."

i stood up and peeled off my coat and
 
 ___________________________
 
at. it's the easiest way to fool them. that or
the police. geiger can collect on these notes, unless you can show
fraud. instead of that he makes you a present of them and admits they
are gambling debts, which gives you a defense, even if he had kept the
notes. if he's a crook, he knows his onions, and if he's an honest man
doing a little loan business on the side, he ought to have his money.
who was this joe brody you paid the five thousand dollars to?"

"some kind of gambler. i hardly recall. norris would know. my butler."

"your daughters have money in their own right, general?"

"vivian has, but not a great deal. carmen is still a minor under her
mother's will. i give them both generous allowances."

i said: "i can take this geiger off your back, general, if that's what
you want. whoever he is and whatever he has. it may cost you a little
money, besides what you pay me. and of course it won't get you anything.
sugaring them never does. you're already listed on their book of nice
names."

 
 ___________________________
 
d tried to catch up on my footdangling. there was a
gusty wind blowing in at the windows and the soot from the oil burners
of the hotel next door was down-drafted into the room and rolling across
the top of the desk like tumbleweed drifting across a vacant lot. i was
thinking about going out to lunch and that life was pretty flat and that
it would probably be just as flat if i took a drink and that taking a
drink all alone at that time of day wouldn't be any fun anyway. i was
thinking this when norris called up. in his carefully polite manner he
said that general sternwood was not feeling very well and that certain
items in the newspaper had been read to him and he assumed that my
investigation was now completed.

"yes, as regards geiger," i said. "i didn't shoot him, you know."

"the general didn't suppose you did, mr. marlowe."

"does the general know anything about those photographs mrs. regan was
worrying about?"

"no, sir. decidedly not."

"did you know what the general gave me?"

"yes,
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the wrong side
of the fence."

"i often wonder if there is a wrong side."

"we're losing the subject. what has eddie mars got on you?"

"you mean a hold on me of some sort?"

"yes."

her lip curled. "wittier, please, marlowe. much wittier."

"how's the general? i don't pretend to be witty."

"not too well. he didn't get up today. you could at least stop
questioning me."

"i remember a time when i thought the same about you. how much does the
general know?"

"he probably knows everything."

"norris would tell him?"

"no. wilde, the district attorney, was out to see him. did you burn those
pictures?"

"sure. you worry about your little sister, don't you--from time to
time."

"i think she's all i do worry about. i worry about dad in a way, to keep
things from him."

"he hasn't many illusions," i said, "but i suppose he still has pride."

"we're his blood. that's the hell of it." she stared at me in the mirror
with deep, distant eyes. "i don't want him to die despising his own
blood. it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
lood," i said.

i started the car and turned it and drove back across the interurban
tracks to the highway and so on into town and up to west hollywood. she
didn't speak to me. she hardly moved all the way back. i drove through
the gates and up the sunken driveway to the portecochere of the big
house. she jerked the car door open and was out of it before it had
quite stopped. she didn't speak even then. i watched her back as she
stood against the door after ringing the bell. the door opened and
norris looked out. she pushed past him quickly and was gone. the door
banged shut and i was sitting there looking at it.

i turned back down the driveway and home.

[24]

the apartment house lobby was empty this time. no gunman waiting under
the potted palm to give me orders. i took the automatic elevator up to
my floor and walked along the hallway to the tune of a muted radio
behind a door. i needed a drink and was in a hurry to get one. i didn't
switch the light on inside the door. i made straight f
 
 ___________________________
 
ou have anything that's
worrying you beyond endurance, drop up and chew it over. i'll only be
oiling my machine gun."

i left him blinking and walked away. twenty minutes later i was airing
the scrubwoman's soir√©e d'amour out of my office and opening up a thick
rough envelope addressed in a fine old-fashioned pointed handwriting.
the envelope contained a brief formal note and a large mauve check for
five hundred dollars, payable to philip marlowe and signed, guy de
brisay sternwood, by vincent norris. that made it a nice morning. i was
making out a bank slip when the buzzer told me somebody had entered my
two by four reception room. it was the little man from the plymouth.

"fine," i said. "come in and shed your coat."

he slid past me carefully as i held the door, as carefully as though he
feared i might plant a kick in his minute buttocks. we sat down and
faced each other across the desk. he was a very small man, not more than
five feet three and would hardly weigh as much as a butcher's 
 
 ___________________________
 
erful, in a dark business suit, with
a fringed white scarf hanging outside his tweed overcoat. then they were
gone, everybody was gone out of the room but myself and wilde, and wilde
was saying in a cold, angry voice: "this is the last time, marlowe. the
next fast one you pull i'll throw you to the lions, no matter whose
heart it breaks."

it was like that, over and over again, lying on the bed and watching the
patch of sunlight slide down the corner of the wall. then the phone
rang, and it was norris, the sternwood butler, with his usual
untouchable voice.

"mr. marlowe? i telephoned your office without success, so i took the
liberty of trying to reach you at home."

"i was out most of the night," i said. "i haven't been down."

"yes, sir. the general would like to see you this morning, mr. marlowe,
if it's convenient."

"half an hour or so," i said. "how is he?"

"he's in bed, sir, but not doing badly."

"wait till he sees me," i said, and hung up.

i shaved, changed clothes and started fo
 
 ___________________________
 
nwood place in twenty minutes and drove up under the arch at the
side door. it was eleven-fifteen. the birds in the ornamental trees were
crazy with song after the rain, the terraced lawns were as green as the
irish flag, and the whole estate looked as though it had been made about
ten minutes before. i rang the bell. it was five days since i had rung
it for the erst time. it felt like a year.

a maid opened the door and led me along a side hall to the main hallway
and left me there, saying mr. norris would be down in a moment. the main
hallway looked just the same. the portrait over the mantel had the same
hot black eyes and the knight in the stained-glass window still wasn't
getting anywhere untying the naked damsel from the tree.

in a few minutes norris appeared, and he hadn't changed either. his
acid-blue eyes were as remote as ever, his grayish-pink skin looked
healthy and rested, and he moved as if he was twenty years younger than
he really was. i was the one who felt the weight of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e years.

we went up the tiled staircase and turned the opposite way from vivian's
room. with each step the house seemed to grow larger and more silent. we
reached a massive old door that looked as if it had come out of a
church. norris opened it softly and looked in. then he stood aside and i
went in past him across what seemed to be about a quarter of a mile of
carpet to a huge canopied bed like the one henry the eighth died in.

general sternwood was propped up on pillows. his bloodless hands were
clasped on top of the sheet. they looked gray against it. his black eyes
were still full of light and the rest of his face still looked like the
face of a corpse.

"sit down, mr. marlowe." his voice sounded weary and a little stif
 
 ___________________________
 
 and you're through.' _you_
don't know what i have to go through or over or under to do your job
for you. i do it my way. i do my best to protect you and i may break
a few rules, but i break them in your favor. the client comes first,
unless he's crooked. even then all i do is hand the job back to him
and keep my mouth shut. after all you didn't tell me _not_ to go to
captain gregory."

"that would have been rather difficult," he said with a faint smile.

"well, what have i done wrong? your man norris seemed to think when
geiger was eliminated the case was over. i don't see it that way.
geiger's method of approach puzzled me and still does. i'm not sherlock
holmes or philo vance. i don't expect to go over ground the police have
covered and pick up a broken pen point and build a case from it. if you
think there is anybody in the detective business making a living doing
that sort of thing, you don't know much about cops. it's not things like
that they overlook, if they overlook anything. i'm n
 
 ___________________________
 
i'm leaving. i'll give you three days. if you're gone
by then--okey. if you're not, out it comes. and don't think i don't mean
that."

she turned suddenly. "i don't know what to say to you. i don't know how
to begin."

"yeah. get her out of here and see that she's watched every minute.
promise?"

"i promise. eddie--"

"forget eddie. i'll go see him after i get some rest. i'll handle
eddie."

"he'll try to kill you."

"yeah," i said. "his best boy couldn't. i'll take a chance on the
others. does norris know?"

"he'll never tell."

"i thought he knew."

i went quickly away from her down the room and out and down the tiled
staircase to the front hall. i didn't see anybody when i left. i found
my hat alone this time. outside the bright gardens had a haunted look,
as though small wild eyes were watching me from behind the bushes, as
though the sunshine itself had a mysterious something in its light. i
got into my car and drove off down the hill.

what did it matter where you lay once you were dea