else?"

"yes."

she stared at me, a little puzzled. "there is. the woman said there was
a police jam connected with it and i'd better lay it on the line fast,
or i'd be talking to my little sister through a wire screen."

"better," i said. "what kind of jam?"

"i don't know."

"where is carmen now?"

"she's at home. she was sick last night. she's still in bed, i think."

"did she go out last night?"

"no. i was out, but the servants say she wasn't. i was down at las
olindas, playing roulette at eddie mars' cypress club. i lost my shirt."

"so you like roulette. you would."

she crossed her legs and lit another cigarette. "yes. i like roulette.
all the sternwoods like losing games, like roulette and marrying men
that walk out on them and riding steeplechases at fifty-eight years old
and being rolled on by a jumper and crippled for life. the sternwoods
have money. all it has bought them is a rain check."

"what was owen doing last night with your car?"

"nobody knows. he took it without permission
 
 ___________________________
 
. we always let him take a
car on his night off, but last night wasn't his night off." she made a
wry mouth. "do you think--?"

"he knew about this nude photo? how would i be able to say? i don't rule
him out. can you get five thousand in cash right away?"

"not unless i tell dad--or borrow it. i could probably borrow it from
eddie mars. he ought to be generous with me, heaven knows."

"better try that. you may need it in a hurry."

she leaned back and hung an arm over the back of the chair. "how about
telling the police?"

"it's a good idea. but you won't do it."

"won't i?"

"no. you have to protect your father and your sister. you don't know
what the police might turn up. it might be something they couldn't sit
on. though they usually try in blackmail cases."

"can you do anything?"

"i think i can. but i can't tell you why
 
 ___________________________
 
ray eyebrows had that indefinably sporty look.
he had a long chin, a nose with a hook to it, thoughtful gray eyes that
had a slanted look because the fold of skin over his upper lid came down
over the comer of the lid itself.

he stood there politely, one hand touching the door at his back, the
other holding the gray hat and flapping it gently against his thigh. he
looked hard, not the hardness of the tough guy. more like the hardness
of a well-weathered horseman. but he was no horseman. he was eddie mars.

he pushed the door shut behind him and put that hand in the lap-seamed
pocket of his coat and left the thumb outside to glisten in the rather
dim light of the room. he smiled at carmen. he had a nice easy smile.
she licked her lips and stared at him. the fear went out of her face.
she smiled back.

"excuse the casual entrance," he said. "the bell didn't seem to rouse
anybody. is mr. geiger around?"

i said: "no. we don't know just where he is. we found the door a little
open. we stepped insid
 
 ___________________________
 
e."

he nodded and touched his long chin with the brim of his hat. "you're
friends of his, of course?"

"just business acquaintances. we dropped by for a book."

"a book, eh?" he said that quickly and brightly and, i thought, a little
slyly, as if he knew all about geiger's books. then he looked at carmen
again and shrugged.

i moved towards the door. "we'll trot along now," i said. i took hold of
her arm. she was staring at eddie mars. she liked him.

"any message--if geiger comes back?" eddie mars asked gently.

"we won't bother you."

"that's too bad," he said, with too much meaning. his gray eyes twinkled
and then hardened as i went past him to open the door. he added in a
casual tone: "the girl can dust. i'd like to talk to you a little,
soldier."

i let go of her arm. i gave him a blank stare. "kidder, eh?" he said
nicely. "don't waste it. i've got two boys outside in a car that always
do just what i want them to."

carmen made a sound at my side and bolted through the door. her step
 
 ___________________________
 
s
faded rapidly downhill. i hadn't seen her car, so she must have left it
down below. i started to say: "what the hell--!"

"oh, skip it," eddie mars sighed. "there's something wrong around here.
i'm going to find out what it is. if you want to pick lead out of your
belly, get in my way."

"well, well," i said, "a tough guy."

"only when necessary, soldier." he wasn't looking at me any more. he was
walking around the room, frowning, not paying any attention to me. i
looked out above the broken pane of the front window. the top of a car
showed over the hedge. its motor idled.

eddie mars found the purple flagon and the two gold-veined glasses
 
 ___________________________
 
ling
buyer. you missed a little something, though. somebody moved his books
out of the store today--the nice books he rented out."

he snapped his fingers sharply and said: "i should have thought of that,
soldier. you seem to get around. how do you figure it?"

"i think geiger was rubbed. i think that is his blood. and the books
being moved out gives a motive for hiding the body for a while. somebody
is taking over the racket and wants a little time to organize."

"they can't get away with it," eddie mars said grimly.

"who says so? you and a couple of gunmen in your car outside? this is a
big town now, eddie. some very tough people have checked in here lately.
the penalty of growth."

"you talk too damned much," eddie mars said. he bared his teeth and
whistled twice, sharply. a car door slammed outside and running steps
came through the hedge. mars flicked the luger out again and pointed it
at my chest. "open the door."

the knob rattled and a voice called out. i didn't move. the muzzle of
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
to get used to.

"open it yourself, eddie. who the hell are you to give me orders? be
nice and i might help you out."

he came to his feet rigidly and moved around the end of the desk and
over to the door. he opened it without taking his eyes off me. two men
tumbled into the room, reaching busily under their arms. one was an
obvious pug, a good-looking pale-faced boy with a bad nose and one ear
like a club steak. the other man was slim, blond, deadpan, with
close-set eyes and no color in them.

eddie mars said: "see if this bird is wearing any iron."

the blond flicked a short-barreled gun out and stood pointing it at me.
the pug sidled over flatfooted and felt my pockets with care. i turned
around for him like a bored beauty modeling an evening gown.

"no gun," he said in a burry voice.

"find out who he is."

the pug slipped a hand into my breast pocket and drew out my wallet. he
flipped it open and studied the contents. "name's philip marlowe, eddie.
lives at the hobart arms on franklin. priv
 
 ___________________________
 
ate license, deputy's badge
and all. a shamus." he slipped the wallet back in my pocket, slapped my
face lightly and turned away.

"beat it," eddie mars said.

the two gunmen went out again and closed the door. there was the sound
of them getting back into the car. they started its motor and kept it
idling once more.

"all right. talk," eddie mars snapped. the peaks of his eyebrows made
sharp angles against his forehead.

"i'm not ready to give out. killing geiger to grab his racket would be a
dumb trick and i'm not sure it happened that way, assuming he has been
killed. but i'm sure that whoever got the books knows what's what, and
i'm sure that the blonde lady down at his store is scared batty about
something or other. and i have a guess who got the books."

"who?"

"that's the part i'm not ready to give out. i've got a client, you
kno
 
 ___________________________
 
ht grab a little air while you're doing
that." his voice was the elaborately casual voice of the tough guy in
pictures. pictures have made them all like that.

"tsk, tsk," i said, not moving at all. "such a lot of guns around town
and so few brains. you're the second guy i've met within hours who seems
to think a gat in the hand means a world by the tail. put it down and
don't be silly, joe."

his eyebrows came together and he pushed his chin at me. his eyes were
mean.

"the other guy's name is eddie mars," i said. "ever hear of him?"

"no." brody kept the gun pointed at me.

"if he ever gets wise to where you were last night in the rain, he'll
wipe you off the way a check raiser wipes a check."

"what would i be to eddie mars?" brody asked coldly. but he lowered the
gun to his knee.

"not even a memory," i said.

we stared at each other. i didn't look at the pointed black slipper that
showed under the plush curtain on the doorway to my left.

brody said quietly: "don't get me wrong. i'm not a t
 
 ___________________________
 
ures, brody."

"oh, hell," he said. "you win." he stood up and slipped the colt into
his side pocket. his left hand went up inside his coat. he was holding
it there, his face twisted with disgust, when the door buzzer rang and
kept on ringing.

[15]

he didn't like that. his lower lip went in under his teeth, and his
eyebrows drew down sharply at the corners. his whole face became sharp
and foxy and mean.

the buzzer kept up its song. i didn't like it either. if the visitors
should happen to be eddie mars and his boys, i might get chilled off
just for being there. if it was the police, i was caught with nothing to
give them but a smile and a promise. and if it was some of brody's
friends--supposing he had any--they might turn out to be tougher than he
was.

the blonde didn't like it. she stood up in a surge and chipped at the
air with one hand. nerve tension made her face old and ugly.

watching me, brody jerked a small drawer in the desk and picked a
bone-handled automatic out of it. he held it
 
 ___________________________
 
 grew in. he stood up and waved his
hat at me and said: "the boss wants to talk to you. you sure keep your
friends waiting, pal."

i stood still and looked at his flattened nose and club steak ear.

"what about?"

"what do you care? just keep your nose clean and everything will be
jake." his hand hovered near the upper buttonhole of his open coat.

"i smell of policemen," i said. "i'm too tired to talk, too tired to
eat, too tired to think. but if you think i'm not too tired to take
orders from eddie mars--try getting your gat out before i shoot your
good ear off."

"nuts. you ain't got no gun." he stared at me levelly. his dark wiry
brows closed in together and his mouth made a downward curve.

"that was then," i told him. "i'm not always naked."

he waved his left hand. "okey. you win. i wasn't told to blast anybody.
you'll hear from him."

"too late will be too soon," i said, and turned slowly as he passed me
on his way to the door. he opened it and went out without looking back.
i grinned at
 
 ___________________________
 
 my own foolishness, went along to the elevator and upstairs
to the apartment. i took carmen's little gun out of my pocket and
laughed at it. then i cleaned it thoroughly, oiled it, wrapped it in a
piece of canton flannel and locked it up. i made myself a drink and was
drinking it when the phone rang. i sat down beside the table on which it
stood.

"so you're tough tonight," eddie mars' voice said.

"big, fast, tough and full of prickles. what can i do for you?"

"cops over there--you know where. you keep me out of it?"

"why should i?"

"i'm nice to be nice to, soldier. i'm not nice not to be nice to."

"listen hard and you'll hear my teeth chattering."

he laughed dryly. "did you--or did you?"

"i did. i'm damned if i know why. i guess it was just complicated enough
without you."

"thanks, soldier. who gunned him?"

"read it in the paper tomorrow--maybe."

"i want to know n
 
 ___________________________
 
wers. a garage man reported it to the stolen car detail, said
it didn't belong there. the place is called the casa de oro. there's an
angle to that i'll tell you about in a minute. we couldn't find out
anything about who put the car in there. we print the car but don't find
any prints that are on file anywhere. the car in that garage don't jibe
with foul play, although there's a reason to suspect foul play. it jibes
with something else i'll tell you about in a minute."

i said: "that jibes with eddie mars' wife being on the missing list."

he looked annoyed. "yeah. we investigate the tenants and find she's
living there. left about the time regan did, within two days anyway. a
guy who sounds a bit like regan had been seen with her, but we don't get
a positive identification. it's goddamned funny in this police racket
how an old woman can look out of a window and see a guy running and pick
him out of a line-up six months later, but we can show hotel help a
clear photo and they just can't be sure."
 
 ___________________________
 


"that's one of the qualifications for good hotel help," i said.

"yeah. eddie mars and his wife didn't live together, but they were
friendly, eddie says. here's some of the possibilities. first off regan
carried fifteen grand, packed it in his clothes all the time. real
money, they tell me. not just a top card and a bunch of hay. that's a
lot of jack but this regan might be the boy to have it around so he
could take it out and look at it when somebody was looking at him. then
again maybe he wouldn't give a damn. his wife says he never made a
nickel off of old man sternwood ex
 
 ___________________________
 
ught is somebody rolls him for it and rolls him too hard, so they
have to take him out in the desert and plant him among the cactuses. but
i don't like that too well. regan carried a gat and had plenty of
experience using it, and not just in a greasy-faced liquor mob. i
understand he commanded a whole brigade in the irish troubles back in
1922 or whenever it was. a guy like that wouldn't be white meat to a
heister. then, his car being in that garage makes whoever rolled him
know he was sweet on eddie mars' wife, which he was, i guess, but it
ain't something every poolroom bum would know."

"got a photo?" i asked.

"him, not her. that's funny too. there's a lot of funny angles to this
case. here." he pushed a shiny print across the desk and i looked at an
irish face that was more sad than merry and more reserved than brash.
not the face of a tough guy and not the face of a man who could be
pushed around much by anybody. straight dark brows with strong bone
under them. a forehead wide rather than 
 
 ___________________________
 
high, a mat of dark clustering
hair, a thin short nose, a wide mouth. a chin that had strong lines but
was small for the mouth. a face that looked a little taut, the face of a
man who would move fast and play for keeps. i passed the print back. i
would know that face, if i saw it.

captain gregory knocked his pipe out and refilled it and tamped the
tobacco down with his thumb. he lit it, blew smoke and began to talk
again.

"well, there could be people who would know he was sweet on eddie mars'
frau. besides eddie himself. for a wonder he knew it. but he don't seem
to give a damn. we check him pretty thoroughly around that time. of
course eddie wouldn't have knocked him off out of jealousy. the set-up
would point to him too obvious."

"it depends how smart he is," i said. "he might try the double bluff."

captain gregory shook his head. "if he's smart enough to get by in his
racket, he's too smart for that. i get your idea. he pulls the dumb play
because he thinks we wouldn't expect 
 
 ___________________________
 
h the heels of his
large heavy hands.

"i don't see nothing to do but wait," he said. "we've got readers out,
but it's too soon to look for results. regan had fifteen grand we know
of. the girl had some, maybe a lot in rocks. but they'll run out of
dough some day. regan will cash a check, drop a marker, write a letter.
they're in a strange town and they've got new names, but they've got the
same old appetites. they got to get back in the fiscal system."

"what did the girl do before she married eddie mars?"

"torcher."

"can't you get any old professional photos?"

"no. eddie must of had some, but he won't loosen up. he wants her let
alone. i can't make him. he's got friends in town, or he wouldn't be
what he is." he grunted. "any of this do you any good?"

i said: "you'll never find either of them. the pacific ocean is too
close."

"what i said about my chair cushion still goes. we'll find him. it may
take time. it could take a year or two."

"general sternwood may not live that long," i said.

 
 ___________________________
 
some is properly iced," the old boy said, almost with
a smirk in his voice.

that was that. we said good-by and hung up. the coffee shop smell from
next door came in at the windows with the soot but failed to make me
hungry. so i got out my office bottle and took the drink and let my
self-respect ride its own race.

i counted it up on my fingers. rusty regan had run away from a lot of
money and a handsome wife to go wandering with a vague blonde who was
more or less married to a racketeer named eddie mars. he had gone
suddenly without good-bys and there might be any number of reasons for
that. the general had been too proud, or, at the first interview he gave
me, too careful, to tell me the missing persons bureau had the matter in
hand. the missing persons people were dead on their feet on it and
evidently didn't think it worth bothering over. regan had done what he
had done and that was his business. i agreed with captain gregory that
eddie mars would have been very unlikely to involve himself 
 
 ___________________________
 
in a double
murder just because another man had gone to town with the blonde he was
not even living with. it might have annoyed him, but business is
business, and you have to hold your teeth clamped around hollywood to
keep from chewing on stray blondes. if there had been a lot of money
involved, that would be different. but fifteen grand wouldn't be a lot
of money to eddie mars. he was no two-bit chiseler like brody.

geiger was dead and carmen would have to find some other shady character
to drink exotic blends of hootch with. i didn't suppose she would have
any trouble. all she would have to do would be to stand on the corner
for five minutes and look coy. i hoped that the next grifter who dropped
the hook on her would play her a little more smoothly, a little more for
the long haul rather than the quick touch.

mrs. regan knew eddie mars well enough to borrow money
 
 ___________________________
 
 from him. that
was natural, if she played roulette and was a good loser. any gambling
house owner would lend a good client money in a pinch. apart from this
they had an added bond of interest in regan. he was her husband and he
had gone off with eddie mars' wife.

carol lundgren, the boy killer with the limited vocabulary, was out of
circulation for a long, long time, even if they didn't strap him in a
chair over a bucket of acid. they wouldn't, because he would take a plea
and save the county money. they all do when they don't have the price of
a big lawyer. agnes lozelle was in custody as a material witness. they
wouldn't need her for that, if carol took a plea, and if he pleaded
guilty on arraignment, they would turn her loose. they wouldn't w
 
 ___________________________
 
ant to
open up any angles on geiger's business, apart from which they had
nothing on her.

that left me. i had concealed a murder and suppressed evidence for
twenty-four hours, but i was still at large and had a
five-hundred-dollar check coming. the smart thing for me to do was to
take another drink and forget the whole mess.

that being the obviously smart thing to do, i called eddie mars and told
him i was coming down to las olindas that evening to talk to him. that
was how smart i was.

i got down there about nine, under a hard high october moon that lost
itself in the top layers of a beach fog. the cypress club was at the far
end of the town, a rambling frame mansion that had once been the summer
residence of a rich man named de cazens, and later had been a hotel. it
was now a big dark outwardly shabby place in a thick grove of
wind-twisted monterey cypresses, which gave it i
 
 ___________________________
 
ts name. it had enormous
scrolled porches, turrets all over the place, stained-glass trims around
the big windows, big empty stables at the back, a general air of
nostalgic decay. eddie mars had left the outside much as he had found
it, instead of making it over to look like an mgm set. i left my car on
a street with sputtering arc lights and walked into the grounds along a
damp gravel path to the main entrance. a doorman in a double-breasted
guard's coat let me into a huge dim silent lobby from which a white oak
staircase curved majestically up to the darkness of an upper floor. i
checked my hat and coat and waited, listening to music and confused
voices behind heavy double doors.
 
 ___________________________
 
 they seemed a long way off, and not
quite of the same world as the building itself. then the slim
pasty-faced blond man who had been with eddie mars and the pug at
geiger's place came through a door under the staircase, smiled at me
bleakly and took me back with him along a carpeted hall to the boss's
office.

this was a square room with a deep old bay window and a stone fireplace
in which a fire of juniper logs burned lazily. it was wainscoted in
walnut and had a frieze of faded damask above the paneling. the ceiling
was high and remote. there was a smell of cold sea.

eddie mars' dark sheenless desk didn't belong in the room, but neither

 
 ___________________________
 
did anything made after 1900. his carpet had a florida suntan. there was
a bartop radio in the corner and a sévres china tea set on a copper tray
beside a samovar. i wondered who that was for. there was a door in the
corner that had a time lock on it.

eddie mars grinned at me sociably and shook hands and moved his chin at
the vault. "i'm a pushover for a heist mob here except for that thing,"
he said cheerfully. "the local johns drop in every morning and watch me
open it. i have an arrangement with them."

"you hinted you had something for me," i said. "what is it?"

"what's your hurry? have a drink and sit down."

"no hurry at all. you and i haven't anything to talk about but
business."

"you'll have the drink and like it," he said. he mixed a couple 
 
 ___________________________
 
ly. i haven't been asked to be. but i know somebody
who would like to know where he is."

"she doesn't give a damn," he said.

"i mean her father."

he wiped his lips again and looked at the handkerchief almost as if he
expected to find blood on it. he drew his thick gray eyebrows close
together and lingered the side of his weatherbeaten nose.

"geiger was trying to blackmail the general," i said. "the general
wouldn't say so, but i figure he was at least half scared regan might be
behind it."

eddie mars laughed. "uh-uh. geiger worked that one on everybody. it was
strictly his own idea. he'd get notes from people that looked
legal--were legal, i dare say, except that he wouldn't have dared sue on
them. he'd present the notes, with a nice flourish, leaving himself
empty-handed. if he drew an ace, he had a prospect that scared and he
went to work. if he didn't draw an ace, he just dropped the whole
thing."

"clever guy," i said. "he dropped it all right. dropped it and fell on
it. how come you kn
 
 ___________________________
 
d-up rhumba that nobody was
dancing to. the gourd player rubbed his finger tips together as if they
were sore and got a cigarette into his mouth almost with the same
movement. the other four, with a timed simultaneous stoop, reached under
their chairs for glasses from which they sipped, smacking their lips and
flashing their eyes. tequila, their manner said. it was probably mineral
water. the pretense was as wasted as the music. nobody was looking at
them.

the room had been a ballroom once and eddie mars had changed it only as
much as his business compelled him. no chromium glitter, no indirect
lighting from behind angular cornices, no fused glass pictures, or
chairs in violent leather and polished metal tubing, none of the
pseudo-modernistic circus of the typical hollywood night trap. the light
was from heavy crystal chandeliers and the rose-damask panels of the
wall were still the same rose damask, a little faded by time and
darkened by dust, that had been matched long ago against the parquet
 
 ___________________________
 
looked at thousands of
boors and millions of fools. his tall dark disinterested manner was
flawless. he said gravely: "the table cannot cover your bet, madam. you
have over sixteen thousand dollars there."

"it's your money," the girl jeered. "don't you want it back?"

a man beside her tried to tell her something. she turned swiftly and spat
something at him and he faded back into the crowd red-faced. a door
opened in the paneling at the far end of the enclosed place made by the
bronze railing. eddie mars came through the door with a set indifferent
smile on his face, his hands thrust into the pockets of his dinner
jacket, both thumbnails glistening outside. he seemed to like that pose.
he strolled behind the croupiers and stopped at the corner of the middle
table. he spoke with lazy calm, less politely than the croupier.

"something the matter, mrs. regan?"

she turned her face to him with a sort of lunge. i saw the curve of her
cheek stiffen, as if with an almost unbearable inner tautness. she
 
 ___________________________
 

didn't answer him.

eddie mars said gravely: "if you're not playing any more, you must let
me send someone home with you."

the girl flushed. her cheekbones stood out white in her face. then she
laughed off-key. she said bitterly:

"one more play, eddie. everything i have on the red. i like red. it's
the color of blood."

eddie mars smiled faintly, then nodded and reached into his inner breast
pocket. he drew out a large pinseal wallet with gold corners and tossed
it carelessly along the table to the croupier. "cover her bet in even
thousands," he said, "if no one objects to this turn of the wheel being
just for the lady."

no one objected, vivian regan leaned down and pushed all her winnings
savagely with both hands on to the large red diamond on the layout.

the croupier leaned over the table without haste. he counted an
 
 ___________________________
 
d stacked
her money and chips, placed all but a few chips and bills in 3 neat pile
and pushed the rest back off the layout with his rake. he opened eddie
mars' wallet and drew out two flat packets of thousand-dollar bills. he
broke one, counted six bills out, added them to the unbroken packet, put
the four loose bills in the wallet and laid it aside as carelessly as if
it had been a packet of matches. eddie mars didn't touch the wallet.
nobody moved except the croupier. he spun the wheel lefthanded and sent
the ivory ball skittering along the upper edge with a casual flirt of
his wrist. then he drew his hands back and folded his arms.

vivian's lips parted slowly until her teeth caught the light and
glittered like knives. the ball drifted lazily down the slope of the
wheel and bounced on the chromium ridges above the numbers. after a long
time and then very suddenly motion left it with a dry click. the
 
 ___________________________
 
 wheel
slowed, carrying the ball around with it. the croupier didn't unfold his
arms until the wheel had entirely ceased to revolve.

"the red wins," he said formally, without interest. the little ivory
ball lay in red 25, the third number from the double zero. vivian regan
put her head back and laughed triumphantly.

the croupier lifted his rake and slowly pushed the stack of
thousand-dollar bills across the layout, added them to the stake, pushed
everything slowly out of the field of play.

eddie mars smiled, put his wallet back in his pocket, turned on his heel
and left the room through the door in the paneling.

a dozen people let their breath out at the same time and broke for the
bar. i broke with them and got to the far end of the room before vivian
had gathered up her winnings and turned away from the table. i went out
into the large quiet lobby, got my hat and coat from the check girl,
dropped a quarter in her tray and went out on the porch. the doorman
loomed up beside me and said: "
 
 ___________________________
 
g up and felt in it and went towards the path. she still
stood there motionless, a gray fur coat held tight around her throat
with an ungloved hand on which a ring made a faint glitter. she wore no
hat. her dark parted hair was part of the darkness of the night. her
eyes too.

"nice work, marlowe. are you my bodyguard now?" her voice had a harsh
note.

"looks that way. here's the bag."

she took it. i said: "have you a car with you?"

she laughed. "i came with a man. what are you doing here?"

"eddie mars wanted to see me."

"i didn't know you knew him. why?"

"i don't mind telling you. he thought i was looking for somebody he
thought had run away with his wife."

"were you?"

"no."

"then what did you come for?"

"to find out why he thought i was looking for somebody he thought had
run away with his wife."

"did you find out?"

"no."

"you leak information like a radio announcer," she said. "i suppose it's
none of my business--even if the man was my husband. i thought you
weren't interested in 
 
 ___________________________
 
y attention to him. he drew two
cups of coffee from a tarnished nickel urn and set them in front of us.
he looked at the bottle of rye, muttered under his breath and said
wearily: "okey, i'll watch the street while you pour it."

he went and stood at the display window with his back to us and his ears
hanging out.

"my heart's in my mouth doing this," i said, and unscrewed the top of
the whiskey bottle and loaded the coffee. "the law enforcement in this
town is terrific. all through prohibition eddie mars' place was a night
club and they had two uniformed men in the lobby every night--to see
that the guests didn't bring their own liquor instead of buying it from
the house."

the clerk turned suddenly and walked back behind the counter and went
in behind the little glass window of the prescription room.

we sipped our loaded coffee. i looked at vivian's face in the mirror
back of the coffee urn. it was taut, pale, beautiful and wild. her lips
were red and harsh.

"you have wicked eyes," i said. "
 
 ___________________________
 
what's eddie mars got on you?"

she looked at me in the mirror. "i took plenty away from him tonight at
roulette--starting with five grand i borrowed from him yesterday and
didn't have to use."

"that might make him sore. you think he sent that loogan after you?"

"what's a loogan?"

"a guy with a gun."

"are you a loogan?"

"sure," i laughed. "but strictly speaking a loogan is on the wrong side
of the fence."

"i often wonder if there is a wrong side."

"we're losing the subject. what has eddie mars got on you?"

"you mean a hold on me of some sort?"

"yes."

her lip curled. "wittier, please, marlowe. much wittier."

"how's the general? i don't pretend to be witty."

"not too well. he didn't get up today. you could at least stop
questioning me."

"i remember a time when i thought the same about you. how much does the
general know?"

"he probably knows everything."

"norris would tell him?"

"no. wilde, the district attorney, was out to see him. did you burn those
pictures?"

"sure. you wor
 
 ___________________________
 
ike
moth wings.

i kissed her tightly and quickly. then a long slow clinging kiss. her
lips opened under mine. her body began to shake in my arms.

"killer," she said softly, her breath going into my mouth.

i strained her against me until the shivering of her body was almost
shaking mine. i kept on kissing her. after a long time she pulled her
head away enough to say: "where do you live?"

"hobart arms. franklin near kenmore."

"i've never seen it."

"want to?"

"yes," she breathed.

"what has eddie mars got on you?"

her body stiffened in my arms and her breath made a harsh sound. her
head pulled back until her eyes, wide open, ringed with white, were
staring at me.

"so that's the way it is," she said in a soft dull voice.

"that's the way it is. kissing is nice, but your father didn't hire me
to sleep with you."

"you son of a bitch," she said calmly, without moving.

i laughed in her face. "don't think i'm an icicle," i said. "i'm not
blind or without senses. i have warm blood like the next
 
 ___________________________
 
 guy. you're
easy to take--too damned easy. what has eddie mars got on you?"

"if you say that again, i'll scream."

"go ahead and scream."

she jerked away and pulled herself upright, far back in the comer of the
car.

"men have been shot for little things like that, marlowe."

"men have been shot for practically nothing. the first time we met i
told you i was a detective. get it through your lovely head. i work at
it, lady. i don't play at it."

she fumbled in her bag and got a handkerchief out and bit on it, her
head turned away from me. the tearing soun
 
 ___________________________
 
. i was as empty of life as a scarecrow's pockets. i went out
to the kitchenette and drank two cups of black coffee. you can have a
hangover from other things than alcohol. i had one from women. women
made me sick.

i shaved and showered and dressed and got my raincoat out and went
downstairs and looked out of the front door. across the street, a
hundred feet up, a gray plymouth sedan was parked. it was the same one
that had tried to trail me around the day before, the same one that i
had asked eddie mars about. there might be a cop in it, if a cop had
that much time on his hands and wanted to waste it following me around.
or it might be a smoothie in the detective business trying to get a
noseful of somebody else's case in order to chisel a way into it. or it
might be the bishop of bermuda disapproving of my night life.

i went out back and got my convertible from the garage and drove it
around front past the gray plymouth. there was a small man in it, alone.
he started up after me. he worked b
 
 ___________________________
 
s. his eyes
opened a little, shined again, and his voice was full of thought.

"i was trying to get a line on you, sure," he said. "i've got something
to sell--cheap, for a couple of c notes. how'd you tie me to joe?"

i opened a letter and read it. it offered me a six months'
correspondence course in fingerprinting at a special professional
discount. i dropped it into the waste basket and looked at the little
man again. "don't mind me. i was just guessing. you're not a cop. you
don't belong to eddie mars' outfit. i asked him last night. i couldn't
think of anybody else but joe brody's friends who would be that much
interested in me."

"jesus," he said and licked his lower lip. his face had turned white as
paper when i mentioned eddie mars. his mouth drooped open and his
cigarette hung to the comer of it by some magic, as if it had grown
there. "aw, you're kidding me," he said at last, with the sort of smile
the operating room sees.

"all right. i'm kidding you." i opened another letter. this on
 
 ___________________________
 
" he said with something that was
near enough to dignity to make me stare at him.

i said: "you're right. i've been meeting the wrong kind of people
lately. let's cut out the gabble and get down to cases. what have you
got for the money?"

"would you pay for it?"

"if it does what?"

"if it helps you find rusty regan."

"i'm not looking for rusty regan."

"says you. want to hear it or not?"

"go ahead and chirp. i'll pay for anything i use. two c notes buys a lot
of information in my circle."

"eddie mars had regan bumped off," he said calmly, and leaned back as if
he had just been made a vice-president.

i waved a hand in the direction of the door. "i wouldn't even argue with
you," i said. "i wouldn't waste the oxygen. on your way, small size."

he leaned across the desk, white lines at the corners of his mouth. he
snubbed his cigarette out carefully, over and over again, without
looking at it. from behind a communicating door came the sound of a
typewriter clacking monotonously to the bell, to
 
 ___________________________
 
is regan was a cockeyed sort of buzzard. he had long-range
eyes. he was looking over into the next valley all the time. he wasn't
scarcely around where he was. i don't think he gave a damn about dough.
and coming from me, brother, that's a compliment."

the little man wasn't so dumb after all. a three for a quarter grifter
wouldn't even think such thoughts, much less know how to express them.

i said: "so he ran away."

"he started to run away, maybe. with this girl mona. she wasn't living
with eddie mars, didn't like his rackets. especially the side lines,
like blackmail, bent cars, hideouts for hot boys from the east, and so
on. the talk was regan told eddie one night, right out in the open, that
if he ever messed mona up in any criminal rap, he'd be around to see
him."

"most of this is on the record, harry," i said. "you can't expect money
for that."

"i'm coming to what isn't. so regan blew. i used to see him every
afternoon in vardi's drinking irish whiskey and staring at the wall. he
don'
 
 ___________________________
 
what i was there for, to pick up bets for puss walgreen."

"i thought he was in the insurance business."

"that's what it says on the door. i guess he'd sell you insurance at
that, if you tramped on him. well, about the middle of september i don't
see regan any more. i don't notice it right away. you know how it is. a
guy's there and you see him and then he ain't there and you don't not
see him until something makes you think of it. what makes me think about
it is i hear a guy say laughing that eddie mars' woman lammed out with
rusty regan and mars is acting like he was best man, instead of being
sore. so i tell joe brody and joe was smart."

"like hell he was," i said.

"not copper smart, but still smart. he's out for the dough. he gets to
figuring could he get a line somehow on the two lovebirds he could maybe
collect twice--once from eddie mars and once from regan's wife. joe knew
the family a little."

"five grand worth," i said. "he nicked them for that a while back."

"yeah?" harry jones l
 
 ___________________________
 
ooked mildly surprised. "agnes ought to of told me
that. there's a frail for you. always holding out. well, joe and me
watch the papers and we don't see anything, so we know old sternwood has
a blanket on it. then one day i see lash canino in vardi's. know him?"

i shook my head.

"there's a boy that is tough like some guys think they are tough. he
does a job for eddie mars when mars needs him--trouble-shooting. he'd
bump a guy off between drinks. when mars don't need him he don't go near
him. and he don't stay in l.a. well it might be something and it might
not. maybe they got a line on regan and mars has just been sitting back
with a smile on his puss, waiting for the chance. then again it might be
something else entirely. anyway i tell joe and joe gets on canino's
tail. he can tail. me, i'm no good at it. i'm giving that one away. no
charge. and joe tails canin
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the side for himself.
canino blows and joe loses him. end of act one."

"what does this canino look like?"

"short, heavy set, brown hair, brown eyes, and always wears brown
clothes and a brown hat. even wears a brown suede raincoat. drives a
brown coupe. everything brown for mr. canino."

"let's have act two," i said.

"without some dough that's all."

"i don't see two hundred bucks in it. mrs. regan married an
ex-bootlegger out of the joints. she'd know other people of his sort.
she knows eddie mars well. if she thought anything had happened to
regan, eddie would be the very man she'd go to, and canino might be the
man eddie would pick to handle the assignment. it that all you have?"

"would you give the two hundred to know where eddie's wife is?" the
little man asked calmly.

he had all my attention now. i almost cracked the arms of my chair
leaning on them.

"even if she was alone?" harry jones added in a soft, rather sinister
tone. "even if she never run away with regan at all, and was 
 
 ___________________________
 
g in here," he said steadily. "i come in
talking two c's. that's still the price. i come because i thought i'd
get a take it or leave it, one right gee to another. now you're waving
cops at me. you oughta be ashamed of yourself."

i said: "you'll get the two hundred--for that information. i have to get
the money myself first."

he stood up and nodded and pulled his worn little irish tweed coat tight
around his chest. "that's okey. after dark is better anyway. it's a
leery job--buckin' guys like eddie mars. but a guy has to eat. the
book's been pretty dull lately. i think the big boys have told puss
walgreen to move on. suppose you come over there to the office, fulwider
building, western and santa monica, four-twenty-eight at the back. you
bring the money, i'll take you to agnes."

"can't you tell me yourself? i've seen agnes."

"i promised her," he said simply. he buttoned his overcoat, cocked his
hat jauntily, nodded again and strolled to the door. he went out. his
steps died along the hall.


 
 ___________________________
 
 it."

"i--i--" her voice trailed off and came back with a panic rush. "where's
harry?"

"got scared and blew. meet me somewhere--anywhere at all--i have the
money."

"i don't believe you--about harry. it's a trap."

"oh stuff. i could have had harry hauled in long ago. there isn't
anything to make a trap for. canino got a line on harry somehow and he
blew. i want quiet, you want quiet, harry wants quiet." harry already
had it. nobody could take it away from him. "you don't think i'd stooge
for eddie mars, do you, angel?"

"no-o, i guess not. not that. i'll meet you in half an hour. beside
bullocks wilshire, the east entrance to the parking lot."

"right," i said.

i dropped the phone in its cradle. the wave of almond odor flooded me
again, and the sour smell of vomit. the little dead man sat silent in
his chair, beyond fear, beyond change.

i left the office. nothing moved in the dingy corridor. no pebbled glass
door had light behind it. i went down the fire stairs to the second
floor and from 
 
 ___________________________
 
 my way. this is a get-away stake and god
how i need it. what happened to harry?"

"i told you he ran away. canino got wise to him somehow. forget harry.
i've paid and i want my information."

"you'll get it. joe and i were out riding foothill boulevard sunday
before last. it was late and the lights coming up and the usual mess of
cars. we passed a brown coupe and i saw the girl who was driving it.
there was a man beside her, a dark short man. the girl was a blonde. i'd
seen her before. she was eddie mars' wife. the guy was canino. you
wouldn't forget either of them, if you ever saw them. joe tailed the
coupe from in front. he was good at that. canino, the watchdog, was
taking her out for air. a mile or so east of realito a road turns
towards the foothills. that's orange country to the south but to the
north it's as bare as hell's back yard and smack up against the hills
there's a cyanide plant where they make the stuff for fumigation. just
off the highway there's a small garage and paintshop ru
 
 ___________________________
 
emed to come from a skylight. the
skylight could belong to a garage, the garage could be run by a man
named art huck, and there could be a frame house next door to it. i
tucked my chin down in my collar and started towards it, then went back
to unstrap the license holder from the steering post and put it in my
pocket. i leaned lower under the wheel. behind a weighted flap, directly
under my right leg as i sat in the car, there was a hidden compartment.
there were two guns in it. one belonged to eddie mars' boy lanny and one
belonged to me. i took lanny's. it would have had more practice than
mine. i stuck it nose down in an inside pocket and started up the side
road.

the garage was a hundred yards from the highway. it showed the highway a
blank side wall. i played the flash on it quickly. "art huck--auto
repairs and painting." i chuckled, then harry jones' face rose up in
front of me, and i stopped chuckling. the garage doors were shut, but
there was an edge of light under them and a thread of 
 
 ___________________________
 
went on past. the frame house was there, light in two
front windows, shades down. it was set well back from the road, behind a
thin clump of trees. a car stood on the gravel drive in front. it was
dark, indistinct, but it would be a brown coupe and it would belong to
mr. canino. it squatted there peacefully in front of the narrow wooden
porch.

he would let her take it out for a spin once in a while, and sit beside
her, probably with a gun handy. the girl rusty regan ought to have
married, that eddie mars couldn't keep, the girl that hadn't run away
with regan. nice mr. canino.

i trudged back to the garage and banged on the wooden door with the butt
of my flash. there was a hung instant of silence, as heavy as thunder.
the light inside went out. i stood there grinning and licking the rain
off my lip. i clicked the spot on the middle of the doors. i grinned at
the circle of white. i was where i wanted to be.

a voice spoke through the door, a surly voice: "what you want?"

"open up. i've got two
 
 ___________________________
 
mean they left you here alone?"

her head turned slowly again. she smiled. "you don't look dangerous."

"i thought they were keeping you a prisoner."

it didn't seem to startle her. it even slightly amused her. "what made
you think that?"

"i know who you are."

her very blue eyes flashed so sharply that i could almost see the sweep
of their glance, like the sweep of a sword. her mouth tightened. but her
voice didn't change.

"then i'm afraid you're in a bad spot. and i hate killing."

"and you eddie mars' wife? shame on you."

she didn't like that. she glared at me. i grinned. "unless you can
unlock these bracelets, which i'd advise you not to do, you might spare
me a little of that drink you're neglecting."

she brought the glass over. bubbles rose in it like false hopes. she
bent over me. her breath was as delicate as the eyes of a fawn. i gulped
from the glass. she took it away from my mouth and watched some of the
liquid run down my neck.

she bent over me again. blood began to move around 
 
 ___________________________
 
ocktail bars picking up horse bets for crumbs.
picking up information too. this little bird picked up an idea about
canino. one way and another he and his friends found out where you were.
he came to me to sell the information because he knew--how he knew is a
long story--that i was working for general sternwood. i got his
information, but canino got the little bird. he's a dead little bird
now, with his feathers ruffled and his neck limp and a pearl of blood on
his beak. canino killed him. but eddie mars wouldn't do that, would he,
silver-wig? he never killed anybody. he just hires it done."

"get out," she said harshly. "get out of here quick."

her hand clutched in midair on the green lighter. the fingers strained.
the knuckles were as white as snow.

"but canino doesn't know i know that," i said. "about the little bird.
all he knows is i'm nosing around."

then she laughed. it was almost a racking laugh. it shook her as the
wind shakes a tree. i thought there was puzzlement in it, not exactl
 
 ___________________________
 
, not as cold as her lips.

[29]

the garage next door was dark. i crossed the gravel drive and a patch of
sodden lawn. the road ran with small rivulets of water. it gurgled down
a ditch on the far side. i had no hat. that must have fallen in the
garage. canino hadn't bothered to give it back to me. he hadn't thought
i would need it any more. i imagined him driving back jauntily through
the rain, alone, having left the gaunt and sulky art and the probably
stolen sedan in a safe place. she loved eddie mars and she was hiding to
protect him. so he would find her there when he came back, calm beside
the light and the untasted drink, and me tied up on the davenport. he
would carry her stuff out to the car and go through the house carefully
to make sure nothing incriminating was left. he would tell her to go out
and wait. she wouldn't hear a shot. a blackjack is just as effective at
short range. he would tell her he had left me tied up and i would get
loose after a while. he would think she was that 
 
 ___________________________
 
rred thumb and stared at me bleakly.

"so you got yourself in another jam."

"oh, you heard about it."

"brother, i sit here all day on my fanny and i don't look as if i had a
brain in my head. but you'd be surprised what i hear. shooting this
canino was all right i guess, but i don't figure the homicide boys
pinned any medals on you."

"there's been a lot of killing going on around me," i said. "i haven't
been getting my share of it."

he smiled patiently. "who told you this girl out there was eddie mars'
wife?"

i told him. he listened carefully and yawned. he tapped his gold-studded
mouth with a palm like a tray. "i guess you figure i ought to of found
her."

"that's a fair deduction."

"maybe i knew," he said. "maybe i thought if eddie and his woman wanted
to play a little game like that, it would be smart--or as smart as i
ever get--to let them think they were getting away with it. and then
again maybe you think i was letting eddie get away with it for more
personal reasons." he held his bi
 
 ___________________________
 
an effort, a trick he was
out of practice on. it furrowed his whole forehead and when it smoothed
out it was full of white lines that turned reddish as i watched them.

"i'm a copper," he said. "just a plain ordinary copper. reasonably
honest. as honest as you could expect a man to be in a world where it's
out of style. that's mainly why i asked you to come in this morning. i'd
like you to believe that. being a copper i like to see the law win. i'd
like to see the flashy well-dressed muggs like eddie mars spoiling their
manicures in the rock quarry at folsom, alongside of the poor little
slum-bred hard guys that got knocked over on their first caper and never
had a break since. that's what i'd like. you and me both lived too long
to think i'm likely to see it happen. not in this town, not in any town
half this size, in any part of this wide, green and beautiful u.s.a. we
just don't run our country that way."

i didn't say anything. he blew smoke with a backward jerk of his head,
looked at the mo
 
 ___________________________
 
uthpiece of his pipe and went on:

"but that don't mean i think eddie mars bumped off regan or had any
reason to or would have done it if he had. i just figured maybe he knows
something about it, and maybe sooner or later something will sneak out
into the open. hiding his wife out at realito was childish, but it's the
kind of childishness a smart monkey thinks is smart. i had him in here
last night, after the d.a. got through with him. he admitted the whole
thing. he said he knew canino as a reliable protection guy and that's
what he had him for. he didn't know anythi
 
 ___________________________
 
e same
people, say the same words to them, over and over again, and yet each
time it seemed real, like something actually happening, and for the
first time. i was driving hard along the highway through the rain, with
silver-wig in the corner of the car, saying nothing, so that by the time
we reached los angeles we seemed to be utter strangers again. i was
getting out at an all night drugstore and phoning bernie ohls that i had
killed a man at realito and was on my way over to wilde's house with
eddie mars' wife, who had seen me do it. i was pushing the car along the
silent, rain-polished streets to lafayette park and up under the
porte-cochere of wilde's big frame house and the porch light was already
on, ohls having telephoned ahead that i was coming. i was in wilde's
study and he was behind his desk in a flowered dressing-gown and a tight
hard face and a dappled cigar moved in his fingers and up to the bitter
smile on his lips. ohls was there and a slim gray scholarly man from the
sheriff's of
 
 ___________________________
 
 neck. there was a fingerprint man fussing around and
i was telling him not to forget the latch of the transom. (he found
canino's thumb print on it, the only print the brown man had left to
back up my story.)

i was back again at wilde's house, signing a typewritten statement his
secretary had run off in another room. then the door opened and eddie
mars came in and an abrupt smile flashed to his face when he saw
silver-wig, and he said: "hello, sugar," and she didn't look at him or
answer him. eddie mars fresh and cheerful, in a dark business suit, with
a fringed white scarf hanging outside his tweed overcoat. then they were
gone, everybody was gone out of the room but myself and wilde, and wilde
was saying in a cold, angry voice: "this is the last time, marlowe. the
next fast one you pull i'll throw you to the lions, no matter whose
heart it breaks."

it was like that, over and over again, lying on the bed and watching the
patch of sunlight slide down the corner of the wall. then the phone
ran
 
 ___________________________
 
 creepy, all rusted metal and old wood and silent
wells and greasy scummy sumps. maybe that upset her. i guess you've been
there yourself. it was kind of eerie."

"yes--it is." it was a small breathless voice now.

"so we went in there and i stuck a can up in a bull wheel for her to pop
at. she threw a wingding. looked like a mild epileptic fit to me."

"yes." the same minute voice. "she has them once in a while. is that all
you wanted to see me about?"

"i guess you still wouldn't tell me what eddie mars has on you."

"nothing at all. and i'm getting a little tired of that question," she
said coldly.

"do you know a man named canino?"

she drew her fine black brows together in thought. "vaguely. i seem to
remember the name."

"eddie mars' trigger man. a tough hombre, they said. i guess he was.
without a little help from a lady i'd be where he is--in the morgue."

"the ladies seem to--" she stopped dead and whitened. "i can't joke
about it," she said simply.

"i'm not joking, and if i seem to ta
 
 ___________________________
 
lk in circles, it just seems that
way. it all ties together--everything. geiger and his cute little
blackmail tricks, brody and his pictures, eddie mars and his roulette
tables, canino and the girl rusty regan didn't run away with. it all
ties together."

"i'm afraid i don't even know what you're talking about."

"suppose you did--it would be something like this. geiger got his hooks
into your sister, which isn't very difficult, and got some notes from
her and tried to blackmail your father with them, in a nice way. eddie
mars was behind geiger, protecting him and using him for a cat's-paw.
your father sent for me instead of paying up, which sh
 
 ___________________________
 
owed he wasn't
scared about anything. eddie mars wanted to know that. he had something
on you and he wanted to know if he had it on the general too. if he had,
he could collect a lot of money in a hurry. if not, he would have to
wait until you got your share of the family fortune, and in the meantime
be satisfied with whatever spare cash he could take away from you across
the roulette table. geiger was killed by owen taylor, who was in love
with your silly little sister and didn't like the kind of games geiger
played with her. that didn't mea
 
 ___________________________
 
atch and held it for her. she drew in
a lungful of smoke and let it out raggedly and then the cigarette seemed
to be forgotten between her fingers. she never drew on it again.

"well, the missing persons bureau can't find him," i said. "it's not so
easy. what they can't do it's not likely that i can do."

"oh." there was a shade of relief in her voice.

"that's one reason. the missing persons people think he just disappeared
on purpose, pulled down the curtain, as they call it. they don't think
eddie mars did away with him."

"who said anybody did away with him?"

"we're coming to it," i said.

for a brief instant her face seemed to come to pieces, to become merely
a set of features without form or control. her mouth looked like the
prelude to a scream. but only for an instant. the sternwood blood had to
be good for something more than her black eyes and her recklessness.

i stood up and took the smoking cigarette from between her fingers and
killed it in an ashtray. then i took carmen's little 
 
 ___________________________
 
 disposing of the body when you went to eddie
mars for help. but that would be small change to what eddie expects to
collect one of these days, wouldn't it?"

"you son of a bitch!" she said.

"uh-huh. i'm a very smart guy. i haven't a feeling or a scruple in the
world. all i have the itch for is money. i am so money greedy that for
twenty-eve bucks a day and expenses, mostly gasoline and whiskey, i do
my thinking myself, what there is of it; i risk my whole future, the
hatred of the cops and of eddie mars and his pals, i dodge bullets and
eat saps, and say thank you very much, if you have any more trouble, i
hope you'll think of me, i'll just leave one of my cards in case
anything comes up. i do all this for twenty-five bucks a day--and maybe
just a little to protect what little pride a broken and sick old man has
left in his blood, in the thought that his blood is not poison, and that
although his two little girls are a trifle wild, as many nice girls are
these days, they are not perverts or ki
 
 ___________________________
 
to the windows. the drapes lay in heavy
ivory folds beside her feet. she stood among the folds and looked out,
towards the quiet darkish foothills. she stood motionless, almost
blending into the drapes. her hands hung loose at her sides. utterly
motionless hands. she turned and came back along the room and walked
past me blindly. when she was behind me she caught her breath sharply
and spoke.

"he's in the sump," she said. "a horrible decayed thing. i did it. i did
just what you said. i went to eddie mars. she came home and told me
about it, just like a child. she's not normal. i knew the police would
get it all out of her. in a little while she would even brag about it.
and if dad knew, he would call them instantly and tell them the whole
story. and sometime in that night he would die. it's not his dying--it's
what he would be thinking just before he died. rusty wasn't a bad
fellow. i didn't love him. he was all right, i guess. he just didn't
mean anything to me, one way or another, alive or de
 
 ___________________________
 
ad, compared with
keeping it from dad."

"so you let her run around loose," i said, "getting into other jams."

"i was playing for time. just for time. i played the wrong way, of
course. i thought she might even forget it herself. i've heard they do
forget what happens in those fits. maybe she has forgotten it. i knew
eddie mars would bleed me white, but i didn't care. i had to have help
and i could only get it from somebody like him.... there have been times
when i hardly believed it all myself. and other times when i had to get
drunk quickly--whatever time of day it was. awfully damn quickly."

"you'll take her away," i said. "and do that awfully damn quickly."

she still had her back to me. she said softly now: "what about you?"

"nothing about me. i'm leaving. i'll give you three days. if you're gone
by then--okey.