 blue eyes as remote as eyes
could be. his skin was smooth and bright and he moved like a man with
very sound muscles. he walked slowly across the floor towards us and the
girl jerked away from me. she flashed across the room to the foot of the
stairs and went up them like a deer. she was gone before i could draw a
long breath and let it out.

the butler said tonelessly: "the general will see you now, mr. marlowe."

i pushed my lower jaw up off my chest and nodded at him. "who was that?"

"miss carmen sternwood, sir."

"you ought to wean her. she looks old enough."

he looked at me with grave politeness and repeated what he had said.

[2]

we went out at the french doors and along a smooth red-flagged path that
skirted the far side of the lawn from the garage. the boyish-looking
chauffeur had a big black and chromium sedan out now and was dusting
that. the path took us along to the side of the greenhouse and the
butler opened a door for me and stood aside. it opened into a sort of
vestibule that was a
 
 ___________________________
 
the slanted printing on the back. "dear sir: in spite of
the legal uncollectibility of the enclosed, which frankly represent
gambling debts, i assume you might wish them honored. respectfully, a.
g. geiger."

i looked at the slips of stiffish white paper. they were promissory
notes filled out in ink, dated on several dates early in the month
before, september. "on demand i promise to pay to arthur gwynn geiger or
order the sum of one thousand dollars ($1000.00) without interest. value
received. carmen sternwood."

the written part was in a sprawling moronic handwriting with a lot of
fat curlicues and circles for dots. i mixed myself another drink and
sipped it and put the exhibit aside.

"your conclusions?" the general asked.

"i haven't any yet. who is this arthur gwynn geiger?"

"i haven't the faintest idea."

"what does carmen say?"

"i haven't asked her. i don't intend to. if i did, she would suck her
thumb and look coy."

i said: "i met her in the hall. she did that to me. then she tried to
sit i
 
 ___________________________
 
house. the filaments of its lights glowed
dimly and died. the door opened and a woman got out. a small slim woman
in a vagabond hat and a transparent raincoat. she went in through the
box maze. a bell rang faintly, light through the rain, a closing door,
silence.

i reached a flash out of my car pocket and went downgrade and looked at
the car. it was a packard convertible, maroon or dark brown. the left
window was down. i felt for the license holder and poked light at it.
the registration read: carmen sternwood, 3765 alta brea crescent, west
hollywood. i went back to my car again and sat and sat. the top dripped
on my knees and my stomach burned from the whiskey. no more cars came up
the hill. no lights went on in the house before which i was parked. it
seemed like a nice neighborhood to have bad habits in.

at seven-twenty a single flash of hard white light shot out of geiger's
house like a wave of summer lightning. as the darkness folded back on
it and ate it up a thin tinkling scream echoed out and
 
 ___________________________
 
amp on a
pedestal, two other standing lamps with jade-green shades and long
tassels. there was a black desk with carved gargoyles at the corners and
behind it a yellow satin cushion on a polished black chair with carved
arms and back. the room contained an odd assortment of odors, of which
the most emphatic at the moment seemed to be the pungent aftermath of
cordite and the sickish aroma of ether.

on a sort of low dais at one end of the room there was a high-backed
teakwood chair in which miss carmen sternwood was sitting on a fringed
orange shawl. she was sitting very straight, with her hands on the arms
of the chair, her knees close together, her body stiffly erect in the
pose of an egyptian goddess, her chin level, her small bright teeth
shining between her parted lips. her eyes were wide open. the dark slate
color of the iris had devoured the pupil. they were mad eyes. she seemed
to be unconscious, but she didn't have the pose of unconsciousness. she
looked as if, in her mind, she was doing somet
 
 ___________________________
 
t getting
warmed up with their pieces of string and chalk and their cameras and
dusting powders and their nickel cigars. they would have been very much
there. it wasn't the killer; he had left too fast. he must have seen the
girl. he couldn't be sure she was too batty to see him. he would be on
his way to distant places. i couldn't guess the answer, but it was all
right with me if somebody wanted geiger missing instead of just
murdered. it gave me a chance to find out if i could tell it leaving
carmen sternwood out. i locked up again, choked my car to life and rode
off home to a shower, dry clothes and a late dinner. after that i sat
around in the apartment and drank too much hot toddy trying to crack
the code in geiger's blue indexed notebook. all i could be sure of was
that it was a list of names and addresses, probably of the customers.
there were over four hundred of them. that made it a nice racket, not
to mention any blackmail angles, and there were probably plenty of those.
any name on the list
 
 ___________________________
 
row the sector of
search quite a lot, especially as i had had his personal keys in my
pocket when it happened.

i didn't get a chance to look at the garage. the doors were shut and
padlocked and something moved behind the hedge as i drew level. a woman
in a green and white check coat and a small button of a hat on soft
blond hair stepped out of the maze and stood looking wild-eyed at my
car, as if she hadn't heard it come up the hill. then she turned swiftly
and dodged back out of sight. it was carmen sternwood, of course.

i went on up the street and parked and walked back. in the daylight it
seemed an exposed and dangerous thing to do. i went in through the
hedge. she stood there straight and silent against the locked front
door. one hand went slowly up to her teeth and her teeth bit at her
funny thumb. there were purple smears under her eyes and her face was
gnawed white by nerves.

she half smiled at me. she said: "hello," in a thin, brittle voice.
"wha--what--?" that tailed off and she went back 
 
 ___________________________
 
girl, and out of character for what he was trying to do. i talked to
brody for a long time. he was a crook, but not a killer type. he had two
guns, but he wasn't wearing either of them. he was trying to find a way
to cut in on geiger's racket, which naturally he knew all about from the
girl. he says he was watching geiger off and on to see if he had any
tough backers. i believe him. to suppose he killed geiger in order to
get his books, then scrammed with the nude photo geiger had just taken
of carmen sternwood, then planted the gun on owen taylor and pushed
taylor into the ocean off lido, is to suppose a hell of a lot too much.
taylor had the motive, jealous rage, and the opportunity to kill geiger.
he was out in one of the family cars without permission. he killed
geiger right in front of the girl, which brody would never have done,
even if he had been a killer. i can't see anybody with a purely
commercial interest in geiger doing that. but taylor would have done it.
the nude photo business was just
 
 ___________________________
 
he scent on the air was a perfume, a heavy
cloying perfume.

there was no sound, no sound at all. then my eyes adjusted themselves
more to the darkness and i saw there was something across the floor in
front of me that shouldn't have been there. i backed, reached the wall
switch with my thumb and flicked the light on.

the bed was down. something in it giggled. a blond head was pressed into
my pillow. two bare arms curved up and the hands belonging to them were
clasped on top of the blond head. carmen sternwood lay on her back, in
my bed, giggling at me. the tawny wave of her hair was spread out on the
pillow as if by a careful and artificial hand. her slaty eyes peered at
me and had the effect, as usual, of peering from behind a barrel. she
smiled. her small sharp teeth glinted.

"cute, aren't i?" she said.

i said harshly: "cute as a filipino on saturday night."

i went over to a floor lamp and pulled the switch, went back to put off
the ceiling light, and went across the room again to the chessboar