 and leaned the automatic against the boy's ribs.
i looked back through the window. the whine of the siren was very loud
now. two red lights swelled in the middle of the street. they grew
larger and blended into one and the car rushed by in a wild flurry of
sound.

"let's go," i said.

the boy swung the car and started off down the hill.

"let's go home," i said. "to laverne terrace."

his smooth lips twitched. he swung the car west on franklin. "you're a
simple-minded lad. what's your name?"

"carol lundgren," he said lifelessly.

"you shot the wrong guy, carol. joe brody didn't kill your queen."

he spoke three words to me and kept on driving.

[17]

a moon half gone from the full glowed through a ring of mist among the
high branches of the eucalyptus trees on laverne terrace. a radio
sounded loudly from a house low down the hill. the boy swung the car
over to the box hedge in front of geiger's house, killed the motor and
sat looking straight before him with both hands on the wheel. no light
showe
 
 ___________________________
 
en taylor, driver of the lido pier suicide car,
with the laurel canyon exotic bungalow slaying. none of them mentioned
the sternwoods, bernie ohls or me. owen taylor was "chauffeur to a
wealthy family." captain cronjager of the hollywood division got all the
credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed
to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service
maintained by one geiger in the back of the bookstore on hollywood
boulevard. brody had shot geiger and carol lundgren had shot brody in
revenge. police were holding carol lundgren in custody. he had
confessed. he had a bad record--probably in high school. police were
also holding one agnes lozelle, geiger's secretary, as a material
witness.

it was a nice write-up. it gave the impression that geiger had been
killed the night before, that brody had been killed about an hour later,
and that captain cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a
cigarette. the suicide of taylor made page one of section ii. th
 
 ___________________________
 
inutes and look coy. i hoped that the next grifter who dropped
the hook on her would play her a little more smoothly, a little more for
the long haul rather than the quick touch.

mrs. regan knew eddie mars well enough to borrow money from him. that
was natural, if she played roulette and was a good loser. any gambling
house owner would lend a good client money in a pinch. apart from this
they had an added bond of interest in regan. he was her husband and he
had gone off with eddie mars' wife.

carol lundgren, the boy killer with the limited vocabulary, was out of
circulation for a long, long time, even if they didn't strap him in a
chair over a bucket of acid. they wouldn't, because he would take a plea
and save the county money. they all do when they don't have the price of
a big lawyer. agnes lozelle was in custody as a material witness. they
wouldn't need her for that, if carol took a plea, and if he pleaded
guilty on arraignment, they would turn her loose. they wouldn't want to
open up any angl