o a
wealthy family." captain cronjager of the hollywood division got all the
credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed
to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service
maintained by one geiger in the back of the bookstore on hollywood
boulevard. brody had shot geiger and carol lundgren had shot brody in
revenge. police were holding carol lundgren in custody. he had
confessed. he had a bad record--probably in high school. police were
also holding one agnes lozelle, geiger's secretary, as a material
witness.

it was a nice write-up. it gave the impression that geiger had been
killed the night before, that brody had been killed about an hour later,
and that captain cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a
cigarette. the suicide of taylor made page one of section ii. there was
a photo of the sedan on the deck of the power lighter, with the license
plate blacked out, and something covered with a cloth lying on the deck
beside the running board. owe
 
 ___________________________
 
loser. any gambling
house owner would lend a good client money in a pinch. apart from this
they had an added bond of interest in regan. he was her husband and he
had gone off with eddie mars' wife.

carol lundgren, the boy killer with the limited vocabulary, was out of
circulation for a long, long time, even if they didn't strap him in a
chair over a bucket of acid. they wouldn't, because he would take a plea
and save the county money. they all do when they don't have the price of
a big lawyer. agnes lozelle was in custody as a material witness. they
wouldn't need her for that, if carol took a plea, and if he pleaded
guilty on arraignment, they would turn her loose. they wouldn't want to
open up any angles on geiger's business, apart from which they had
nothing on her.

that left me. i had concealed a murder and suppressed evidence for
twenty-four hours, but i was still at large and had a
five-hundred-dollar check coming. the smart thing for me to do was to
take another drink and forget the whole m
 
 ___________________________
 


"is agnes there?"

"no agnes here, buddy. what number you want?"

"wentworth two-five-two-eight."

"right number, wrong gal. ain't that a shame?" the voice cackled.

i hung up and reached for the phone book again and looked up the
wentworth apartments. i dialed the manager's number. i had a blurred
vision of mr. canino driving fast through rain to another appointment
with death.

"glendower apartments. mr. schiff speaking."

"this is wallis, police identification bureau. is there a girl named
agnes lozelle registered in your place?"

"who did you say you were?"

i told him again.

"if you give me your number, i'll--"

"cut the comedy," i said sharply, "i'm in a hurry. is there or isn't
there?"

"no. there isn't." the voice was as stiff as a breadstick.

"is there a tall blonde with green eyes registered in the flop?"

"say, this isn't any flop--"

"oh, can it, _can it!_" i rapped at him in a police voice. "you want me to
send the vice squad over there and shake the joint down? i know all
about bu