the desk. he was a very small man, not more than
five feet three and would hardly weigh as much as a butcher's thumb. he
had tight brilliant eyes that wanted to look hard, and looked as hard as
oysters on the half shell. he wore a double-breasted dark gray suit that
was too wide in the shoulders and had too much lapel. over this, open,
an irish tweed coat with some badly worn spots. a lot of foulard tie
bulged out and was rainspotted above his crossed lapels.

"maybe you know me," he said. "i'm harry jones."

i said i didn't know him. i pushed a flat tin of cigarettes at him. his
small neat lingers speared one like a trout taking the fly. he lit it
with the desk lighter and waved his hand.

"i been around," he said. "know the boys and such. used to do a little
liquor-running down from hueneme point. a tough racket, brother. riding
the scout car with a gun in your lap and a wad on your hip that would
choke a coal chute. plenty of times we paid off four sets of law before
we hit beverly hills. a to
 
 ___________________________
 
at eddie mars' woman lammed out with
rusty regan and mars is acting like he was best man, instead of being
sore. so i tell joe brody and joe was smart."

"like hell he was," i said.

"not copper smart, but still smart. he's out for the dough. he gets to
figuring could he get a line somehow on the two lovebirds he could maybe
collect twice--once from eddie mars and once from regan's wife. joe knew
the family a little."

"five grand worth," i said. "he nicked them for that a while back."

"yeah?" harry jones looked mildly surprised. "agnes ought to of told me
that. there's a frail for you. always holding out. well, joe and me
watch the papers and we don't see anything, so we know old sternwood has
a blanket on it. then one day i see lash canino in vardi's. know him?"

i shook my head.

"there's a boy that is tough like some guys think they are tough. he
does a job for eddie mars when mars needs him--trouble-shooting. he'd
bump a guy off between drinks. when mars don't need him he don't go near
him.
 
 ___________________________
 
egan married an
ex-bootlegger out of the joints. she'd know other people of his sort.
she knows eddie mars well. if she thought anything had happened to
regan, eddie would be the very man she'd go to, and canino might be the
man eddie would pick to handle the assignment. it that all you have?"

"would you give the two hundred to know where eddie's wife is?" the
little man asked calmly.

he had all my attention now. i almost cracked the arms of my chair
leaning on them.

"even if she was alone?" harry jones added in a soft, rather sinister
tone. "even if she never run away with regan at all, and was being kept
now about forty miles from l.a. in a hideout--so the law would keep on
thinking she had dusted with him? would you pay two hundred bucks for
that, shamus?"

i licked my lips. they tasted dry and salty. "i think i would," i said.
"where?"

"agnes found her," he said grimly. "just by a lucky break. saw her out
riding and managed to tail her home. agnes will tell you where that
is--when she's h
 
 ___________________________
 
lwider
building, western and santa monica, four-twenty-eight at the back. you
bring the money, i'll take you to agnes."

"can't you tell me yourself? i've seen agnes."

"i promised her," he said simply. he buttoned his overcoat, cocked his
hat jauntily, nodded again and strolled to the door. he went out. his
steps died along the hall.

i went down to the bank and deposited my five-hundred-dollar check and
drew out two hundred in currency. i went upstairs again and sat in my
chair thinking about harry jones and his story. it seemed a little too
pat. it had the austere simplicity of fiction rather than the tangled
woof of fact. captain gregory ought to have been able to find mona mars,
if she was that close to his beat. supposing, that is, he had tried.

i thought about it most of the day. nobody came into the office. nobody
called me on the phone. it kept on raining.

[26]

at seven the rain had stopped for a breathing spell, but the gutters
were still flooded. on santa monica the water was level 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed. a very nice building.

i came out at the fourth floor sniffing for air. the hallway had the
same dirty spittoon and frayed mat, the same mustard walls, the same
memories of low tide. i went down the line and turned a corner. the
name: "l. d. walgreen--insurance," showed on a dark pebbled glass door,
on a second dark door, on a third behind which there was a light. one
of the dark doors said: "entrance."

a glass transom was open above the lighted door. through it the sharp
birdlike voice of harry jones spoke, saying:

"canino? ... yeah, i've seen you around somewhere. sure."

i froze. the other voice spoke. it had a heavy purr, like a small dynamo
behind a brick wall. it said: "i thought you would." there was a vaguely
sinister note in that voice.

a chair scraped on linoleum, steps sounded, the transom above me
squeaked shut. a shadow melted from behind the pebbled glass.

i went back to the first of the three doors marked with the name
walgreen. i tried it cautiously. it was locked. it move
 
 ___________________________
 
alked like a cat on a mantel and reached the hinged
side of the door, put an eye to the crack and saw nothing but light
against the angle of the wood.

the purring voice was now saying quite pleasantly: "sure, a guy could
sit on his fanny and crab what another guy done if he knows what it's
all about. so you go to see this peeper. well, that was your mistake.
eddie don't like it. the peeper told eddie some guy in a gray plymouth
was tailing him. eddie naturally wants to know who and why, see."

harry jones laughed lightly. "what makes it his business?"

"that don't get you no place."

"you know why i went to the peeper. i already told you. account of joe
brody's girl. she has to blow and she's shatting on her uppers. she
figures the peeper can get her some dough. i don't have any."

the purring voice said gently: "dough for what? peepers don't give that
stuff out to punks."

"he could raise it. he knows rich people." harry jones laughed, a brave
little laugh.

"don't fuss with me, little man." th
 
 ___________________________
 
where the boys pitch
dimes against the wall."

"she's my girl now, canino. i don't put my girl in the middle for
anybody."

a silence followed. i listened to the rain lashing the windows. the
smell of cigarette smoke came through the crack of the door. i wanted to
cough. i bit hard on a handkerchief.

the purring voice said, still gentle: "from what i hear this blonde
broad was just a shill for geiger. i'll talk it over with eddie. how
much you tap the peeper for?"

"two centuries."

"get it?"

harry jones laughed again. "i'm seeing him tomorrow. i have hopes."

"where's agnes?"

"listen--"

"where's agnes?"

silence.

"look at it, little man."

i didn't move. i wasn't wearing a gun. i didn't have to see through the
crack of the door to know that a gun was what the purring voice was
inviting harry jones to look at. but i didn't think mr. canino would do
anything with his gun beyond showing it. i waited.

"i'm looking at it," harry jones said, his voice squeezed tight as if it
could hardly get pas
 
 ___________________________
 
t his teeth. "and i don't see anything i didn't see
before. go ahead and blast and see what it gets you."

"a chicago overcoat is what it would get _you_, little man."

silence.

"where's agnes?"

harry jones sighed. "okey," he said wearily. "she's in an apartment
house at 28 court street, up on bunker hill. apartment 301. i guess i'm
yellow all right. why should i front for that twist?"

"no reason. you got good sense. you and me'll go out and talk to her.
all i want is to find out is she dummying up on you, kid. if it's the
way you say it is, everything is jakeloo. you can put the bite on the
peeper and be on your way. no hard feelings?"

"no," harry jones said. "no hard feelings, canino."

"fine.
 
 ___________________________
 
 let's dip the bill. got a glass?" the purring voice was now as
false as an usherette's eyelashes and as slippery as a watermelon seed.
a drawer was pulled open. something jarred on wood. a chair squeaked. a
scufling sound on the floor. "this is bond stuff," the purring voice
said.

there was a gurgling sound. "moths in your ermine, as the ladies say."

harry jones said softly: "success."

i heard a sharp cough. then a violent retching. there was a small thud
on the floor, as if a thick glass had fallen. my fingers curled against
my raincoat.

the purring voice said gently: "you ain't sick from just one drink, are
you, pal?"

harry jones didn't answer. there was labored breathing for a short
moment. then thick silence folded down. then a chair scraped.

"so long, little man," said mr. canino.

steps, a click, the wedge of light died at my feet, a door ope
 
 ___________________________
 
ely and assured.

i stirred around the edge of the door and pulled it wide and looked into
blackness relieved by the dim shine of a window. the comer of a desk
glittered faintly. a hunched shape took form in a chair behind it. in
the close air there was a heavy clogged smell, almost a perfume. i went
across to the corridor door and listened. i heard the distant clang of
the elevator.

i found the light switch and light glowed in a dusty glass bowl hanging
from the ceiling by three brass chains. harry jones looked at me across
the desk, his eyes wide open, his face frozen in a tight spasm, the skin
bluish. his small dark head was tilted to one side. he sat upright
against the back of the chair.

a street-car bell clanged at an almost infinite distance and the sound
came buffeted by innumerable walls. a brown half pint of whiskey stood
on the desk with the cap off. harry jones' glass glinted against a
castor of the desk. the second glass was gone.

i breathed shallowly, from the top of my lungs, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d bent above the
bottle. behind the charred smell of the bourbon another odor lurked,
faintly, the odor of bitter almonds. harry jones dying had vomited on
his coat. that made it cyanide.

i walked around him carefully and lifted a phone book from a hook on the
wooden frame of the window. i let it fall again, reached the telephone
as far as it would go from the little dead man. i dialed information.
the voice answered.

"can you give me the phone number of apartment 301, 28 court street?"

"one moment, please." the voice came to me borne on the smell of bitter
almonds. a silence. "the number is wentworth 2528. it is listed und
 
 ___________________________
 
ay suit and irish tweed
overcoat, gray hat. my information is apartment 301, but all i get there
is the big razzoo."

"oh, she ain't there. there's a couple of car salesmen living in
three-o-one."

"thanks, i'll drop around."

"make it quiet, won't you? come to my place, direct?"

"much obliged, mr. schiff." i hung up.

i wiped sweat off my face. i walked to the far corner of the office and
stood with my face to the wall, patted it with a hand. i turned around
slowly and looked across at little harry jones grimacing in his chair.

"well, you fooled him, harry," i said out loud, in a voice that sounded
queer to me. "you lied to him and you drank your cyanide like a little
gentleman. you died like a poisoned rat, harry, but you're no rat to
me."

i had to search him. it was a nasty job. his pockets yielded
nothing about agnes, nothing that i wanted at all. i didn't think they
would, but i had to be sure. mr. canino might be back. mr. canino would
be the kind of self-confident gentleman who would no
 
 ___________________________
 
loor and from there looked down at the lighted roof of the elevator
cage. i pressed the button. slowly the car lurched into motion. i ran
down the stairs again. the car was above me when i walked out of the
building.

it was raining hard again. i walked into it with the heavy drops
slapping my face. when one of them touched my tongue i knew that my
mouth was open and the ache at the side of my jaws told me it was open
wide and strained back, mimicking the rictus of death carved upon the
face of harry jones.

[27]

"give me the money."

the motor of the gray plymouth throbbed under her voice and the rain
pounded above it. the violet light at the top of bullock's green-tinged
tower was far above us, serene and withdrawn from the dark, dripping
city. her black-gloved hand reached out and i put the bills in it. she
bent over to count them under the dim light of the dash. a bag clicked
open, clicked shut. she let a spent breath die on her lips. she leaned
towards me.

"i'm leaving, copper. i'm on my w
 
 ___________________________
 
that's what you have to sell. sure you knew her?"

"if you ever see her, you won't make a mistake the second time. good-by,
copper, and wish me luck. i got a raw deal."

"like hell you did," i said, and walked away across the street to my own
car.

the gray plymouth moved forward, gathered speed, and darted around the
corner on to sunset place. the sound of its motor died, and with it
blonde agnes wiped herself off the slate for good, so far as i was
concerned. three men dead, geiger, brody and harry jones, and the woman
went riding off in the rain with my two hundred in her bag and not a
mark on her. i kicked my starter and drove on downtown to eat. i ate a
good dinner. forty miles in the rain is a hike, and i hoped to make it a
round trip.

i drove north across the river, on into pasadena, through pasadena and
almost at once i was in orange groves. the tumbling rain was solid white
spray in the headlights. the windshield wiper could hardly keep the
glass clear enough to see through. but not eve
 
 ___________________________
 
d a weighted flap, directly
under my right leg as i sat in the car, there was a hidden compartment.
there were two guns in it. one belonged to eddie mars' boy lanny and one
belonged to me. i took lanny's. it would have had more practice than
mine. i stuck it nose down in an inside pocket and started up the side
road.

the garage was a hundred yards from the highway. it showed the highway a
blank side wall. i played the flash on it quickly. "art huck--auto
repairs and painting." i chuckled, then harry jones' face rose up in
front of me, and i stopped chuckling. the garage doors were shut, but
there was an edge of light under them and a thread of light where the
halves met. i went on past. the frame house was there, light in two
front windows, shades down. it was set well back from the road, behind a
thin clump of trees. a car stood on the gravel drive in front. it was
dark, indistinct, but it would be a brown coupe and it would belong to
mr. canino. it squatted there peacefully in front of the nar
 
 ___________________________
 
 out in it, cursing.

the brown man looked at the big car. "just a panel job, to start with,"
he said casually, his purring voice still softer from the drink. "but
the guy had dough and his driver needed a few bucks. you know the
racket."

i said: "there's only one that's older." my lips felt dry. i didn't want
to talk. i lit a cigarette. i wanted my tires fixed. the minutes passed
on tiptoe. the brown man and i were two strangers chance-met, looking at
each other across a little dead man named harry jones. only the brown
man didn't know that yet.

feet crunched outside and the door was pushed open. the light hit
pencils of rain and made silver wires of them. art trundled two muddy
flats in sullenly, kicked the door shut, let one of the flats fall over
on its side. he looked at me savagely.

"you sure pick spots for a jack to stand on," he snarled.

the brown man laughed and took a rolled cylinder of nickels out of his
pocket and tossed it up and down on the palm of his hand.

"don't crab so much
 
 ___________________________
 
eside her, touching her knees. she came to her feet with a
sudden lurch. our eyes were only inches apart.

"hello, silver-wig," i said softly.

she stepped back, around the chair, and swept a package of cigarettes up
off the table. she jabbed one loose and pushed it roughly into my mouth.
her hand was shaking. she snapped a small green leather lighter and held
it to the cigarette. i drew in the smoke, staring into her lake-blue
eyes. while she was still close to me i said:

"a little bird named harry jones led me to you. a little bird that used
to hop in and out of cocktail bars picking up horse bets for crumbs.
picking up information too. this little bird picked up an idea about
canino. one way and another he and his friends found out where you were.
he came to me to sell the information because he knew--how he knew is a
long story--that i was working for general sternwood. i got his
information, but canino got the little bird. he's a dead little bird
now, with his feathers ruffled and his neck 
 
 ___________________________
 
have done it if he had. i just figured maybe he knows
something about it, and maybe sooner or later something will sneak out
into the open. hiding his wife out at realito was childish, but it's the
kind of childishness a smart monkey thinks is smart. i had him in here
last night, after the d.a. got through with him. he admitted the whole
thing. he said he knew canino as a reliable protection guy and that's
what he had him for. he didn't know anything about his hobbies or want
to. he didn't know harry jones. he didn't know joe brody. he did know
geiger, of course, but claims he didn't know about his racket. i guess
you heard all that."

"yes."

"you played it smart down there at realito, brother. not trying to cover
up. we keep a file on unidentified bullets nowadays. someday you might
use that gun again. then you'd be over a barrel."

"i played it smart," i said, and leered at him.

he knocked his pipe out and stared down at it broodingly. "what happened
to the girl?" he asked, not looking up.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
e
sheriff's office who looked and talked more like a professor of
economics than a cop. i was telling the story and they were listening
quietly and silver-wig sat in a shadow with her hands folded in her lap,
looking at nobody. there was a lot of telephoning. there were two men
from the homicide bureau who looked at me as if i was some kind of
strange beast escaped from a traveling circus. i was driving again,
with one of them beside me, to the fulwider building. we were there
in the room where harry jones was still in the chair behind the desk,
the twisted stiffness of his dead face and the sour-sweet smell in the
room. there was a medical examiner, very young and husky, with red
bristles on his neck. there was a fingerprint man fussing around and
i was telling him not to forget the latch of the transom. (he found
canino's thumb print on it, the only print the brown man had left to
back up my story.)

i was back again at wilde's house, signing a typewritten statement his
secretary had run off in