 had been killed about an hour later,
and that captain cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a
cigarette. the suicide of taylor made page one of section ii. there was
a photo of the sedan on the deck of the power lighter, with the license
plate blacked out, and something covered with a cloth lying on the deck
beside the running board. owen taylor had been despondent and in poor
health. his family lived in dubuque, and his body would be shipped
there. there would be no inquest.

[20]

captain gregory of the missing persons bureau laid my card down on his
wide flat desk and arranged it so that its edges exactly paralleled the
edges of the desk. he studied it with his head on one side, grunted,
swung around in his swivel chair and looked out of his window at the
barred top floor of the hall of justice half a block away. he was a
burly man with tired eyes and the slow deliberate movements of a night
watchman. his voice was toneless, flat and uninterested.

"private dick, eh?" he said, not look
 
 ___________________________
 
ing at me at all, but looking out
of his window. smoke wisped from the blackened bowl of a briar that hung
on his eye tooth. "what can i do for you?"

"i'm working for general guy sternwood, 3765 alta brea crescent, west
hollywood."

captain gregory blew a little smoke from the corner of his mouth without
removing the pipe. "on what?"

"not exactly on what you're working on, but i'm interested. i thought
you could help me."

"help you on what?"

"general sternwood's a rich man," i said. "he's an old friend of the
d.a.'s father. if he wants to hire a full-time boy to run errands for
him, that's no reflection on the police. it's just a luxury he is able
to afford himself."

"what makes you think i'm doing anything for him?"

i didn't answer 
 
 ___________________________
 
t. he swung around slowly and heavily in his swivel
chair and put his large feet flat on the bare linoleum that covered his
floor. his office had the musty smell of years of routine. he stared at
me bleakly.

"i don't want to waste your time, captain," i said and pushed my chair
back--about four inches.

he didn't move. he kept on staring at me out of his washed-out tired
eyes. "you know the d.a.?"

"i've met him. i worked for him once. i know bernie ohls, his chief
investigator, pretty well."

captain gregory reached for a phone and mumbled into it: "get me ohls at
the d.a.'s office."

he sat holding the phone down on its cradle. moments passed. smoke
drifted from his pipe. his eyes were heavy and motionless like his hand.
the bell tinkled and he reached for my card with his left hand. "ohls?
... al gregory at headquarters. a guy named philip marlowe is in my
office. his card says he's a private investigator. he wants information
from me.... yeah? what does he look like? ... okey, thanks."

he dropp
 
 ___________________________
 
a rather
mysterious blackmail angle. i want to make sure regan isn't involved.
knowing where he is or isn't might help."

"brother, i'd like to help you, but i don't know where he is. he pulled
down the curtain and that's that."

"pretty hard to do against your organization, isn't it, captain?"

"yeah--but it can be done--for a while." he touched a bell button on the
side of his desk. a middle-aged woman put her head in at a side door.
"get me the file on terence regan, abba."

the door closed. captain gregory and i looked at each other in some more
heavy silence. the door opened again and the woman put a tabbed green
file on his desk. captain gregory nodded her out, put a pair of heavy
horn-rimmed glasses on his veined nose and turned the papers in the file
over slowly. i rolled a cigarette around in my fingers.

"he blew on the 16th of september," he said. "the only thing important
about that is it was the chauffeur's day off and nobody saw regan take
his car out. it was late afternoon, though. we 
 
 ___________________________
 
 than merry and more reserved than brash.
not the face of a tough guy and not the face of a man who could be
pushed around much by anybody. straight dark brows with strong bone
under them. a forehead wide rather than high, a mat of dark clustering
hair, a thin short nose, a wide mouth. a chin that had strong lines but
was small for the mouth. a face that looked a little taut, the face of a
man who would move fast and play for keeps. i passed the print back. i
would know that face, if i saw it.

captain gregory knocked his pipe out and refilled it and tamped the
tobacco down with his thumb. he lit it, blew smoke and began to talk
again.

"well, there could be people who would know he was sweet on eddie mars'
frau. besides eddie himself. for a wonder he knew it. but he don't seem
to give a damn. we check him pretty thoroughly around that time. of
course eddie wouldn't have knocked him off out of jealousy. the set-up
would point to him too obvious."

"it depends how smart he is," i said. "he might try t
 
 ___________________________
 
he double bluff."

captain gregory shook his head. "if he's smart enough to get by in his
racket, he's too smart for that. i get your idea. he pulls the dumb play
because he thinks we wouldn't expect him to pull the dumb play. from a
police angle that's wrong. because he'd have us in his hair so much it
would interfere with his business. you might think a dumb play would be
smart. i might think so. the rank and file wouldn't. they'd make his
life miserable. i've ruled it out. if i'm wrong, you can prove it on me
and i'll eat my 
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a vague blonde who was
more or less married to a racketeer named eddie mars. he had gone
suddenly without good-bys and there might be any number of reasons for
that. the general had been too proud, or, at the first interview he gave
me, too careful, to tell me the missing persons bureau had the matter in
hand. the missing persons people were dead on their feet on it and
evidently didn't think it worth bothering over. regan had done what he
had done and that was his business. i agreed with captain gregory that
eddie mars would have been very unlikely to involve himself in a double
murder just because another man had gone to town with the blonde he was
not even living with. it might have annoyed him, but business is
business, and you have to hold your teeth clamped around hollywood to
keep from chewing on stray blondes. if there had been a lot of money
involved, that would be different. but fifteen grand wouldn't be a lot
of money to eddie mars. he was no two-bit chiseler like brody.

geiger was 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll me yourself? i've seen agnes."

"i promised her," he said simply. he buttoned his overcoat, cocked his
hat jauntily, nodded again and strolled to the door. he went out. his
steps died along the hall.

i went down to the bank and deposited my five-hundred-dollar check and
drew out two hundred in currency. i went upstairs again and sat in my
chair thinking about harry jones and his story. it seemed a little too
pat. it had the austere simplicity of fiction rather than the tangled
woof of fact. captain gregory ought to have been able to find mona mars,
if she was that close to his beat. supposing, that is, he had tried.

i thought about it most of the day. nobody came into the office. nobody
called me on the phone. it kept on raining.

[26]

at seven the rain had stopped for a breathing spell, but the gutters
were still flooded. on santa monica the water was level with the
sidewalk and a thin film of it washed over the top of the curbing. a
traffic cop in shining black rubber from boots to cap sloshe
 
 ___________________________
 
es, blue curtains at the
windows, a wallpaper with bright green pine trees on it. the furniture
looked as if it had come from one of those places that advertise on bus
benches. gay, but full of resistance.

she said softly: "eddie didn't do anything to him. i haven't seen rusty
in months. eddie's not that sort of man."

"you left his bed and board. you were living alone. people at the place
where you lived identified regan's photo."

"that's a lie," she said coldly.

i tried to remember whether captain gregory had said that or not. my
head was too fuzzy. i couldn't be sure.

"and it's none of your business," she added.

"the whole thing is my business. i'm hired to find out."

"eddie's not that sort of man."

"oh, you like racketeers."

"as long as people will gamble there will be places for them to gamble."

"that's just protective thinking. once outside the law you're all the
way outside. you think he's just a gambler. i think he's a pornographer,
a blackmailer, a hot car broker, a killer by remote
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"i--i was afraid you'd come back."

i said: "we had a date. i told you it was all arranged." i began to
laugh like a loon.

then she was bending down over him, touching him. and after a little
while she stood up with a small key on a thin chain.

she said bitterly: "did you have to kill him?"

i stopped laughing as suddenly as i had started. she went behind me and
unlocked the handcuffs.

"yes," she said softly. "i suppose you did."

[30]

this was another day and the sun was shining again.

captain gregory of the missing persons bureau looked heavily out of his
office window at the barred upper floor of the hall of justice, white
and clean after the rain. then he turned ponderously in his swivel chair
and tamped his pipe with a heat-scarred thumb and stared at me bleakly.

"so you got yourself in another jam."

"oh, you heard about it."

"brother, i sit here all day on my fanny and i don't look as if i had a
brain in my head. but you'd be surprised what i hear. shooting this
canino was all right 
 
 ___________________________
 
ou'd be over a barrel."

"i played it smart," i said, and leered at him.

he knocked his pipe out and stared down at it broodingly. "what happened
to the girl?" he asked, not looking up.

"i don't know. they didn't hold her. we made statements, three sets of
them, for wilde, for the sheriff's office, for the homicide bureau. they
turned her loose. i haven't seen her since. i don't expect to."

"kind of a nice girl, they say. wouldn't be one to play dirty games."

"kind of a nice girl," i said.

captain gregory sighed and rumpled his mousy hair. "there's just one
more thing," he said almost gently. "you look like a nice guy, but you
play too rough. if you really want to help the sternwood family--leave
'em alone."

"i think you're right, captain."

"how do you feel?"

"swell," i said. "i was standing on various pieces of carpet most of the
night, being balled out. before that i got soaked to the skin and beaten
up. i'm in perfect condition."

"what the hell did you expect, brother?"

"nothing else." i
 
 ___________________________
 
l. it's an
advantage i wouldn't want to take away from you, not a hair of it. it's
not much, considering what you have to put up with. you can say anything
you like to me and i wouldn't think of getting angry. i'd like to offer
you your money back. it may mean nothing to you. it might mean something
to me."

"what does it mean to you?"

"it means i have refused payment for an unsatisfactory job. that's all."

"do you do many unsatisfactory jobs?"

"a few. everyone does."

"why did you go to see captain gregory?"

i leaned back and hung an arm over the back of the chair. i studied his
face. it told me nothing. i didn't know the answer to his question--no
satisfactory answer.

i said: "i was convinced you put those geiger notes up to me chiefly as
a test, and that you were a little afraid regan might somehow be
involved in an attempt to blackmail you. i didn't know anything about
regan then. it wasn't until i talked to captain gregory that i realized
regan wasn't that sort of guy in all probability."


 
 ___________________________
 
e was something in mr.
wilde's manner the night we had the conference over at his house about
geiger and so on. we were alone for a minute and he asked me whether you
had told me you were looking for regan. i said you had told me you
wished you knew where he was and that he was all right. wilde pulled his
lip in and looked funny. i knew just as plainly as though he had said it
that by 'looking for regan' he meant using the machinery of the law to
look for him. even then i tried to go up against captain gregory in such
a way that i wouldn't tell him anything he didn't know already."

"and you allowed captain gregory to think i had employed you to find
rusty?"

"yeah. i guess i did--when i was sure he had the case."

he closed his eyes. they twitched a little. he spoke with them closed.
"and do you consider that ethical?"

"yes," i said. "i do."

the eyes opened again. the piercing blackness of them was startling
coming suddenly out of that dead face. "perhaps i don't understand," he
said.

"maybe you 
 
 ___________________________
 
when you hire a
boy in my line of work it isn't like hiring a window-washer and showing
him eight windows and saying: 'wash those and you're through.' _you_
don't know what i have to go through or over or under to do your job
for you. i do it my way. i do my best to protect you and i may break
a few rules, but i break them in your favor. the client comes first,
unless he's crooked. even then all i do is hand the job back to him
and keep my mouth shut. after all you didn't tell me _not_ to go to
captain gregory."

"that would have been rather difficult," he said with a faint smile.

"well, what have i done wrong? your man norris seemed to think when
geiger was eliminated the case was over. i don't see it that way.
geiger's method of approach puzzled me and still does. i'm not sherlock
holmes or philo vance. i don't expect to go over ground the police have
covered and pick up a broken pen point and build a case from it. if you
think there is anybody in the detective business making a living doing
that 