slid off the
desk and stepped up close to her and gave her a smack on the side of the
face.

just like last night," i said. "we're a scream together. reilly and
sternwood, two stooges in search of a comedian."

the giggles stopped dead, but she didn't mind the slap any more than
last night. probably all her boy friends got around to slapping her
sooner or later. i could understand how they might. i sat down on the
end of the black desk again.

"your name isn't reilly," she said seriously. "it's philip marlowe.
you're a private detective. viv told me. she showed me your card." she
smoothed the cheek i had slapped. she smiled at me, as if i was nice to
be with.

"well, you do remember," i said. "and you came back to look for that
photo and you couldn't get into the house. didn't you?"

her chin ducked down and up. she worked the smile. i was having the eye
put on me. i was being brought into camp. i was going to yell "yippee!"
in a minute and ask her to go to yuma.

"the photo's gone," i said. "i look
 
 ___________________________
 
d, deadpan, with
close-set eyes and no color in them.

eddie mars said: "see if this bird is wearing any iron."

the blond flicked a short-barreled gun out and stood pointing it at me.
the pug sidled over flatfooted and felt my pockets with care. i turned
around for him like a bored beauty modeling an evening gown.

"no gun," he said in a burry voice.

"find out who he is."

the pug slipped a hand into my breast pocket and drew out my wallet. he
flipped it open and studied the contents. "name's philip marlowe, eddie.
lives at the hobart arms on franklin. private license, deputy's badge
and all. a shamus." he slipped the wallet back in my pocket, slapped my
face lightly and turned away.

"beat it," eddie mars said.

the two gunmen went out again and closed the door. there was the sound
of them getting back into the car. they started its motor and kept it
idling once more.

"all right. talk," eddie mars snapped. the peaks of his eyebrows made
sharp angles against his forehead.

"i'm not ready to give 
 
 ___________________________
 
t of his washed-out tired
eyes. "you know the d.a.?"

"i've met him. i worked for him once. i know bernie ohls, his chief
investigator, pretty well."

captain gregory reached for a phone and mumbled into it: "get me ohls at
the d.a.'s office."

he sat holding the phone down on its cradle. moments passed. smoke
drifted from his pipe. his eyes were heavy and motionless like his hand.
the bell tinkled and he reached for my card with his left hand. "ohls?
... al gregory at headquarters. a guy named philip marlowe is in my
office. his card says he's a private investigator. he wants information
from me.... yeah? what does he look like? ... okey, thanks."

he dropped the phone and took his pipe out of his mouth and tamped the
tobacco with the brass cap of a heavy pencil. he did it carefully and
solemnly, as if that was as important as anything he would have to do
that day. he leaned back and stared at me some more.

"what you want?"

"an idea of what progress you're making, if any."

he thought that over. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 palms of my hands. i tried it once more.

"it isn't on account of the neighbors," i told her. "they don't really
care a lot. there's a lot of stray broads in any apartment house and one
more won't make the building rock. it's a question of professional
pride. you know--professional pride. i'm working for your father. he's a
sick man, very frail, very helpless. he sort of trusts me not to pull
any stunts. won't you please get dressed, carmen?"

"your name isn't doghouse reilly," she said. "it's philip marlowe. you
can't fool me."

i looked down at the chessboard. the move with the knight was wrong. i
put it back where i had moved it from. knights had no meaning in this
game. it wasn't a game for knights.

i looked at her again. she lay still now, her face pale against the
pillow, her eyes large and dark and empty as rain barrels in a drought.
one of her small five-fingered thumbless hands picked at the cover
restlessly. there was a vague glimmer of doubt starting to get born in
her somewhere. she di
 
 ___________________________
 
s on the seventh
floor of the building right opposite you. if you have anything that's
worrying you beyond endurance, drop up and chew it over. i'll only be
oiling my machine gun."

i left him blinking and walked away. twenty minutes later i was airing
the scrubwoman's soir√©e d'amour out of my office and opening up a thick
rough envelope addressed in a fine old-fashioned pointed handwriting.
the envelope contained a brief formal note and a large mauve check for
five hundred dollars, payable to philip marlowe and signed, guy de
brisay sternwood, by vincent norris. that made it a nice morning. i was
making out a bank slip when the buzzer told me somebody had entered my
two by four reception room. it was the little man from the plymouth.

"fine," i said. "come in and shed your coat."

he slid past me carefully as i held the door, as carefully as though he
feared i might plant a kick in his minute buttocks. we sat down and
faced each other across the desk. he was a very small man, not more than
five fe