d panels, and over
the fireplace a marble mantel with cupids at the corners. above the
mantel there was a large oil portrait, and above the portrait two
bullet-torn or moth-eaten cavalry pennants crossed in a glass frame. the
portrait was a stiffly posed job of an officer in full regimentals of
about the time of the mexican war. the officer had a neat black
imperial, black mustachios, hot hard coal-black eyes, and the general
look of a man it would pay to get along with. i thought this might be
general sternwood's grandfather. it could hardly be the general himself,
even though i had heard he was pretty far gone in years to have a couple
of daughters still in the dangerous twenties.

i was still staring at the hot black eyes when a door opened far back
under the stairs. it wasn't the butler coming back. it was a girl.

she was twenty or so, small and delicately put together, but she looked
durable. she wore pale blue slacks and they looked well on her. she
walked as if she were floating. her hair was a
 
 ___________________________
 
g down a
succession of terraces with flowerbeds and trimmed trees to the high
iron fence with gilt spears that hemmed in the estate. a winding
driveway dropped down between retaining walls to the open iron gates.
beyond the fence the hill sloped for several miles. on this lower level
faint and far off i could just barely see some of the old wooden
derricks of the oilfield from which the sternwoods had made their money.
most of the field was public park now, cleaned up and donated to the
city by general sternwood. but a little of it was still producing in
groups of wells pumping five or six barrels a day. the sternwoods,
having moved up the hill, could no longer smell the stale sump water or
the oil, but they could still look out of their front windows and see
what had made them rich. if they wanted to. i didn't suppose they would
want to.

i walked down a brick path from terrace to terrace, followed along
inside the fence and so out of the gates to where i had left my car
under a pepper tree on the str
 
 ___________________________
 
as lined with italian cypresses trimmed short and chunky,
something the shape of the oil jars in ali baba and the forty thieves.
behind the third jar a loud-pattered sleeve edge moved.

i leaned against a pepper tree in the parkway and waited. the thunder in
the foothills was rumbling again. the glare of lightning was reflected
on piled-up black clouds off to the south. a few tentative raindrops
splashed down on the sidewalk and made spots as large as nickels. the
air was as still as the air in general sternwood's orchid house.

the sleeve behind the tree showed again, then a big nose and one eye and
some sandy hair without a hat on it. the eye stared at me. it
disappeared. its mate reappeared like a woodpecker on the other side of
the tree. five minutes went by. it got him. his type are half nerves. i
heard a match strike and then whistling started. then a dim shadow
slipped along the grass to the next tree. then he was out on the walk
coming straight towards me, swinging the cane and whistling. a sou
 
 ___________________________
 
ed dressing table, beside a
handkerchief, some loose money, a man's brushes, a keyholder. a man's
clothes were in the closet and a man's slippers under the flounced edge
of the bed cover. mr. geiger's room. i took the keyholder back to the
living room and went through the desk. there was a locked steel box in
the deep drawer. i used one of the keys on it. there was nothing in it
but a blue leather book with an index and a lot of writing in code, in
the same slanting printing that had written to general sternwood. i put
the notebook in my pocket, wiped the steel box where i had touched it,
locked the desk up, pocketed the keys, turned the gas logs off in the
fireplace, wrapped myself in my coat and tried to rouse miss sternwood.
it couldn't be done. i crammed her vagabond hat on her head and swathed
her in her coat and carried her out to her car. i went back and put all
the lights out and shut the front door, dug her keys out of her bag and
started the packard. we went off down the hill without lights. 
 
 ___________________________
 
sed a naked girl with long jade earrings
while i ran after them and tried to take a photograph with an empty
camera.

[9]

the next morning was bright, clear and sunny. i woke up with a
motorman's glove in my mouth, drank two cups of coffee and went through
the morning papers. i didn't find any reference to mr. arthur gwynn
geiger in either of them. i was shaking the wrinkles out of my damp suit
when the phone rang. it was bernie ohls, the d.a.'s chief investigator,
who had given me the lead to general sternwood.

"well, how's the boy?" he began. he sounded like a man who had slept
well and didn't owe too much money.

"i've got a hangover," i said.

"tsk, tsk." he laughed absently and then his voice became a shade too
casual, a cagey cop voice. "seen general sternwood yet?"

"uh-huh."

"done anything for him?"

"too much rain," i answered, if that was an answer.

"they seem to be a family things happen to. a big buick belonging to one
of them is washing about in the surf off lido fish pier."

i held th
 
 ___________________________
 
aced kid was telling me
the truck couldn't be far away when i looked through the arched entrance
of the garage and saw it back in the dimness with its rear doors open
again.

we went around to the front of the apartment house and i got out. there
was nobody in the lobby, no switchboard. a wooden desk was pushed back
against the wall beside a panel of gilt mailboxes. i looked the names
over. a man named joseph brody had apartment 405. a man named joe brody
had received five thousand dollars from general sternwood to stop
playing with carmen and find some other little girl to play with. it
could be the same joe brody. i felt like giving odds on it.

i went around an elbow of wall to the foot of tiled stairs and the shaft
of the automatic elevator. the top of the elevator was level with the
floor. there was a door beside the shaft lettered "garage." i opened it
and went down narrow steps to the basement. the automatic elevator was
propped open and the man in new overalls was grunting hard as he stacked
he
 
 ___________________________
 
 suspected. what do you think, ohls?"

ohls said: "we'll find out--but that doesn't help cronjager's troubles.
what's eating him is all this happened last night and he's only just
been rung in on it."

cronjager said sourly: "i think i can find some way to deal with that
angle too." he looked at me sharply and immediately looked away again.

wilde waved his cigar and said: "let's see the exhibits, marlowe." i
emptied my pockets and put the catch on his desk: the three notes and
geiger's card to general sternwood, cam1en's photos, and the blue
notebook with the code list of names and addresses. i had already given
geiger's keys to ohls.

wilde looked at what i gave him, puffing gently at his cigar. ohls lit
one of his own toy cigars and blew smoke peacefully at the ceiling.
cronjager leaned on the desk and looked at what i had given wilde.

wilde tapped the three notes signed by carmen and said: "i guess these
were just a come-on. if general sternwood paid them, it would be through
fear of something wor
 
 ___________________________
 
 at ohls. ohls said calmly: "i want to turn a prisoner over
to you. let's go."

he stood up. cronjager looked at him fiercely and stalked out of the
room. ohls went after him. the door closed again. wilde tapped on his
desk and stared at me with his clear blue eyes.

"you ought to understand how any copper would feel about a cover-up like
this," he said. "you'll have to make statements of all of it--at least
for the files. i think it may be possible to keep the two killings
separate and to keep general sternwood's name out of both of them. do
you know why i'm not tearing your ear off?"

"no. i expected to get both ears torn off."

"what are you getting for it all?"

"twenty-five dollars a day and expenses."

"that would make fifty dollars and a little gasoline so far."

"about that."

he put his head on one side and rubbed the back of his left little
finger along the lower edge of his chin.

"and for that amount of money you're willing to get yourself in dutch
with half the law enforcement of this coun
 
 ___________________________
 
nterested.

"private dick, eh?" he said, not looking at me at all, but looking out
of his window. smoke wisped from the blackened bowl of a briar that hung
on his eye tooth. "what can i do for you?"

"i'm working for general guy sternwood, 3765 alta brea crescent, west
hollywood."

captain gregory blew a little smoke from the corner of his mouth without
removing the pipe. "on what?"

"not exactly on what you're working on, but i'm interested. i thought
you could help me."

"help you on what?"

"general sternwood's a rich man," i said. "he's an old friend of the
d.a.'s father. if he wants to hire a full-time boy to run errands for
him, that's no reflection on the police. it's just a luxury he is able
to afford himself."

"what makes you think i'm doing anything for him?"

i didn't answer that. he swung around slowly and heavily in his swivel
chair and put his large feet flat on the bare linoleum that covered his
floor. his office had the musty smell of years of routine. he stared at
me bleakly.

"i don'
 
 ___________________________
 
"what did the girl do before she married eddie mars?"

"torcher."

"can't you get any old professional photos?"

"no. eddie must of had some, but he won't loosen up. he wants her let
alone. i can't make him. he's got friends in town, or he wouldn't be
what he is." he grunted. "any of this do you any good?"

i said: "you'll never find either of them. the pacific ocean is too
close."

"what i said about my chair cushion still goes. we'll find him. it may
take time. it could take a year or two."

"general sternwood may not live that long," i said.

"we've done all we could, brother. if he wants to put out a reward and
spend some money, we might get results. the city don't give me the kind
of money it takes." his large eyes peered at me and his scratchy
eyebrows moved. "you serious about thinking eddie put them both down?"

i laughed. "no. i was just kidding. i think what you think, captain.
that regan ran away with a woman who meant more to him than a rich wife
he didn't get along with. besides, she isn't
 
 ___________________________
 
 blowing in at the windows and the soot from the oil burners
of the hotel next door was down-drafted into the room and rolling across
the top of the desk like tumbleweed drifting across a vacant lot. i was
thinking about going out to lunch and that life was pretty flat and that
it would probably be just as flat if i took a drink and that taking a
drink all alone at that time of day wouldn't be any fun anyway. i was
thinking this when norris called up. in his carefully polite manner he
said that general sternwood was not feeling very well and that certain
items in the newspaper had been read to him and he assumed that my
investigation was now completed.

"yes, as regards geiger," i said. "i didn't shoot him, you know."

"the general didn't suppose you did, mr. marlowe."

"does the general know anything about those photographs mrs. regan was
worrying about?"

"no, sir. decidedly not."

"did you know what the general gave me?"

"yes, sir. three notes and a card, i believe."

"right. i'1l return them. as t
 
 ___________________________
 
the cigarette. i drew in the smoke, staring into her lake-blue
eyes. while she was still close to me i said:

"a little bird named harry jones led me to you. a little bird that used
to hop in and out of cocktail bars picking up horse bets for crumbs.
picking up information too. this little bird picked up an idea about
canino. one way and another he and his friends found out where you were.
he came to me to sell the information because he knew--how he knew is a
long story--that i was working for general sternwood. i got his
information, but canino got the little bird. he's a dead little bird
now, with his feathers ruffled and his neck limp and a pearl of blood on
his beak. canino killed him. but eddie mars wouldn't do that, would he,
silver-wig? he never killed anybody. he just hires it done."

"get out," she said harshly. "get out of here quick."

her hand clutched in midair on the green lighter. the fingers strained.
the knuckles were as white as snow.

"but canino doesn't know i know that," i said. "
 
 ___________________________
 
nger than
he really was. i was the one who felt the weight of the years.

we went up the tiled staircase and turned the opposite way from vivian's
room. with each step the house seemed to grow larger and more silent. we
reached a massive old door that looked as if it had come out of a
church. norris opened it softly and looked in. then he stood aside and i
went in past him across what seemed to be about a quarter of a mile of
carpet to a huge canopied bed like the one henry the eighth died in.

general sternwood was propped up on pillows. his bloodless hands were
clasped on top of the sheet. they looked gray against it. his black eyes
were still full of light and the rest of his face still looked like the
face of a corpse.

"sit down, mr. marlowe." his voice sounded weary and a little stiff.

i pulled a chair close to him and sat down. all the windows were shut
tight. the room was sunless at that hour. awnings cut off what glare
there might be from the sky. the air had the faint sweetish smell of old
a