ching me, over and
over again, drawing one lip slowly across the other with a funereal
absorption, like an undertaker dry-washing his hands.

"tell me about yourself, mr. marlowe. i suppose i have a right to ask?"

"sure, but there's very little to tell. i'm thirty-three years old, went
to college once and can still speak english if there's any demand for
it. there isn't much in my trade. i worked for mr. wilde, the district
attorney, as an investigator once. his chief investigator, a man named
bernie ohls, called me and told me you wanted to see me. i'm unmarried
because i don't like policemen's wives."

"and a little bit of a cynic," the old man smiled. "you didn't like
working for wilde?"

"i was fired. for insubordination. i test very high on insubordination,
general."

"i always did myself, sir. i'm glad to hear it. what do you know about
my family?"

"i'm told you are a widower and have two young daughters, both pretty
and both wild. one of them has been married three times, the last time
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and frustration and dreamed about a man in
a bloody chinese coat who chased a naked girl with long jade earrings
while i ran after them and tried to take a photograph with an empty
camera.

[9]

the next morning was bright, clear and sunny. i woke up with a
motorman's glove in my mouth, drank two cups of coffee and went through
the morning papers. i didn't find any reference to mr. arthur gwynn
geiger in either of them. i was shaking the wrinkles out of my damp suit
when the phone rang. it was bernie ohls, the d.a.'s chief investigator,
who had given me the lead to general sternwood.

"well, how's the boy?" he began. he sounded like a man who had slept
well and didn't owe too much money.

"i've got a hangover," i said.

"tsk, tsk." he laughed absently and then his voice became a shade too
casual, a cagey cop voice. "seen general sternwood yet?"

"uh-huh."

"done anything for him?"

"too much rain," i answered, if that was an answer.

"they seem to be a family things happen to. a big buick belong
 
 ___________________________
 
ead to say coolly: "you're as cold-blooded a beast as i ever
met, marlowe. or can i call you phil?"

"sure."

"you can call me vivian."

"thanks, mrs. regan."

"oh, go to hell, marlowe." she went on out and didn't look back.

i let the door shut and stood with my hand on it, staring at the hand.
my face felt a little hot. i went back to the desk and put the whiskey
away and rinsed out the two pony glasses and put them away.

i took my hat off the phone and called the d.a.'s office and asked for
bernie ohls.

he was back in his cubbyhole. "well, i let the old man alone," he said.
"the butler said he or one of the girls would tell him. this owen taylor
lived over the garage and i went through his stuff. parents at dubuque,
iowa. i wired the chief of police there to find out what they want done.
the sternwood family will pay for it."

"suicide?" i asked.

"no can tell. he didn't leave any notes. he had no leave to take the
car. everybody was home last night but mrs. regan. she was down at las
olinda
 
 ___________________________
 
i went out and shut the door again and went back to the
living room. the boy hadn't moved. i stood still, listening for sirens.
it was all a question of how soon agnes talked and what she said. if she
talked about geiger, the police would be there any minute. but she might
not talk for hours. she might even have got away.

i looked down at the boy. "want to sit up, son?"

he closed his eye and pretended to go to sleep. i went over to the desk
and scooped up the mulberry-colored phone and dialed bernie ohls'
office. he had left to go home at six o'clock. i dialed the number of
his home. he was there.

"this is marlowe," i said. "did your boys find a revolver on owen taylor
this morning?"

i could hear him clearing his throat and then i could hear him trying to
keep the surprise out of his voice. "that would come under the heading
of police business," he said.

"if they did, it had three empty shells in it."

"how the hell did you know that?" ohls asked quietly.

"come over to 7244 laverne terrace,
 
 ___________________________
 
d opened the windows up and muffled the phone bell with a piece of
paper and went to bed. i had a bellyful of the sternwood family.

i read all three of the morning papers over my eggs and bacon the next
morning. their accounts of the affair came as close to the truth as
newspaper stories usually come--as close as mars is to saturn. none of
the three connected owen taylor, driver of the lido pier suicide car,
with the laurel canyon exotic bungalow slaying. none of them mentioned
the sternwoods, bernie ohls or me. owen taylor was "chauffeur to a
wealthy family." captain cronjager of the hollywood division got all the
credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed
to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service
maintained by one geiger in the back of the bookstore on hollywood
boulevard. brody had shot geiger and carol lundgren had shot brody in
revenge. police were holding carol lundgren in custody. he had
confessed. he had a bad record--probably in high s
 
 ___________________________
 
nk i'm doing anything for him?"

i didn't answer that. he swung around slowly and heavily in his swivel
chair and put his large feet flat on the bare linoleum that covered his
floor. his office had the musty smell of years of routine. he stared at
me bleakly.

"i don't want to waste your time, captain," i said and pushed my chair
back--about four inches.

he didn't move. he kept on staring at me out of his washed-out tired
eyes. "you know the d.a.?"

"i've met him. i worked for him once. i know bernie ohls, his chief
investigator, pretty well."

captain gregory reached for a phone and mumbled into it: "get me ohls at
the d.a.'s office."

he sat holding the phone down on its cradle. moments passed. smoke
drifted from his pipe. his eyes were heavy and motionless like his hand.
the bell tinkled and he reached for my card with his left hand. "ohls?
... al gregory at headquarters. a guy named philip marlowe is in my
office. his card says he's a private investigator. he wants information
from me.... ye
 
 ___________________________
 
, in which i seemed to do the
same thing over and over again, go to the same places, meet the same
people, say the same words to them, over and over again, and yet each
time it seemed real, like something actually happening, and for the
first time. i was driving hard along the highway through the rain, with
silver-wig in the corner of the car, saying nothing, so that by the time
we reached los angeles we seemed to be utter strangers again. i was
getting out at an all night drugstore and phoning bernie ohls that i had
killed a man at realito and was on my way over to wilde's house with
eddie mars' wife, who had seen me do it. i was pushing the car along the
silent, rain-polished streets to lafayette park and up under the
porte-cochere of wilde's big frame house and the porch light was already
on, ohls having telephoned ahead that i was coming. i was in wilde's
study and he was behind his desk in a flowered dressing-gown and a tight
hard face and a dappled cigar moved in his fingers and up to the b