"take this
envelope and examine it. and help yourself to the brandy."

i took the envelope off his knees and sat down with it again. i wiped
off the palms of my hands and turned it around. it was addressed to
general guy sternwood, 3765 alta brea crescent, west hollywood,
california. the address was in ink, in the slanted printing engineers
use. the envelope was slit. i opened it up and took out a brown card and
three slips of stiff paper. the card was of thin brown linen, printed in
gold: "mr. arthur gwynn geiger." no address. very small in the lower
left-hand corner: "rare books and de luxe editions." i turned the card
over. more of the slanted printing on the back. "dear sir: in spite of
the legal uncollectibility of the enclosed, which frankly represent
gambling debts, i assume you might wish them honored. respectfully, a.
g. geiger."

i looked at the slips of stiffish white paper. they were promissory
notes filled out in ink, dated on several dates early in the month
before, september. "on demand i 
 
 ___________________________
 
promise to pay to arthur gwynn geiger or
order the sum of one thousand dollars ($1000.00) without interest. value
received. carmen sternwood."

the written part was in a sprawling moronic handwriting with a lot of
fat curlicues and circles for dots. i mixed myself another drink and
sipped it and put the exhibit aside.

"your conclusions?" the general asked.

"i haven't any yet. who is this arthur gwynn geiger?"

"i haven't the faintest idea."

"what does carmen say?"

"i haven't asked her. i don't intend to. if i did, she would suck her
thumb and look coy."

i said: "i met her in the hall. she did that to me. then she tried to
sit in my lap."

nothing changed in his expression. his clasped hands rested peacefully
on the edge of the rug, and the heat, which made me feel like a new
england boiled dinner, didn't seem to make him even warm.

"do i have to be polite?" i asked. "or can i just be natural?"
 
 ___________________________
 
 swinging the cane and whistling. a sour
whistle with jitters in it. i stared vaguely up at the dark sky. he
passed within ten feet of me and didn't give me a glance. he was safe
now. he had ditched it.

i watched him out of sight and went up the central walk of the la baba
and parted the branches of the third cypress. i drew out a wrapped book
and put it under my arm and went away from there. nobody yelled at me.

[5]

back on the boulevard i went into a drugstore phone booth and looked up
mr. arthur gwynn geiger's residence. he lived on laverne terrace, a
hillside street off laurel canyon boulevard. i dropped my nickel and
dialed his number just for fun. nobody answered. i turned to the
classified section and noted a couple of bookstores within blocks of
where i was.

the first i came to was on the north side, a large lower floor devoted
to stationery and office supplies, a mass of books on the mezzanine. it
didn't look the right place. i crossed the street and walked two blocks
east to the other one. 
 
 ___________________________
 
e for brains. his somber
eyes probed at me impersonally. his long thin brown lingers held the
edge of the door. he said nothing.

i said: "geiger?"

nothing in the man's face changed that i could see. he brought a
cigarette from behind the door and tucked it between his lips and drew a
little smoke from it. the smoke came towards me in a lazy, contemptuous
puff and behind it words in a cool, unhurried voice that had no more
inflection than the voice of a faro dealer.

"you said what?"

"geiger. arthur gwynn geiger. the guy that has the books."

the man considered that without any haste. he glanced down at the tip of
his cigarette. his other hand, the one that had been holding the door,
dropped out of sight. his shoulder had a look as though his hidden hand
might be making motions.

"don't know anybody by that name," he said. "does he live around here?"

i smiled. he didn't like the smile. his eyes got nasty. i said: "you're
joe brody?"

the brown face hardened. "so what? got a grift, brother--or just amu