t, and it does you credit."

mr. george, looking hard at him, bit his lip and shook his head.

"now, george," said the other, keeping close to him, "you're a
sensible man and a well-conducted man; that's what you are, beyond a
doubt. and mind you, i don't talk to you as a common character,
because you have served your country and you know that when duty
calls we must obey. consequently you're very far from wanting to give
trouble. if i required assistance, you'd assist me; that's what you'd
do. phil squod, don't you go a-sidling round the gallery like
that"--the dirty little man was shuffling about with his shoulder
against the wall, and his eyes on the intruder, in a manner that
looked threatening--"because i know you and won't have it."

"phil!" said mr. george.

"yes, guv'ner."

"be quiet."

the little man, with a low growl, stood still.

"ladies and gentlemen," said mr. bucket, "you'll excuse anything that
may appear to be disagreeable in this, for my name's inspector bucket
of the detective
 
 ___________________________
 
an!"

the affair being brought to this head, mr. george, after a little
consideration, proposed to go in first to his comrade (as he called
him), taking miss flite with him. mr. bucket agreeing, they went away
to the further end of the gallery, leaving us sitting and standing by
a table covered with guns. mr. bucket took this opportunity of
entering into a little light conversation, asking me if i were afraid
of fire-arms, as most young ladies were; asking richard if he were a
good shot; asking phil squod which he considered the best of those
rifles and what it might be worth first-hand, telling him in return
that it was a pity he ever gave way to his temper, for he was
naturally so amiable that he might have been a young woman, and
making himself generally agreeable.

after a time he followed us to the further end of the gallery, and
richard and i were going quietly away when mr. george came after us.
he said that if we had no objection to see his comrade, he would take
a visit from us very kin
 
 ___________________________
 
ks at it at arm's length, brings
it close to him, holds it in his right hand, holds it in his left
hand, reads it with his head on this side, with his head on that
side, contracts his eyebrows, elevates them, still cannot satisfy
himself. he smooths it out upon the table with his heavy palm, and
thoughtfully walking up and down the gallery, makes a halt before it
every now and then to come upon it with a fresh eye. even that won't
do. "is it," mr. george still muses, "blank cartridge or ball?"

phil squod, with the aid of a brush and paint-pot, is employed in the
distance whitening the targets, softly whistling in quick-march time
and in drum-and-fife manner that he must and will go back again to
the girl he left behind him.

"phil!" the trooper beckons as he calls him.

phil approaches in his usual way, sidling off at first as if he were
going anywhere else and then bearing down upon his commander like a
bayonet-charge. certain splashes of white show in high relief upon
his dirty face, and he s
 
 ___________________________
 
rest in this poor
creature. you do, don't you, phil?"

"certainly and surely i do, guv'ner," is phil's reply.

"now i was thinking, sir," says mr. george in a martial sort of
confidence, as if he were giving his opinion in a council of war at a
drum-head, "that if this man was to take him to a bath and was to lay
out a few shillings in getting him one or two coarse articles--"

"mr. george, my considerate friend," returns allan, taking out his
purse, "it is the very favour i would have asked."

phil squod and jo are sent out immediately on this work of
improvement. miss flite, quite enraptured by her success, makes the
best of her way to court, having great fears that otherwise her
friend the chancellor may be uneasy about her or may give the
judgment she has so long expected in her absence, and observing
"which you know, my dear physician, and general, after so many years,
would be too absurdly unfortunate!" allan takes the opportunity of
going out to procure some restorative medicines, and obt
 
 ___________________________
 
fbler nor i was afore."

the meek little stationer, with a broken and unfinished cough, slips
down his fourth half-crown--he has never been so close to a case
requiring so many--and is fain to depart. and jo and he, upon this
little earth, shall meet no more. no more.

for the cart so hard to draw is near its journey's end and drags over
stony ground. all round the clock it labours up the broken steps,
shattered and worn. not many times can the sun rise and behold it
still upon its weary road.

phil squod, with his smoky gunpowder visage, at once acts as nurse
and works as armourer at his little table in a corner, often looking
round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an encouraging
elevation of his one eyebrow, "hold up, my boy! hold up!" there, too,
is mr. jarndyce many a time, and allan woodcourt almost always, both
thinking, much, how strangely fate has entangled this rough outcast
in the web of very different lives. there, too, the trooper is a
frequent visitor, filling the do