ehind a desk in his dark shop with a heavy
flat ruler, snipping and slicing at sheepskin in company with his two
'prentices, he is emphatically a retiring and unassuming man. from
beneath his feet, at such times, as from a shrill ghost unquiet in
its grave, there frequently arise complainings and lamentations in
the voice already mentioned; and haply, on some occasions when these
reach a sharper pitch than usual, mr. snagsby mentions to the
'prentices, "i think my little woman is a-giving it to guster!"

this proper name, so used by mr. snagsby, has before now sharpened
the wit of the cook's courtiers to remark that it ought to be the
name of mrs. snagsby, seeing that she might with great force and
expression be termed a guster, in compliment to her stormy character.
it is, however, the possession, and the only possession except fifty
shillings per annum and a very small box indifferently filled with
clothing, of a lean young woman from a workhouse (by some supposed to
have been christened a
 
 ___________________________
 
ugusta) who, although she was farmed or
contracted for during her growing time by an amiable benefactor of
his species resident at tooting, and cannot fail to have been
developed under the most favourable circumstances, "has fits," which
the parish can't account for.

guster, really aged three or four and twenty, but looking a round ten
years older, goes cheap with this unaccountable drawback of fits, and
is so apprehensive of being returned on the hands of her patron saint
that except when she is found with her head in the pail, or the sink,
or the copper, or the dinner, or anything else that happens to be
near her at the time of her seizure, she is always at work. she is a
satisfaction to the parents and guardians of the 'prentices, who feel
that there is little 
 
 ___________________________
 
danger of her inspiring tender emotions in the
breast of youth; she is a satisfaction to mrs. snagsby, who can
always find fault with her; she is a satisfaction to mr. snagsby, who
thinks it a charity to keep her. the law-stationer's establishment
is, in guster's eyes, a temple of plenty and splendour. she believes
the little drawing-room upstairs, always kept, as one may say, with
its hair in papers and its pinafore on, to be the most elegant
apartment in christendom. the view it commands of cook's court at one
end (not to mention a squint into cursitor street) and of coavinses'
the sheriff's officer's backyard at the other she regards as a
prospect of unequalled beauty. the portraits it displays in oil--and
plenty of it too--of mr. snagsby looking a
 
 ___________________________
 
t mrs. snagsby and of mrs.
snagsby looking at mr. snagsby are in her eyes as achievements of
raphael or titian. guster has some recompenses for her many
privations.

mr. snagsby refers everything not in the practical mysteries of the
business to mrs. snagsby. she manages the money, reproaches the
tax-gatherers, appoints the times and places of devotion on sundays,
licenses mr. snagsby's entertainments, and acknowledges no
responsibility as to what she thinks fit to provide for dinner,
insomuch that she is the high standard of comparison among the
neighbouring wives a long way down chancery lane on both sides, a
 
 ___________________________
 
-stationer's, deeds engrossed and copied, law-writing executed in
all its branches, &c., &c., &c.

it is somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon, and a
balmy fragrance of warm tea hovers in cook's court. it hovers about
snagsby's door. the hours are early there: dinner at half-past one
and supper at half-past nine. mr. snagsby was about to descend into
the subterranean regions to take tea when he looked out of his door
just now and saw the crow who was out late.

"master at home?"

guster is minding the shop, for the 'prentices take tea in the
kitchen with mr. and mrs. snagsby; consequently, the robe-maker's two
daughters, combing their curls at the two glasses in the two
second-floor windows of the opposite house, are not driving the two
'prentices to distraction as they fondly suppose, but are merely
awakening the unprofitable admiration of guster, whose hair won't
grow, and never would, and it is confidently thought, never will.

"master at home?" says mr. tulkinghorn.

maste
 
 ___________________________
 
r is at home, and guster will fetch him. guster disappears, glad
to get out of the shop, which she regards with mingled dread and
veneration as a storehouse of awful implements of the great torture
of the law--a place not to be entered after the gas is turned off.

mr. snagsby appears, greasy, warm, herbaceous, and chewing. bolts a
bit of bread and butter. says, "bless my soul, sir! mr. tulkinghorn!"

"i want half a word with you, snagsby."

"certainly, sir! dear me, sir, why didn't you send your young man
round for me? pray walk into the ba
 
 ___________________________
 
rophetically seen lying here by the
mother at whose breast he nestled, a little child, with eyes upraised
to her loving face, and soft hand scarcely knowing how to close upon
the neck to which it crept, what an impossibility the vision would
have seemed! oh, if in brighter days the now-extinguished fire within
him ever burned for one woman who held him in her heart, where is
she, while these ashes are above the ground!

it is anything but a night of rest at mr. snagsby's, in cook's court,
where guster murders sleep by going, as mr. snagsby himself
allows--not to put too fine a point upon it--out of one fit into
twenty. the occasion of this seizure is that guster has a tender
heart and a susceptible something that possibly might have been
imagination, but for tooting and her patron saint. be it what it may,
now, it was so direfully impressed at tea-time by mr. snagsby's
account of the inquiry at which he had assisted that at supper-time
she projected herself into the kitchen, preceded by a fl
 
 ___________________________
 
ong
vacation. mr. snagsby, law-stationer of cook's court, cursitor
street, is sensible of the influence not only in his mind as a
sympathetic and contemplative man, but also in his business as a
law-stationer aforesaid. he has more leisure for musing in staple inn
and in the rolls yard during the long vacation than at other seasons,
and he says to the two 'prentices, what a thing it is in such hot
weather to think that you live in an island with the sea a-rolling
and a-bowling right round you.

guster is busy in the little drawing-room on this present afternoon
in the long vacation, when mr. and mrs. snagsby have it in
contemplation to receive company. the expected guests are rather
select than numerous, being mr. and mrs. chadband and no more. from
mr. chadband's being much given to describe himself, both verbally
and in writing, as a vessel, he is occasionally mistaken by strangers
for a gentleman connected with navigation, but he is, as he expresses
it, "in the ministry." mr. chadband is 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry remarkable to say on the greatest of subjects as to render his
volunteering, on his own account, at all incumbent on his conscience;
but he has his followers, and mrs. snagsby is of the number. mrs.
snagsby has but recently taken a passage upward by the vessel,
chadband; and her attention was attracted to that bark a 1, when she
was something flushed by the hot weather.

"my little woman," says mr. snagsby to the sparrows in staple inn,
"likes to have her religion rather sharp, you see!"

so guster, much impressed by regarding herself for the time as the
handmaid of chadband, whom she knows to be endowed with the gift of
holding forth for four hours at a stretch, prepares the little
drawing-room for tea. all the furniture is shaken and dusted, the
portraits of mr. and mrs. snagsby are touched up with a wet cloth,
the best tea-service is set forth, and there is excellent provision
made of dainty new bread, crusty twists, cool fresh butter, thin
slices of ham, tongue, and german sausage, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 but he says,
with his cough of mildness, "no, my dear, no. i merely named the
time."

"what's time," says mrs. snagsby, "to eternity?"

"very true, my dear," says mr. snagsby. "only when a person lays in
victuals for tea, a person does it with a view--perhaps--more to
time. and when a time is named for having tea, it's better to come up
to it."

"to come up to it!" mrs. snagsby repeats with severity. "up to it! as
if mr. chadband was a fighter!"

"not at all, my dear," says mr. snagsby.

here, guster, who had been looking out of the bedroom window, comes
rustling and scratching down the little staircase like a popular
ghost, and falling flushed into the drawing-room, announces that mr.
and mrs. chadband have appeared in the court. the bell at the inner
door in the passage immediately thereafter tinkling, she is
admonished by mrs. snagsby, on pain of instant reconsignment to her
patron saint, not to omit the ceremony of announcement. much
discomposed in her nerves (which were previously in t
 
 ___________________________
 
f, on the young maidens, and on
the young men! my friends, why do i wish for peace? what is peace? is
it war? no. is it strife? no. is it lovely, and gentle, and
beautiful, and pleasant, and serene, and joyful? oh, yes! therefore,
my friends, i wish for peace, upon you and upon yours."

in consequence of mrs. snagsby looking deeply edified, mr. snagsby
thinks it expedient on the whole to say amen, which is well received.

"now, my friends," proceeds mr. chadband, "since i am upon this
theme--"

guster presents herself. mrs. snagsby, in a spectral bass voice and
without removing her eyes from chadband, says with dreadful
distinctness, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says chadband, "since i am upon this theme, and in
my lowly path improving it--"

guster is heard unaccountably to murmur "one thousing seven hundred
and eighty-two." the spectral voice repeats more solemnly, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says mr. chadband, "we will inquire in a spirit of
love--"

still guster reiterates "one thou
 
 ___________________________
 
sing seven hundred and eighty-two."

mr. chadband, pausing with the resignation of a man accustomed to be
persecuted and languidly folding up his chin into his fat smile,
says, "let us hear the maiden! speak, maiden!"

"one thousing seven hundred and eighty-two, if you please, sir. which
he wish to know what the shilling ware for," says guster, breathless.

"for?" returns mrs. chadband. "for his fare!"

guster replied that "he insistes on one and eightpence or on
summonsizzing the party." mrs. snagsby and mrs. chadband are
proceeding to grow shrill in indignation when mr. chadband quiets the
tumult by lifting up his hand.

"my friends," says he, "i remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday. it
is right that i should be chastened in some penalty. i ought not to
murmur. rachael, pay the eightpence!"

while mrs. snagsby, drawing her breath, looks hard at mr. snagsby, as
who should say, "you hear this apostl
 
 ___________________________
 
appears to be a process so inseparable from the constitution of this
exemplary vessel that in beginning to eat and drink, he may be
described as always becoming a kind of considerable oil mills or
other large factory for the production of that article on a wholesale
scale. on the present evening of the long vacation, in cook's court,
cursitor street, he does such a powerful stroke of business that the
warehouse appears to be quite full when the works cease.

at this period of the entertainment, guster, who has never recovered
her first failure, but has neglected no possible or impossible means
of bringing the establishment and herself into contempt--among which
may be briefly enumerated her unexpectedly performing clashing
military music on mr. chadband's head with plates, and afterwards
crowning that gentleman with muffins--at which period of the
entertainment, guster whispers mr. snagsby that he is wanted.

"and being wanted in the--not to put too fine a point upon it--in the
shop," says m
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
recipe remains for you--the profound philosophical prescription--the
be-all and the end-all of your strange existence upon earth. move on!
you are by no means to move off, jo, for the great lights can't at
all agree about that. move on!

mr. snagsby says nothing to this effect, says nothing at all indeed,
but coughs his forlornest cough, expressive of no thoroughfare in any
direction. by this time mr. and mrs. chadband and mrs. snagsby,
hearing the altercation, have appeared upon the stairs. guster having
never left the end of the passage, the whole household are assembled.

"the simple question is, sir," says the constable, "whether you know
this boy. he says you do."

mrs. snagsby, from her elevation, instantly cries out, "no he don't!"

"my lit-tle woman!" says mr. snagsby, looking up the staircase. "my
love, permit me! pray have a moment's patience, my dear. i do know
something of this lad, and in what i know of him, i can't say that
there's any harm; perhaps on the contrary, constabl
 
 ___________________________
 
young friend now. will you come to-morrow, my
young friend, and inquire of this good lady where i am to be found to
deliver a discourse unto you, and will you come like the thirsty
swallow upon the next day, and upon the day after that, and upon the
day after that, and upon many pleasant days, to hear discourses?"
(this with a cow-like lightness.)

jo, whose immediate object seems to be to get away on any terms,
gives a shuffling nod. mr. guppy then throws him a penny, and mrs.
snagsby calls to guster to see him safely out of the house. but
before he goes downstairs, mr. snagsby loads him with some broken
meats from the table, which he carries away, hugging in his arms.

so, mr. chadband--of whom the persecutors say that it is no wonder he
should go on for any length of time uttering such abominable
nonsense, but that the wonder rather is that he should ever leave
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life
until he invests a little capital of supper in the oil-trade. j
 
 ___________________________
 
i estimate in a man
in your way of business."

mr. snagsby makes a suitable response and goes homeward so confused
by the events of the evening that he is doubtful of his being awake
and out--doubtful of the reality of the streets through which he
goes--doubtful of the reality of the moon that shines above him. he
is presently reassured on these subjects by the unchallengeable
reality of mrs. snagsby, sitting up with her head in a perfect
beehive of curl-papers and night-cap, who has dispatched guster to
the police-station with official intelligence of her husband's being
made away with, and who within the last two hours has passed through
every stage of swooning with the greatest decorum. but as the little
woman feelingly says, many thanks she gets for it!




chapter xxiii

esther's narrative


we came home from mr. boythorn's after six pleasant weeks. we were
often in the park and in the woods and seldom passed the lodge where
we had taken shelter without looking in to speak to the keeper
 
 ___________________________
 
pting her to nocturnal examinations of mr.
snagsby's pockets; to secret perusals of mr. snagsby's letters; to
private researches in the day book and ledger, till, cash-box, and
iron safe; to watchings at windows, listenings behind doors, and a
general putting of this and that together by the wrong end.

mrs. snagsby is so perpetually on the alert that the house becomes
ghostly with creaking boards and rustling garments. the 'prentices
think somebody may have been murdered there in bygone times. guster
holds certain loose atoms of an idea (picked up at tooting, where
they were found floating among the orphans) that there is buried
money underneath the cellar, guarded by an old man with a white
beard, who cannot get out for seven thousand years because he said
the lord's prayer backwards.

"who was nimrod?" mrs. snagsby repeatedly inquires of herself. "who
was that lady--that creature? and who is that boy?" now, nimrod being
as dead as the mighty hunter whose name mrs. snagsby has
appropriated
 
 ___________________________
 
t mrs. snagsby will have her eye upon him and upon some
one else; and oh, you may walk a long while in your secret ways (says
mrs. snagsby with haughtiness and scorn), but you can't blind me!

mrs. snagsby sounds no timbrel in anybody's ears, but holds her
purpose quietly, and keeps her counsel. to-morrow comes, the savoury
preparations for the oil trade come, the evening comes. comes mr.
snagsby in his black coat; come the chadbands; come (when the gorging
vessel is replete) the 'prentices and guster, to be edified; comes at
last, with his slouching head, and his shuffle backward, and his
shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, and his shuffle to the
left, and his bit of fur cap in his muddy hand, which he picks as if
it were some mangy bird he had caught and was plucking before eating
raw, jo, the very, very tough subject mr. chadband is to improve.

mrs. snagsby screws a watchful glance on jo as he is brought into the
little drawing-room by guster. he looks at mr. snagsby the momen
 
 ___________________________
 
this stool."

jo, apparently possessed by an impression that the reverend gentleman
wants to cut his hair, shields his head with both arms and is got
into the required position with great difficulty and every possible
manifestation of reluctance.

when he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, mr. chadband, retiring
behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, "my friends!"
this is the signal for a general settlement of the audience. the
'prentices giggle internally and nudge each other. guster falls into
a staring and vacant state, compounded of a stunned admiration of mr.
chadband and pity for the friendless outcast whose condition touches
her nearly. mrs. snagsby silently lays trains of gunpowder. mrs.
chadband composes herself grimly by the fire and warms her knees,
finding that sensation favourable to the reception of eloquence.

it happens that mr. chadband has a pulpit habit of fixing some member
of his congregation with his eye and fatly arguing his points with
that particular
 
 ___________________________
 
nced state of low spirits and
false position when mr. chadband accidentally finishes him.

"my friends," he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some
time--and it smokes to such an extent that he seems to light his
pocket-handkerchief at it, which smokes, too, after every dab--"to
pursue the subject we are endeavouring with our lowly gifts to
improve, let us in a spirit of love inquire what is that terewth to
which i have alluded. for, my young friends," suddenly addressing the
'prentices and guster, to their consternation, "if i am told by the
doctor that calomel or castor-oil is good for me, i may naturally ask
what is calomel, and what is castor-oil. i may wish to be informed of
that before i dose myself with either or with both. now, my young
friends, what is this terewth then? firstly (in a spirit of love),
what is the common sort of terewth--the working clothes--the
every-day wear, my young friends? is it deception?"

"ah--h!" from mrs. snagsby.

"is it suppression?"

a shiver in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 eloquent enough without
their modest aid--it might hold thee awake, and thou might learn from
it yet!

jo never heard of any such book. its compilers and the reverend
chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the reverend
chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear him
talk for five minutes. "it an't no good my waiting here no longer,"
thinks jo. "mr. snagsby an't a-going to say nothink to me to-night."
and downstairs he shuffles.

but downstairs is the charitable guster, holding by the handrail of
the kitchen stairs and warding off a fit, as yet doubtfully, the same
having been induced by mrs. snagsby's screaming. she has her own
supper of bread and cheese to hand to jo, with whom she ventures to
interchange a word or so for the first time.

"here's something to eat, poor boy," says guster.

"thank'ee, mum," says jo.

"are you hungry?"

"jist!" says jo.

"what's gone of your father and your mother, eh?"

jo stops in the middle of a bite and looks petrified. fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r this orphan
charge of the christian saint whose shrine was at tooting has patted
him on the shoulder, and it is the first time in his life that any
decent hand has been so laid upon him.

"i never know'd nothink about 'em," says jo.

"no more didn't i of mine," cries guster. she is repressing symptoms
favourable to the fit when she seems to take alarm at something and
vanishes down the stairs.

"jo," whispers the law-stationer softly as the boy lingers on the
step.

"here i am, mr. snagsby!"

"i didn't know you were gone--there's another half-crown, jo. it was
quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other night when
we were out together. it would breed trouble. you can't be too quiet,
jo."

"i am fly, master!"

and so, good night.

a ghostly shade, fr
 
 ___________________________
 
to fill up all the blanks.

"why, what do you mean?" asks mr. tulkinghorn.

"just so, sir," returns mr. snagsby; "i was sure you would feel it
yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of my feelings when
coupled with the known excitableness of my little woman. you see, the
foreign female--which you mentioned her name just now, with quite a
native sound i am sure--caught up the word snagsby that night, being
uncommon quick, and made inquiry, and got the direction and come at
dinner-time. now guster, our young woman, is timid and has fits, and
she, taking fright at the foreigner's looks--which are fierce--and at
a grinding manner that she has of speaking--which is calculated to
alarm a weak mind--gave way to it, instead of bearing up against it,
and tumbled down the kitchen stairs out of one into another, such
fits as i do sometimes think are never gone into, or come out of, in
any house but ours. consequently there was by good fortune ample
occupation for my little woman, and only me to a
 
 ___________________________
 
she is so twisted and clenched up that she is difficult to
handle without hurting."

we all three went into the house together; although it was cold and
raw, it smelt close too from being up all night. in the passage
behind the door stood a scared, sorrowful-looking little man in a
grey coat who seemed to have a naturally polite manner and spoke
meekly.

"downstairs, if you please, mr. bucket," said he. "the lady will
excuse the front kitchen; we use it as our workaday sitting-room. the
back is guster's bedroom, and in it she's a-carrying on, poor thing,
to a frightful extent!"

we went downstairs, followed by mr. snagsby, as i soon found the
little man to be. in the front kitchen, sitting by the fire, was mrs.
snagsby, with very red eyes and a very severe expression of face.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, entering behind us, "to
wave--not to put too fine a point upon it, my dear--hostilities for
one single moment in the course of this prolonged night, here is
inspector bucket, mr. wo
 
 ___________________________
 
court, and a lady call upon us in cook's court, cursitor street,
at the present hour. i don't know. i have not the least idea. if i
was to be informed, i should despair of understanding, and i'd rather
not be told."

he appeared so miserable, sitting with his head upon his hand, and i
appeared so unwelcome, that i was going to offer an apology when mr.
bucket took the matter on himself.

"now, mr. snagsby," said he, "the best thing you can do is to go
along with mr. woodcourt to look after your guster--"

"my guster, mr. bucket!" cried mr. snagsby. "go on, sir, go on. i
shall be charged with that next."

"and to hold the candle," pursued mr. bucket without correcting
himself, "or hold her, or make yourself useful in any way you're
asked. which there's not a man alive more ready to do, for you're a
man of urbanity and suavity, you know, and you've got the sort of
heart that can feel for another. mr. woodcourt, would you be so good
as see to her, and if you can get that letter from her, to let
 
 ___________________________
 
 she didn't say any harm
to me, and i didn't say any harm to her, indeed, mrs. snagsby!"

it was necessary for her mistress to comfort her--which she did, i
must say, with a good deal of contrition--before she could be got
beyond this.

"she could not find those places," said i.

"no!" cried the girl, shaking her head. "no! couldn't find them. and
she was so faint, and lame, and miserable, oh so wretched, that if
you had seen her, mr. snagsby, you'd have given her half a crown, i
know!"

"well, guster, my girl," said he, at first not knowing what to say.
"i hope i should."

"and yet she was so well spoken," said the girl, looking at me with
wide open eyes, "that it made a person's heart bleed. and so she said
to me, did i know the way to the burying ground? and i asked her
which burying ground. and she said, the poor burying ground. and so i
told her i had been a poor child myself, and it was according to
parishes. but she said she meant a poor burying ground not very far
from here, where th