ause"--cautious man mr. tulkinghorn, taking no
more responsibility than necessary--"and further, as i see you are
going to paris, i have brought them in my pocket."

(sir leicester was going to paris too, by the by, but the delight of
the fashionable intelligence was in his lady.)

mr. tulkinghorn takes out his papers, asks permission to place them
on a golden talisman of a table at my lady's elbow, puts on his
spectacles, and begins to read by the light of a shaded lamp.

"'in chancery. between john jarndyce--'"

my lady interrupts, requesting him to miss as many of the formal
horrors as he can.

mr. tulkinghorn glances over his spectacles and begins again lower
down. my lady carelessly and scornfully abstracts her attention. sir
leicester in a great chair looks at the file and appears to have a
stately liking for the legal repetitions and prolixities as ranging
among the national bulwarks. it happens that the fire is hot where my
lady sits and that the hand-screen is more beautiful than useful,
be
 
 ___________________________
 


"is that mr. jarndyce's waggon?" said richard, calling to our
post-boy.

"yes, sir," he replied. "going to london."

we opened the notes. each was a counterpart of the other and
contained these words in a solid, plain hand.


   i look forward, my dear, to our meeting easily and
   without constraint on either side. i therefore have to
   propose that we meet as old friends and take the past for
   granted. it will be a relief to you possibly, and to me
   certainly, and so my love to you.

   john jarndyce


i had perhaps less reason to be surprised than either of my
companions, having never yet enjoyed an opportunity of thanking one
who had been my benefactor and sole earthly dependence through so
many years. i had not considered how i could thank him, my gratitude
lying too deep in my heart for that; but i now began to consider how
i could meet him without thanking him, and felt it would be very
difficult indeed.

the notes revived in richard and ada a general impression that they
both had, wit
 
 ___________________________
 
, and laying my hand on richard's sleeve
and looking in his face, told him how much i thanked him for his kind
welcome and how greatly i rejoiced to see him, the more so because of
the determination i had made in my illness, which i now conveyed to
him.

"my love," said richard, "there is no one with whom i have a greater
wish to talk than you, for i want you to understand me."

"and i want you, richard," said i, shaking my head, "to understand
some one else."

"since you refer so immediately to john jarndyce," said richard, "--i
suppose you mean him?"

"of course i do."

"then i may say at once that i am glad of it, because it is on that
subject that i am anxious to be understood. by you, mind--you, my
dear! i am not accountable to mr. jarndyce or mr. anybody."

i was pained to find him taking this tone, and he observed it.

"well, well, my dear," said richard, "we won't go into that now. i
want to appear quietly in your country-house here, with you under my
arm, and give my charming cousin a surpr
 
 ___________________________
 
ise. i suppose your loyalty
to john jarndyce will allow that?"

"my dear richard," i returned, "you know you would be heartily
welcome at his house--your home, if you will but consider it so; and
you are as heartily welcome here!"

"spoken like the best of little women!" cried richard gaily.

i asked him how he liked his profession.

"oh, i like it well enough!" said richard. "it's all right. it does
as well as anything else, for a time. i don't know that i shall care
about it when i come to be settled, but i can sell out then
and--howeve
 
 ___________________________
 
 almost have believed in the attraction on which my poor
little wandering friend had expatiated when i saw again the darkened
look of last night. terrible to think it had in it also a shade of
that unfortunate man who had died.

"my dear richard," said i, "this is a bad beginning of our
conversation."

"i knew you would tell me so, dame durden."

"and not i alone, dear richard. it was not i who cautioned you once
never to found a hope or expectation on the family curse."

"there you come back to john jarndyce!" said richard impatiently.
"well! we must approach him sooner or later, for he is the staple of
what i have to say, and it's as well at once. my dear esther, how can
you be so blind? don't you see that he is an interested party and
that it may be very well for him to wish me to know nothing of the
suit, and care nothing about it, but that it may not be quite so well
for me?"

"oh, richard," i remonstrated, "is it possible that you can ever have
seen him and heard him, that you can ever have li
 
 ___________________________
 
become lax about their interests; and people may die
off, and points may drag themselves out of memory, and many things
may smoothly happen that are convenient enough."

i was so touched with pity for richard that i could not reproach him
any more, even by a look. i remembered my guardian's gentleness
towards his errors and with what perfect freedom from resentment he
had spoken of them.

"esther," richard resumed, "you are not to suppose that i have come
here to make underhanded charges against john jarndyce. i have only
come to justify myself. what i say is, it was all very well and we
got on very well while i was a boy, utterly regardless of this same
suit; but as soon as i began to take an interest in it and to look
into it, then it was quite another thing. then john jarndyce
discovers that ada and i must break off and that if i don't amend
that very objectionable course, i am not fit for her. now, esther, i
don't mean to amend that very objectionable course: i will not hold
john jarndyce's favo
 
 ___________________________
 
eness kindling
in him which again presented to me that last sad reminder. "i am
young and earnest, and energy and determination have done wonders
many a time. others have only half thrown themselves into it. i
devote myself to it. i make it the object of my life."

"oh, richard, my dear, so much the worse, so much the worse!"

"no, no, no, don't you be afraid for me," he returned affectionately.
"you're a dear, good, wise, quiet, blessed girl; but you have your
prepossessions. so i come round to john jarndyce. i tell you, my good
esther, when he and i were on those terms which he found so
convenient, we were not on natural terms."

"are division and animosity your natural terms, richard?"

"no, i don't say that. i mean that all this business puts us on
unnatural terms, with which natural relations are incompatible. see
another reason for urging it on! i may find out when it's over that i
have been mistaken in john jarndyce. my head may be clearer when i am
free of it, and i may then agree with what 
 
 ___________________________
 
he case.) i also want ada to know that if i
see her seldom just now, i am looking after her interests as well as
my own--we two being in the same boat exactly--and that i hope she
will not suppose from any flying rumours she may hear that i am at
all light-headed or imprudent; on the contrary, i am always looking
forward to the termination of the suit, and always planning in that
direction. being of age now and having taken the step i have taken, i
consider myself free from any accountability to john jarndyce; but
ada being still a ward of the court, i don't yet ask her to renew our
engagement. when she is free to act for herself, i shall be myself
once more and we shall both be in very different worldly
circumstances, i believe. if you tell her all this with the advantage
of your considerate way, you will do me a very great and a very kind
service, my dear esther; and i shall knock jarndyce and jarndyce on
the head with greater vigour. of course i ask for no secrecy at bleak
house."

"richard," sai
 
 ___________________________
 
erested friend he
seemed--that he was what he has gradually turned out to be--i could
have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; i could not
have defended him too ardently. so little did i know of the world!
whereas now i do declare to you that he becomes to me the embodiment
of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is john
jarndyce; that the more i suffer, the more indignant i am with him;
that every new delay and every new disappointment is only a new
injury from john jarndyce's hand."

"no, no," says vholes. "don't say so. we ought to have patience, all
of us. besides, i never disparage, sir. i never disparage."

"mr. vholes," returns the angry client. "you know as well as i that
he would have strangled the suit if he could."

"he was not active in it," mr. vholes admits with an appearance of
reluctance. "he certainly was not active in it. but however, but
however, he might have had amiable intentions. who can read the
heart, mr. c.!"

"you can," returns richard.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
o be the dearest wish of her heart," said i.
"and, oh, my dear richard, ada's is a noble heart."

"i am sure it is. i--i wish i was dead!"

he went back to the window, and laying his arm across it, leaned his
head down on his arm. it greatly affected me to see him so, but i
hoped he might become more yielding, and i remained silent. my
experience was very limited; i was not at all prepared for his
rousing himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury.

"and this is the heart that the same john jarndyce, who is not
otherwise to be mentioned between us, stepped in to estrange from
me," said he indignantly. "and the dear girl makes me this generous
offer from under the same john jarndyce's roof, and with the same
john jarndyce's gracious consent and connivance, i dare say, as a new
means of buying me off."

"richard!" i cried out, rising hastily. "i will not hear you say such
shameful words!" i was very angry with him indeed, for the first time
in my life, but it only lasted a moment. when i saw