ture was a
mite of a boy, some five or six years old, nursing and hushing a
heavy child of eighteen months. there was no fire, though the weather
was cold; both children were wrapped in some poor shawls and tippets
as a substitute. their clothing was not so warm, however, but that
their noses looked red and pinched and their small figures shrunken
as the boy walked up and down nursing and hushing the child with its
head on his shoulder.

"who has locked you up here alone?" we naturally asked.

"charley," said the boy, standing still to gaze at us.

"is charley your brother?"

"no. she's my sister, charlotte. father called her charley."

"are there any more of you besides charley?"

"me," said the boy, "and emma," patting the limp bonnet of the child
he was nursing. "and charley."

"where is charley now?"

"out a-washing," said the boy, beginning to walk up and down again
and taking the nankeen bonnet much too near the bedstead by trying to
gaze at us at the same time.

we were looking at one 
 
 ___________________________
 
and wrinkled with
washing, and the soap-suds were yet smoking which she wiped off her
arms. but for this, she might have been a child playing at washing
and imitating a poor working-woman with a quick observation of the
truth.

she had come running from some place in the neighbourhood and had
made all the haste she could. consequently, though she was very
light, she was out of breath and could not speak at first, as she
stood panting, and wiping her arms, and looking quietly at us.

"oh, here's charley!" said the boy.

the child he was nursing stretched forth its arms and cried out to be
taken by charley. the little girl took it, in a womanly sort of
manner belonging to the apron and the bonnet, and stood looking at us
over the burden that clung to her most affectionately.

"is it possible," whispered my guardian as we put a chair for the
little creature and got her to sit down with her load, the boy
keeping close to her, holding to her apron, "that this child works
for the rest? look at this
 
 ___________________________
 
! for god's sake, look at this!"

it was a thing to look at. the three children close together, and two
of them relying solely on the third, and the third so young and yet
with an air of age and steadiness that sat so strangely on the
childish figure.

"charley, charley!" said my guardian. "how old are you?"

"over thirteen, sir," replied the child.

"oh! what a great age," said my guardian. "what a great age,
charley!"

i cannot describe the tenderness with which he spoke to her, half
playfully yet all the more compassionately and mournfully.

"and do you live alone here with these babies, charley?" said my
guardian.

"yes, sir," returned the child, looking up into his face with perfect
confidence, "since father died."

"and how do you live, charley? oh! charley," said my guardian,
turning his face away for a moment, "how do you live?"

"since father died, sir, i've gone out to work. i'm out washing
to-day.
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"god help you, charley!" said my guardian. "you're not tall enough to
reach the tub!"

"in pattens i am, sir," she said quickly. "i've got a high pair as
belonged to mother."

"and when did mother die? poor mother!"

"mother died just after emma was born," said the child, glancing at
the face upon her bosom. "then father said i was to be as good a
mother to her as i could. and so i tried. and so i worked at home and
did cleaning and nursing and washing for a long time before i began
to go out. and that's how i know h
 
 ___________________________
 
ow; don't you see, sir?"

"and do you often go out?"

"as often as i can," said charley, opening her eyes and smiling,
"because of earning sixpences and shillings!"

"and do you always lock the babies up when you go out?"

"to keep 'em safe, sir, don't you see?" said charley. "mrs. blinder
comes up now and then, and mr. gridley comes up sometimes, and
perhaps i can run in sometimes, and they can play you know, and tom
an't afraid of being locked up, are you, tom?"

"no-o!" said tom stoutly.

"when it comes on dark, the lamps are lighted down in the court, and
they show up here quite bright--almost quite bright. don't they,
tom?"

"yes, charley," said tom, "almost quite bright."

"then he's as good as gold," said the little creature--oh, in such a
motherly, womanly 
 
 ___________________________
 
way! "and when emma's tired, he puts her to bed.
and when he's tired he goes to bed himself. and when i come home and
light the candle and has a bit of supper, he sits up again and has it
with me. don't you, tom?"

"oh, yes, charley!" said tom. "that i do!" and either in this glimpse
of the great pleasure of his life or in gratitude and love for
charley, who was all in all to him, he laid his face among the scanty
folds of her frock and passed from laughing into crying.

it was the first time since our entry that a tear had been shed among
these children. the little orphan girl had spoken of their father and
their mother as if all that sorrow were subdued by the necessity of
taking courage, and by her childish importance in being able to work,
and by her bustling busy way. but now, when tom cried, although she
sat quite tranquil, looking quiet
 
 ___________________________
 
ve herself a more favourable opportunity
of recovering her breath, exhausted anew by so much talking before it
was fully restored. mr. jarndyce was turning to speak to us when his
attention was attracted by the abrupt entrance into the room of the
mr. gridley who had been mentioned and whom we had seen on our way
up.

"i don't know what you may be doing here, ladies and gentlemen," he
said, as if he resented our presence, "but you'll excuse my coming
in. i don't come in to stare about me. well, charley! well, tom!
well, little one! how is it with us all to-day?"

he bent over the group in a caressing way and clearly was regarded as
a friend by the children, though his face retained its stern
character and his manner to us was as rude as it could be. my
guardian noticed it and respected it.

"no one, surely, would come here to stare about him," he said mildly.

"may be so, sir, may be so," returned the other, taking tom upon his
knee and waving him off impatiently. "i don't want to argue with

 
 ___________________________
 
ere many and many a time. now send me out feet
foremost!'"

his countenance had, perhaps for years, become so set in its
contentious expression that it did not soften, even now when he was
quiet.

"i came to take these babies down to my room for an hour," he said,
going to them again, "and let them play about. i didn't mean to say
all this, but it don't much signify. you're not afraid of me, tom,
are you?"

"no!" said tom. "you ain't angry with me."

"you are right, my child. you're going back, charley? aye? come then,
little one!" he took the youngest child on his arm, where she was
willing enough to be carried. "i shouldn't wonder if we found a
ginger-bread soldier downstairs. let's go and look for him!"

he made his former rough salutation, which was not deficient in a
certain respect, to mr. jarndyce, and bowing slightly to us, went
downstairs to his room.

upon that, mr. skimpole began to talk, for the first time since our
arrival, in his usual gay strain. he said, well, it was really ve
 
 ___________________________
 
tues! insomuch that his heart had just now swelled and the
tears had come into his eyes when he had looked round the room and
thought, "i was the great patron of coavinses, and his little
comforts were my work!"

there was something so captivating in his light way of touching these
fantastic strings, and he was such a mirthful child by the side of
the graver childhood we had seen, that he made my guardian smile even
as he turned towards us from a little private talk with mrs. blinder.
we kissed charley, and took her downstairs with us, and stopped
outside the house to see her run away to her work. i don't know where
she was going, but we saw her run, such a little, little creature in
her womanly bonnet and apron, through a covered way at the bottom of
the court and melt into the city's strife and sound like a dewdrop in
an ocean.




chapter xvi

tom-all-alone's


my lady dedlock is restless, very restless. the astonished
fashionable intelligence hardly knows where to have her. to-day she
is 
 
 ___________________________
 
 narrow world of fact an
opening has dawned into such broader regions as lie within the ken of
mr. guppy. hence his admiration and his emulation of that shining
enchanter.

judy, with a gong-like clash and clatter, sets one of the sheet-iron
tea-trays on the table and arranges cups and saucers. the bread she
puts on in an iron basket, and the butter (and not much of it) in a
small pewter plate. grandfather smallweed looks hard after the tea as
it is served out and asks judy where the girl is.

"charley, do you mean?" says judy.

"hey?" from grandfather smallweed.

"charley, do you mean?"

this touches a spring in grandmother smallweed, who, chuckling as
usual at the trivets, cries, "over the water! charley over the water,
charley over the water, over the water to charley, charley over the
water, over the water to charley!" and becomes quite energetic about
it. grandfather looks at the cushion but has not sufficiently
recovered his late exertion.

"ha!" he says when there is silence. "if that'
 
 ___________________________
 
s her name. she eats a
deal. it would be better to allow her for her keep."

judy, with her brother's wink, shakes her head and purses up her
mouth into no without saying it.

"no?" returns the old man. "why not?"

"she'd want sixpence a day, and we can do it for less," says judy.

"sure?"

judy answers with a nod of deepest meaning and calls, as she scrapes
the butter on the loaf with every precaution against waste and cuts
it into slices, "you, charley, where are you?" timidly obedient to
the summons, a little girl in a rough apron and a large bonnet, with
her hands covered with soap and water and a scrubbing brush in one of
them, appears, and curtsys.

"what work are you about now?" says judy, making an ancient snap at
her like a very sharp old beldame.

"i'm a-cleaning the upstairs back room, miss," replies charley.

"mind you do it thoroughly, and don't loiter. shirking won't do for
me. make haste! go along!" cries judy with a stamp upon t
 
 ___________________________
 
 has in her time been
apprenticed to the art and mystery of artificial flower-making. a
close observer might perhaps detect both in her eye and her
brother's, when their venerable grandsire anticipates his being gone,
some little impatience to know when he may be going, and some
resentful opinion that it is time he went.

"now, if everybody has done," says judy, completing her preparations,
"i'll have that girl in to her tea. she would never leave off if she
took it by herself in the kitchen."

charley is accordingly introduced, and under a heavy fire of eyes,
sits down to her basin and a druidical ruin of bread and butter. in
the active superintendence of this young person, judy smallweed
appears to attain a perfectly geological age and to date from the
remotest periods. her systematic manner of flying at her and pouncing
on her, with or without pretence, whether or no, is wonderful,
evincing an accomplishment in the art of girl-driving seldom reached
by the oldest practitioners.

"now, don'
 
 ___________________________
 
t stare about you all the afternoon," cries judy, shaking
her head and stamping her foot as she happens to catch the glance
which has been previously sounding the basin of tea, "but take your
victuals and get back to your work."

"yes, miss," says charley.

"don't say yes," returns miss smallweed, "for i know what you girls
are. do it without saying it, and then i may begin to believe you."

charley swallows a great gulp of tea in token of submission and so
disperses the druidical ruins that miss smallweed charges her not to
gormandize, which "in you girls," she observes, is disgusting.
charley might find some more difficulty in meeting her views on the
general subject of girls but for a knock at the door.

"see who it is, and don't chew when you open it!" cries judy.

the object of her attentions withdrawing for the purpose, miss
smallweed takes that opportunity of jumbling the remainder 
 
 ___________________________
 
pose, when i am a day in arrear."

"my dear friend!" cries grandfather smallweed, stretching out both
hands to embrace him. "never! never, my dear friend! but my friend in
the city that i got to lend you the money--he might!"

"oh! you can't answer for him?" says mr. george, finishing the
inquiry in his lower key with the words "you lying old rascal!"

"my dear friend, he is not to be depended on. i wouldn't trust him.
he will have his bond, my dear friend."

"devil doubt him," says mr. george. charley appearing with a
tray, on which are the pipe, a small paper of tobacco, and the
brandy-and-water, he asks her, "how do you come here! you haven't got
the family face."

"i goes out to work, sir," returns charley.

the trooper (if trooper he be or have been) takes her bonnet off,
with a light touch for so strong a hand, and pats her on the head.
"you give the house almost a wholesome look. it wants a bit of youth
as much as it wants fresh air." then he dismisses her, lights his
pipe, and drinks 
 
 ___________________________
 
eature in the
world.

we got into such a chatty state that night, through ada and my
guardian drawing me out to tell them all about caddy, that i went on
prose, prose, prosing for a length of time. at last i got up to my
own room, quite red to think how i had been holding forth, and then i
heard a soft tap at my door. so i said, "come in!" and there came in
a pretty little girl, neatly dressed in mourning, who dropped a
curtsy.

"if you please, miss," said the little girl in a soft voice, "i am
charley."

"why, so you are," said i, stooping down in astonishment and giving
her a kiss. "how glad am i to see you, charley!"

"if you please, miss," pursued charley in the same soft voice, "i'm
your maid."

"charley?"

"if you please, miss, i'm a present to you, with mr. jarndyce's
love."

i sat down with my hand on charley's neck and looked at charley.

"and oh, miss," says charley, clapping her hands, with the tears
starting down her dimpled cheeks, "tom's at school, if you please,
and learning so
 
 ___________________________
 
 good! and little emma, she's with mrs. blinder, miss,
a-being took such care of! and tom, he would have been at school--and
emma, she would have been left with mrs. blinder--and me, i should
have been here--all a deal sooner, miss; only mr. jarndyce thought
that tom and emma and me had better get a little used to parting
first, we was so small. don't cry, if you please, miss!"

"i can't help it, charley."

"no, miss, nor i can't help it," says charley. "and if you please,
miss, mr. jarndyce's love, and he thinks you'll like to teach me now
and then. and if you please, tom and emma and me is to see each other
once a month. and i'm so happy and so thankful, miss," cried charley
with a heaving heart, "and i'll try to be such a good maid!"

"oh, charley dear, never forget who did all this!"

"no, miss, i never will. nor tom won't. nor yet emma. it was all you,
miss."

"i have known nothing of it. it was mr. jarndyce, charley."

"yes, miss, but i
 
 ___________________________
 
t was all done for the love of you and that you
might be my mistress. if you please, miss, i am a little present with
his love, and it was all done for the love of you. me and tom was to
be sure to remember it."

charley dried her eyes and entered on her functions, going in her
matronly little way about and about the room and folding up
everything she could lay her hands upon. presently charley came
creeping back to my side and said, "oh, don't cry, if you please,
miss."

and i said again, "i can't help it, charley."

and charley said again, "no, miss, nor i can't help it." and so,
after all, i did cry for joy indeed, and so did she.




chapter xxiv

an appeal case


as soon as richard and i had held the conversation of which i have
given an account, richard communicated the state of his mind to mr.
jarndyce. i doubt if my guardian were altogether taken by surprise
when he received t
 
 ___________________________
 
ding-dress and bonnet. he agreed to this compromise, and
if caddy had ever been happy in her life, she was happy when we sat
down to work.

she was clumsy enough with her needle, poor girl, and pricked her
fingers as much as she had been used to ink them. she could not help
reddening a little now and then, partly with the smart and partly
with vexation at being able to do no better, but she soon got over
that and began to improve rapidly. so day after day she, and my
darling, and my little maid charley, and a milliner out of the town,
and i, sat hard at work, as pleasantly as possible.

over and above this, caddy was very anxious "to learn housekeeping,"
as she said. now, mercy upon us! the idea of her learning
housekeeping of a person of my vast experience was such a joke that i
laughed, and coloured up, and fell into a comical confusion when she
proposed it. however, i said, "caddy, i am sure you are very welcome
to learn anything that you can learn of me, my dear," and i showed
her all my 
 
 ___________________________
 
books and methods and all my fidgety ways. you would have
supposed that i was showing her some wonderful inventions, by her
study of them; and if you had seen her, whenever i jingled my
housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, certainly you might have
thought that there never was a greater imposter than i with a blinder
follower than caddy jellyby.

so what with working and housekeeping, and lessons to charley, and
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with ada, the
three weeks slipped fast away. then i went home with caddy to see
what could be done there, and ada and charley remained behind to take
care of my guardian.

when i say i went home with caddy, i mean to the furnished lodging in
hatton garden. we went to newman street two or three times, where
preparations were in progress too--a good many, i observed, for
enhancing the comforts of old mr. turveydrop, and a few for putting

 
 ___________________________
 
i, kissing her in my
admiration--i couldn't help it.

well! it was only their love for me, i know very well, and it is a
long time ago. i must write it even if i rub it out again, because it
gives me so much pleasure. they said there could be no east wind
where somebody was; they said that wherever dame durden went, there
was sunshine and summer air.




chapter xxxi

nurse and patient


i had not been at home again many days when one evening i went
upstairs into my own room to take a peep over charley's shoulder and
see how she was getting on with her copy-book. writing was a trying
business to charley, who seemed to have no natural power over a pen,
but in whose hand every pen appeared to become perversely animated,
and to go wrong and crooked, and to stop, and splash, and sidle into
corners like a saddle-donkey. it was very odd to see what old letters
charley's young hand had made, they so wrinkled, and shrivelled, and
tottering, it so plump and round. yet charley was uncommonly expert
at 
 
 ___________________________
 
other things and had as nimble little fingers as i ever watched.

"well, charley," said i, looking over a copy of the letter o in which
it was represented as square, triangular, pear-shaped, and collapsed
in all kinds of ways, "we are improving. if we only get to make it
round, we shall be perfect, charley."

then i made one, and charley made one, and the pen wouldn't join
charley's neatly, but twisted it up into a knot.

"never mind, charley. we shall do it in time."

charley laid down her pen, the copy being finished, opened and shut
her cramped little hand, looked gravely at the page, half in pride
and half in doubt, and got up, and dropped me a curtsy.

"thank you, miss. if you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
the name of jenny?"

"a brickmaker's wife, charley? yes."

"she came and spoke to me when i was out a little while ago, and said
you knew her, miss. she asked me if i wasn't the young lady's little
maid--meaning you for the young lady, miss--and 
 
 ___________________________
 
i said yes, miss."

"i thought she had left this neighbourhood altogether, charley."

"so she had, miss, but she's come back again to where she used to
live--she and liz. did you know another poor person of the name of
liz, miss?"

"i think i do, charley, though not by name."

"that's what she said!" returned charley. "they have both come back,
miss, and have been tramping high and low."

"tramping high and low, have they, charley?"

"yes, miss." if charley could only have made the letters in her copy
as round as the eyes with which she looked into my face, they would
have been excellent. "and this poor person came about the house three
or four days, hoping to get a glimpse of you, miss--all she wanted,
she said--but you were away. that was when she saw me. she saw me
a-going about, miss," said charley with a short laugh of the greatest
delight and pride, "and she thought i looked like your maid!"

"did she though, really, charley?"

"yes, miss!" 
 
 ___________________________
 
said charley. "really and truly." and charley, with
another short laugh of the purest glee, made her eyes very round
again and looked as serious as became my maid. i was never tired of
seeing charley in the full enjoyment of that great dignity, standing
before me with her youthful face and figure, and her steady manner,
and her childish exultation breaking through it now and then in the
pleasantest way.

"and where did you see her, charley?" said i.

my little maid's countenance fell as she replied, "by the doctor's
shop, miss." for charley wore her black frock yet.

i asked if the brickmaker's wife were ill, but charley said no. it
was some one else. some one in her cottage who had tramped down to
saint albans and was tramping he didn't know where. a poor boy,
charley said. no father, no mother, no any one. "like as tom might
have been, miss, if emma and me had died after father," said charley,
her round eyes filling with tears.
 
 ___________________________
 


"and she was getting medicine for him, charley?"

"she said, miss," returned charley, "how that he had once done as
much for her."

my little maid's face was so eager and her quiet hands were folded so
closely in one another as she stood looking at me that i had no great
difficulty in reading her thoughts. "well, charley," said i, "it
appears to me that you and i can do no better than go round to
jenny's and see what's the matter."

the alacrity with which charley brought my bonnet and veil, and
having dressed me, quaintly pinned herself into her warm shawl and
made herself look like a little old woman, sufficiently expressed her
readiness. so charley and i, without saying anything to any one, went
out.

it was a cold, wild night, and the trees shuddered in the wind. the
rain had been thick and heavy all day, and with little intermission
for many days. none was falling just then, however. the sky had
partly cleared, but was very gloomy--even above us, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
on't like the
name on it. she might go a-berryin me." his shivering came on again,
and as he leaned against the wall, he shook the hovel.

"he has been talking off and on about such like all day, ma'am," said
jenny softly. "why, how you stare! this is my lady, jo."

"is it?" returned the boy doubtfully, and surveying me with his arm
held out above his burning eyes. "she looks to me the t'other one. it
ain't the bonnet, nor yet it ain't the gownd, but she looks to me the
t'other one."

my little charley, with her premature experience of illness and
trouble, had pulled off her bonnet and shawl and now went quietly up
to him with a chair and sat him down in it like an old sick nurse.
except that no such attendant could have shown him charley's youthful
face, which seemed to engage his confidence.

"i say!" said the boy. "you tell me. ain't the lady the t'other
lady?"

charley shook her head as she methodically drew his rags about him
and made him as warm as she could.

"oh!" the boy muttered. "t
 
 ___________________________
 
fore, since the t'other one
give me the sov'ring. mrs. snagsby, she's always a-watching, and
a-driving of me--what have i done to her?--and they're all a-watching
and a-driving of me. every one of 'em's doing of it, from the time
when i don't get up, to the time when i don't go to bed. and i'm
a-going somewheres. that's where i'm a-going. she told me, down in
tom-all-alone's, as she came from stolbuns, and so i took the
stolbuns road. it's as good as another."

he always concluded by addressing charley.

"what is to be done with him?" said i, taking the woman aside. "he
could not travel in this state even if he had a purpose and knew
where he was going!"

"i know no more, ma'am, than the dead," she replied, glancing
compassionately at him. "perhaps the dead know better, if they could
only tell us. i've kept him here all day for pity's sake, and i've
given him broth and physic, and liz has gone to try if any one will
take him in (here's my pretty in the bed--her child, but i call it
mine); but
 
 ___________________________
 
 i can't keep him long, for if my husband was to come home
and find him here, he'd be rough in putting him out and might do him
a hurt. hark! here comes liz back!"

the other woman came hurriedly in as she spoke, and the boy got up
with a half-obscured sense that he was expected to be going. when the
little child awoke, and when and how charley got at it, took it out
of bed, and began to walk about hushing it, i don't know. there she
was, doing all this in a quiet motherly manner as if she were living
in mrs. blinder's attic with tom and emma again.

the friend had been here and there, and had been played about from
hand to hand, and had come back as she went. at first it was too
early for the boy to be received into the proper refuge, and at last
it was too late. one official sent her to another, and the other sent
her back again to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 for their skill in
evading their duties instead of performing them. and now, after all,
she said, breathing quickly, for she had been running and was
frightened too, "jenny, your master's on the road home, and mine's
not far behind, and the lord help the boy, for we can do no more for
him!" they put a few halfpence together and hurried them into his
hand, and so, in an oblivious, half-thankful, half-insensible way, he
shuffled out of the house.

"give me the child, my dear," said its mother to charley, "and thank
you kindly too! jenny, woman dear, good night! young lady, if my
master don't fall out with me, i'll look down by the kiln by and by,
where the boy will be most like, and again in the morning!" she
hurried off, and presently we passed her hushing and singing to her
child at her own door and looking anxiously along the road for her
drunken husband.

i was afraid of staying then to speak to either woman, lest i should
bring her into trouble. but i said to charley that we must not leav
 
 ___________________________
 
e
the boy to die. charley, who knew what to do much better than i did,
and whose quickness equalled her presence of mind, glided on before
me, and presently we came up with jo, just short of the brick-kiln.

i think he must have begun his journey with some small bundle under
his arm and must have had it stolen or lost it. for he still carried
his wretched fragment of fur cap like a bundle, though he went
bare-headed through the rain, which now fell fast. he stopped when we
called to him and again showed a dread of me wh
 
 ___________________________
 
en i came up, standing
with his lustrous eyes fixed upon me, and even arrested in his
shivering fit.

i asked him to come with us, and we would take care that he had some
shelter for the night.

"i don't want no shelter," he said; "i can lay amongst the warm
bricks."

"but don't you know that people die there?" replied charley.

"they dies everywheres," said the boy. "they dies in their
lodgings--she knows where; i showed her--and they dies down in
tom-all-alone's in heaps. they dies more than they lives, according
to what i see." then he hoarsely whispered charley, "if she ain't the
t'other one, she ain't the forrenner. is there three of 'em then?"

charley looked at me a little frightened. i felt half frightened at
myself when the boy glared on me so.

but he turned and followed when i beckoned to him, and finding 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
window-seat and staring with an indifference that scarcely could be
called wonder at the comfort and brightness about him, i went into
the drawing-room to speak to my guardian. there i found mr. skimpole,
who had come down by the coach, as he frequently did without notice,
and never bringing any clothes with him, but always borrowing
everything he wanted.

they came out with me directly to look at the boy. the servants had
gathered in the hall too, and he shivered in the window-seat with
charley standing by him, like some wounded animal that had been found
in a ditch.

"this is a sorrowful case," said my guardian after asking him a
question or two and touching him and examining his eyes. "what do you
say, harold?"

"you had better turn him out," said mr. skimpole.

"what do you mean?" inquired my guardian, almost sternly.

"my dear jarndyce," said mr. skimpole, "you know what i am: i am a
child. be cross to me if i deserve it. but i have a constitutional
objection to this sort of thing
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle of cooling medicine in his
pocket, and it's impossible for him to do better than take it. you
can tell them to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he
sleeps and to keep it moderately cool and him moderately warm. but it
is mere impertinence in me to offer any recommendation. miss
summerson has such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for the
administration of detail that she knows all about it."

we went back into the hall and explained to jo what we proposed to
do, which charley explained to him again and which he received with
the languid unconcern i had already noticed, wearily looking on at
what was done as if it were for somebody else. the servants
compassionating his miserable state and being very anxious to help,
we soon got the loft-room ready; and some of the men about the house
carried him across the wet yard, well wrapped up. it was pleasant to
observe how kind they were to him and how there appeared to be a
general impression among them that frequently calli
 
 ___________________________
 
ng him "old chap"
was likely to revive his spirits. charley directed the operations and
went to and fro between the loft-room and the house with such little
stimulants and comforts as we thought it safe to give him. my
guardian himself saw him before he was left for the night and
reported to me when he returned to the growlery to write a letter on
the boy's behalf, which a messenger was charged to deliver at
day-light in the morning, that he seemed easier and inclined to
sleep. they had fastened his door on the outside, he said, in case of
his being del
 
 ___________________________
 
on and the summerson almshouses, and a little
annual corporation pilgrimage to st. albans. he had no doubt, he
said, that our young friend was an excellent boy in his way, but his
way was not the harold skimpole way; what harold skimpole was, harold
skimpole had found himself, to his considerable surprise, when he
first made his own acquaintance; he had accepted himself with all his
failings and had thought it sound philosophy to make the best of the
bargain; and he hoped we would do the same.

charley's last report was that the boy was quiet. i could see, from
my window, the lantern they had left him burning quietly; and i went
to bed very happy to think that he was sheltered.

there was more movement and more talking than usual a little before
daybreak, and it awoke me. as i was dressing, i looked out of my
window and asked one of our men who had been among the active
sympathizers last night whether there was anything wrong about the
house. the lantern was still burning in the loft-window.

 
 ___________________________
 
had been too wet to admit
of any tracing by footsteps. hedge and ditch, and wall, and rick and
stack, were examined by our men for a long distance round, lest the
boy should be lying in such a place insensible or dead; but nothing
was seen to indicate that he had ever been near. from the time when
he was left in the loft-room, he vanished.

the search continued for five days. i do not mean that it ceased even
then, but that my attention was then diverted into a current very
memorable to me.

as charley was at her writing again in my room in the evening, and as
i sat opposite to her at work, i felt the table tremble. looking up,
i saw my little maid shivering from head to foot.

"charley," said i, "are you so cold?"

"i think i am, miss," she replied. "i don't know what it is. i can't
hold myself still. i felt so yesterday at about this same time, miss.
don't be uneasy, i think i'm ill."

i heard ada's voice outside, and i hurried to the door of
communication between my room and our pretty sit
 
 ___________________________
 
ting-room, and locked
it. just in time, for she tapped at it while my hand was yet upon the
key.

ada called to me to let her in, but i said, "not now, my dearest. go
away. there's nothing the matter; i will come to you presently." ah!
it was a long, long time before my darling girl and i were companions
again.

charley fell ill. in twelve hours she was very ill. i moved her to my
room, and laid her in my bed, and sat down quietly to nurse her. i
told my guardian all about it, and why i felt it was necessary that i
should seclude myself, and my reason for not seeing my darling above
all. at first she came very often to the door, and called to me, and
even reproached me with sobs and tears; but i wrote her a long letter
saying that she made me anxious and unhappy and imploring her, as she
loved me and wished my
 
 ___________________________
 
servant in or about the house but was so good that they
would all most gladly have come to me at any hour of the day or night
without the least fear or unwillingness, but i thought it best to
choose one worthy woman who was never to see ada and whom i could
trust to come and go with all precaution. through her means i got out
to take the air with my guardian when there was no fear of meeting
ada, and wanted for nothing in the way of attendance, any more than
in any other respect.

and thus poor charley sickened and grew worse, and fell into heavy
danger of death, and lay severely ill for many a long round of day
and night. so patient she was, so uncomplaining, and inspired by such
a gentle fortitude that very often as i sat by charley holding her
head in my arms--repose would come to her, so, when it would come to
her in no other attitude--i silently prayed to our father in heaven
that i might not forget the lesson which this little sister taught
me.

i was very sorrowful to think that charle
 
 ___________________________
 
reater peril. when she was at the worst, and her mind
rambled again to the cares of her father's sick bed and the little
children, she still knew me so far as that she would be quiet in my
arms when she could lie quiet nowhere else, and murmur out the
wanderings of her mind less restlessly. at those times i used to
think, how should i ever tell the two remaining babies that the baby
who had learned of her faithful heart to be a mother to them in their
need was dead!

there were other times when charley knew me well and talked to me,
telling me that she sent her love to tom and emma and that she was
sure tom would grow up to be a good man. at those times charley would
speak to me of what she had read to her father as well as she could
to comfort him, of that young man carried out to be buried who was
the only son of his mother and she was a widow, of the ruler's
daughter raised up by the gracious hand upon her bed of death. and
charley told me that when her father died she had kneeled down and
 
 ___________________________
 

prayed in her first sorrow that he likewise might be raised up and
given back to his poor children, and that if she should never get
better and should die too, she thought it likely that it might come
into tom's mind to offer the same prayer for her. then would i show
tom how these people of old days had been brought back to life on
earth, only that we might know our hope to be restored to heaven!

but of all the various times there were in charley's illness, there
was not one when she lost the gentle qualities i have spoken of. and
there were many, many when i thought in the night of the last high
belief in the watching angel, and the last higher trust in god, on
the part of her poor despised father.

and charley did not die. she flutteringly and slowly turned the
dangerous point, after long lingering there, and then began to mend.
the hope that never had been given, from the first, of charley being
in outward appearance charley any more
 
 ___________________________
 
 soon began to be encouraged;
and even that prospered, and i saw her growing into her old childish
likeness again.

it was a great morning when i could tell ada all this as she stood
out in the garden; and it was a great evening when charley and i at
last took tea together in the next room. but on that same evening, i
felt that i was stricken cold.

happily for both of us, it was not until charley was safe in bed
again and placidly asleep that i began to think the contagion of her
illness was upon me. i had been able easily to hide what i felt at
tea-time, but i was past that already now, and i knew that i was
rapidly following in charley's steps.

i was well enough, however, to be up early in the morning, and to
return my darling's cheerful blessing from the garden, and to talk
with her as long as usual. but i was not free from an impression that
i had been walking about the two rooms i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the night, a little beside
myself, though knowing where i was; and i felt confused at
times--with a curious sense of fullness, as if i were becoming too
large altogether.

in the evening i was so much worse that i resolved to prepare
charley, with which view i said, "you're getting quite strong,
charley, are you not?'

"oh, quite!" said charley.

"strong enough to be told a secret, i think, charley?"

"quite strong enough for that, miss!" cried charley. but charley's
face fell in the height of her delight, for she saw the secret in my
face; and she came out of the great chair, and fell upon my bosom,
and said "oh, miss, it's my doing! it's my doing!" and a great deal
more out of the fullness of her grateful heart.

"now, charley," said i after letting her go on for a little while,
"if i am to be ill, my great trust, humanly speaking, is in you. and
unless you are as quiet and composed for me as you always were for
yourself, you can never fulfil it, charle
 
 ___________________________
 
y."

"if you'll let me cry a little longer, miss," said charley. "oh, my
dear, my dear! if you'll only let me cry a little longer. oh, my
dear!"--how affectionately and devotedly she poured this out as she
clung to my neck, i never can remember without tears--"i'll be good."

so i let charley cry a little longer, and it did us both good.

"trust in me now, if you please, miss," said charley quietly. "i am
listening to everything you say."

"it's very little at present, charley. i shall tell your doctor
to-night that i don't think i am well and that you are going to nurse
me."

for that the poor child thanked me with her whole heart. "and in the
morning, when you hear miss ada in the garden, if i should not be
quite able to go to the window-curtain as usual, do you go, charley,
and say i am asleep--that i have rather tired myself, and am asleep.
at all times keep the room as i have kept it, charley, and let no one
come."

charley promised, and i lay down, for i was ve
 
 ___________________________
 
ry heavy. i saw the
doctor that night and asked the favour of him that i wished to ask
relative to his saying nothing of my illness in the house as yet. i
have a very indistinct remembrance of that night melting into day,
and of day melting into night again; but i was just able on the first
morning to get to the window and speak to my darling.

on the second morning i heard her dear voice--oh, how dear
now!--outside; and i asked charley, with some difficulty (speech
being painful to me), to go and say i was asleep. i heard her answer
softly, "don't disturb her, charley, for the world!"

"how does my own pride look, charley?" i inquired.

"disappointed, miss," said charley, peeping through the curtain.

"but i know she is very beautiful this morning."

"she is indeed, miss," answered charley, peeping. "still looking up
at the window."

with her blue clear eyes, god bless them, always loveliest when
raised like that!

i called c
 
 ___________________________
 
harley to me and gave her her last charge.

"now, charley, when she knows i am ill, she will try to make her way
into the room. keep her out, charley, if you love me truly, to the
last! charley, if you let her in but once, only to look upon me for
one moment as i lie here, i shall die."

"i never will! i never will!" she promised me.

"i believe it, my dear charley. and now come and sit beside me for a
little while, and touch me with your hand. for i cannot see you,
charley; i am blind."




chapter xxxii

the appointed time


it is night in lincoln's inn--perplexed and troublous valley of the
shadow of the law, where suitors generally find but little day--and
fat candles are snuffed out in offices, and clerks have rattled down
the crazy wooden stairs and dispersed. the bell that rings at nine
o'clock has ceased its doleful clangour about nothing; the gates are
shut; and the night-porter, a solemn warder with a mighty power of
sleep, keeps guard in his lodge. from
 
 ___________________________
 
erstand what i mean or what painful unrest arose from this
source.

for the same reason i am almost afraid to hint at that time in my
disorder--it seemed one long night, but i believe there were both
nights and days in it--when i laboured up colossal staircases, ever
striving to reach the top, and ever turned, as i have seen a worm in
a garden path, by some obstruction, and labouring again. i knew
perfectly at intervals, and i think vaguely at most times, that i was
in my bed; and i talked with charley, and felt her touch, and knew
her very well; yet i would find myself complaining, "oh, more of
these never-ending stairs, charley--more and more--piled up to the
sky', i think!" and labouring on again.

dare i hint at that worse time when, strung together somewhere in
great black space, there was a flaming necklace, or ring, or starry
circle of some kind, of which i was one of the beads! and when my
only prayer was to be taken off from the rest and when it was such
inexplicable agony and misery
 
 ___________________________
 
i first shrunk from the light as it twinkled on me once more, and
knew with a boundless joy for which no words are rapturous enough
that i should see again.

i had heard my ada crying at the door, day and night; i had heard her
calling to me that i was cruel and did not love her; i had heard her
praying and imploring to be let in to nurse and comfort me and to
leave my bedside no more; but i had only said, when i could speak,
"never, my sweet girl, never!" and i had over and over again reminded
charley that she was to keep my darling from the room whether i lived
or died. charley had been true to me in that time of need, and with
her little hand and her great heart had kept the door fast.

but now, my sight strengthening and the glorious light coming every
day more fully and brightly on me, i could read the letters that my
dear wrote to me every morning and evening and could put them to my
lips and lay my cheek upon them with no fear of hurting her. i could
see my little maid, so tender and s
 
 ___________________________
 
s ever i had been in my
strength.

by and by my strength began to be restored. instead of lying, with so
strange a calmness, watching what was done for me, as if it were done
for some one else whom i was quietly sorry for, i helped it a little,
and so on to a little more and much more, until i became useful to
myself, and interested, and attached to life again.

how well i remember the pleasant afternoon when i was raised in bed
with pillows for the first time to enjoy a great tea-drinking with
charley! the little creature--sent into the world, surely, to
minister to the weak and sick--was so happy, and so busy, and stopped
so often in her preparations to lay her head upon my bosom, and
fondle me, and cry with joyful tears she was so glad, she was so
glad, that i was obliged to say, "charley, if you go on in this way,
i must lie down again, my darling, for i am weaker than i thought i
was!" so charley became as quiet as a mouse and took her bright face
here and there across and across the two
 
 ___________________________
 
 rooms, out of the shade into
the divine sunshine, and out of the sunshine into the shade, while i
watched her peacefully. when all her preparations were concluded and
the pretty tea-table with its little delicacies to tempt me, and its
white cloth, and its flowers, and everything so lovingly and
beautifully arranged for me by ada downstairs, was ready at the
bedside, i felt sure i was steady enough to say something to charley
that was not new to my thoughts.

first i complimented charley on the room, and indeed it was so fresh
and airy, so spotless and neat, that i could scarce believe i had
been lying there so long. this delighted charley, and her face was
brighter than before.

"yet, charley," said i, looking round, "i miss something, surely,
that i am accustomed to?"

poor little charley looked round too and pretended to shake her head
as if there were nothing absent.

"are the pictures all as they used to be?" i asked her.

"every one of them, miss," said charley.

"and the
 
 ___________________________
 
 furniture, charley?"

"except where i have moved it about to make more room, miss."

"and yet," said i, "i miss some familiar object. ah, i know what it
is, charley! it's the looking-glass."

charley got up from the table, making as if she had forgotten
something, and went into the next room; and i heard her sob there.

i had thought of this very often. i was now certain of it. i could
thank god that it was not a shock to me now. i called charley back,
and when she came--at first pretending to smile, but as she drew
nearer to me, looking grieved--i took her in my arms and said, "it
matters very little, charley. i hope i can do without my old face
very well."

i was presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great
chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room, leaning on
charley. the mirror was gone from its usual place in that room too,
but what i had to bear was none the harder to bear for that.

my guardian had th
 
 ___________________________
 
ght to me--"

"i know it well, dame durden, well."

he was so good, his touch expressed such endearing compassion and
affection, and the tone of his voice carried such comfort into my
heart that i stopped for a little while, quite unable to go on. "yes,
yes, you are tired," said he. "rest a little."

"as i have kept ada out so long," i began afresh after a short while,
"i think i should like to have my own way a little longer, guardian.
it would be best to be away from here before i see her. if charley
and i were to go to some country lodging as soon as i can move, and
if i had a week there in which to grow stronger and to be revived by
the sweet air and to look forward to the happiness of having ada with
me again, i think it would be better for us."

i hope it was not a poor thing in me to wish to be a little more used
to my altered self before i met the eyes of the dear girl i longed so
ardently to see, but it is the truth. i did. he understood me, i was
sure; but i was not afraid of that. 
 
 ___________________________
 
d not as yet the courage
to look at the dear face, though i could have done so easily without
her seeing me.

on the appointed day miss flite arrived. the poor little creature ran
into my room quite forgetful of her usual dignity, and crying from
her very heart of hearts, "my dear fitz jarndyce!" fell upon my neck
and kissed me twenty times.

"dear me!" said she, putting her hand into her reticule, "i have
nothing here but documents, my dear fitz jarndyce; i must borrow a
pocket handkerchief."

charley gave her one, and the good creature certainly made use of it,
for she held it to her eyes with both hands and sat so, shedding
tears for the next ten minutes.

"with pleasure, my dear fitz jarndyce," she was careful to explain.
"not the least pain. pleasure to see you well again. pleasure at
having the honour of being admitted to see you. i am so much fonder
of you, my love, than of the chancellor. though i do attend court
regularly. by the by, my dear, mentioning pocket handkerchiefs--"

miss 
 
 ___________________________
 
flite here looked at charley, who had been to meet her at the
place where the coach stopped. charley glanced at me and looked
unwilling to pursue the suggestion.

"ve-ry right!" said miss flite, "ve-ry correct. truly! highly
indiscreet of me to mention it; but my dear miss fitz jarndyce, i am
afraid i am at times (between ourselves, you wouldn't think it) a
little--rambling you know," said miss flite, touching her forehead.
"nothing more."

"what were you going to tell me?" said i, smiling, for i saw she
wanted to go on. "you have roused my curiosity, and now you must
gratify it."

miss flite 
 
 ___________________________
 
looked at charley for advice in this important crisis, who
said, "if you please, ma'am, you had better tell then," and therein
gratified miss flite beyond measure.

"so sagacious, our young friend," said she to me in her mysterious
way. "diminutive. but ve-ry sagacious! well, my dear, it's a pretty
anecdote. nothing more. still i think it charming. who should follow
us down the road from the coach, my dear, but a poor person in a very
ungenteel bonnet--"

"jenny, if you please, miss," said charley.

"just so!" miss flite acquiesced with the greatest suavity. "jenny.
ye-es! and what does she tell our young friend but that there has
been a lady with a veil inquiring at her cottage after my dear fitz
jarndyce's health and taking a handkerchief away with her as a little
keepsake merely because it was my amiable fitz jarndyce's! now, you
know, so very prepossessing in the lady with the veil!"

"if you please, miss," said charley, to whom i looked in some
astonishment, "jenny says that when he
 
 ___________________________
 
r baby died, you left a
handkerchief there, and that she put it away and kept it with the
baby's little things. i think, if you please, partly because it was
yours, miss, and partly because it had covered the baby."

"diminutive," whispered miss flite, making a variety of motions about
her own forehead to express intellect in charley. "but exceedingly
sagacious! and so dear! my love, she's clearer than any counsel i
ever heard!"

"yes, charley," i returned. "i remember it. well?"

"well, miss," said charley, "and that's the handkerchief the lady
took. and jenny wants you to know that she wouldn't have made away
with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady took it and
left some money instead. jenny don't know her at all, if you please,
miss!"

"why, who can she be?" said i.

"my love," miss flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with
her most mysterious look, "in my opinion--don't mention this to our
diminutive friend-
 
 ___________________________
 
 to my heart my childish prayer to be all
he had so brightly shown himself; and there was nothing to be undone:
no chain for me to break or for him to drag; and i could go, please
god, my lowly way along the path of duty, and he could go his nobler
way upon its broader road; and though we were apart upon the journey,
i might aspire to meet him, unselfishly, innocently, better far than
he had thought me when i found some favour in his eyes, at the
journey's end.




chapter xxxvi

chesney wold


charley and i did not set off alone upon our expedition into
lincolnshire. my guardian had made up his mind not to lose sight of
me until i was safe in mr. boythorn's house, so he accompanied us,
and we were two days upon the road. i found every breath of air, and
every scent, and every flower and leaf and blade of grass, and every
passing cloud, and everything in nature, more beautiful and wonderful
to me than i had ever found it yet. this was my first gain from my
illness. how little i had lost, when
 
 ___________________________
 
our destination, on a delightful evening in the early
summer-time.

if a good fairy had built the house for me with a wave of her wand,
and i had been a princess and her favoured god-child, i could not
have been more considered in it. so many preparations were made for
me and such an endearing remembrance was shown of all my little
tastes and likings that i could have sat down, overcome, a dozen
times before i had revisited half the rooms. i did better than that,
however, by showing them all to charley instead. charley's delight
calmed mine; and after we had had a walk in the garden, and charley
had exhausted her whole vocabulary of admiring expressions, i was as
tranquilly happy as i ought to have been. it was a great comfort to
be able to say to myself after tea, "esther, my dear, i think you are
quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a note of thanks to
your host." he had left a note of welcome for me, as sunny as his own
face, and had confided his bird to my care, which i knew to
 
 ___________________________
 
ittle note to him
in london, telling him how all his favourite plants and trees were
looking, and how the most astonishing of birds had chirped the
honours of the house to me in the most hospitable manner, and how,
after singing on my shoulder, to the inconceivable rapture of my
little maid, he was then at roost in the usual corner of his cage,
but whether dreaming or no i could not report. my note finished and
sent off to the post, i made myself very busy in unpacking and
arranging; and i sent charley to bed in good time and told her i
should want her no more that night.

for i had not yet looked in the glass and had never asked to have my
own restored to me. i knew this to be a weakness which must be
overcome, but i had always said to myself that i would begin afresh
when i got to where i now was. therefore i had wanted to be alone,
and therefore i said, now alone, in my own room, "esther, if you are
to be happy, if you are to have any right to pray to be true-hearted,
you must keep your wo
 
 ___________________________
 
do it. i wished to be generous to him, even
in the secret depths of my heart, which he would never know, because
i could have loved him--could have been devoted to him. at last i
came to the conclusion that i might keep them if i treasured them
only as a remembrance of what was irrevocably past and gone, never to
be looked back on any more, in any other light. i hope this may not
seem trivial. i was very much in earnest.

i took care to be up early in the morning and to be before the glass
when charley came in on tiptoe.

"dear, dear, miss!" cried charley, starting. "is that you?"

"yes, charley," said i, quietly putting up my hair. "and i am very
well indeed, and very happy."

i saw it was a weight off charley's mind, but it was a greater weight
off mine. i knew the worst now and was composed to it. i shall not
conceal, as i go on, the weaknesses i could not quite conquer, but
they always passed from me soon and the happier frame of mind stayed
by me faithfully.

wishing to be fully re-estab
 
 ___________________________
 
lished in my strength and my good spirits
before ada came, i now laid down a little series of plans with
charley for being in the fresh air all day long. we were to be out
before breakfast, and were to dine early, and were to be out again
before and after dinner, and were to talk in the garden after tea,
and were to go to rest betimes, and were to climb every hill and
explore every road, lane, and field in the neighbourhood. as to
restoratives and strengthening delicacies, mr. boythorn's good
housekeeper was for ever trotting about with something to eat or
drink in her hand; i could not even be heard of a
 
 ___________________________
 
days he would come to me in the paddock when i called
him, and eat out of my hand, and follow me about. we arrived at such
a capital understanding that when he was jogging with me lazily, and
rather obstinately, down some shady lane, if i patted his neck and
said, "stubbs, i am surprised you don't canter when you know how much
i like it; and i think you might oblige me, for you are only getting
stupid and going to sleep," he would give his head a comical shake or
two and set off directly, while charley would stand still and laugh
with such enjoyment that her laughter was like music. i don't know
who had given stubbs his name, but it seemed to belong to him as
naturally as his rough coat. once we put him in a little chaise and
drove him triumphantly through the green lanes for five miles; but
all at once, as we were extolling him to the skies, he seemed to take
it ill that he should have been accompanied so far by the circle of
tantalizing little gnats that had been hovering round and round hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s
ears the whole way without appearing to advance an inch, and stopped
to think about it. i suppose he came to the decision that it was not
to be borne, for he steadily refused to move until i gave the reins
to charley and got out and walked, when he followed me with a sturdy
sort of good humour, putting his head under my arm and rubbing his
ear against my sleeve. it was in vain for me to say, "now, stubbs, i
feel quite sure from what i know of you that you will go on if i ride
a little while," for the moment i left him, he stood stock still
again. consequently i was obliged to lead the way, as before; and in
this order we returned home, to the great delight of the village.

charley and i had reason to call i
 
 ___________________________
 
st wonderful achievement in the
world, but when an answer came back all the way from plymouth, in
which he mentioned that he was going to take the picture all the way
to america, and from america would write again, i got all the credit
that ought to have been given to the post-office and was invested
with the merit of the whole system.

thus, what with being so much in the air, playing with so many
children, gossiping with so many people, sitting on invitation in so
many cottages, going on with charley's education, and writing long
letters to ada every day, i had scarcely any time to think about that
little loss of mine and was almost always cheerful. if i did think of
it at odd moments now and then, i had only to be busy and forget it.
i felt it more than i had hoped i should once when a child said,
"mother, why is the lady not a pretty lady now like she used to be?"
but when i found the child was not less fond of me, and drew its soft
hand over my face with a kind of pitying protection in i
 
 ___________________________
 
h some surprise. she
came aside and whispered to me, while tears of honest love and
admiration stood in her bright eyes, "he's a dear good fellow, miss;
but he can't write yet--he's going to learn of me--and i wouldn't
shame him for the world!" why, what had i to fear, i thought, when
there was this nobility in the soul of a labouring man's daughter!

the air blew as freshly and revivingly upon me as it had ever blown,
and the healthy colour came into my new face as it had come into my
old one. charley was wonderful to see, she was so radiant and so
rosy; and we both enjoyed the whole day and slept soundly the whole
night.

there was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of chesney wold
where a seat had been erected commanding a lovely view. the wood had
been cleared and opened to improve this point of sight, and the
bright sunny landscape beyond was so beautiful that i rested there at
least once every day. a picturesque part of the hall, called the
ghost's walk, was seen to advantage fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om this higher ground; and the
startling name, and the old legend in the dedlock family which i had
heard from mr. boythorn accounting for it, mingled with the view and
gave it something of a mysterious interest in addition to its real
charms. there was a bank here, too, which was a famous one for
violets; and as it was a daily delight of charley's to gather wild
flowers, she took as much to the spot as i did.

it would be idle to inquire now why i never went close to the house
or never went inside it. the family were not there, i had heard on my
arrival, and were not expected. i was far from being incurious or
uninterested about the building; on the contrary, i often sat in this
place wondering how the rooms ranged and whether any echo like a
footstep really did resound at times, as the story said, upon the
lonely ghost's walk. the ind
 
 ___________________________
 
efinable feeling with which lady dedlock
had impressed me may have had some influence in keeping me from the
house even when she was absent. i am not sure. her face and figure
were associated with it, naturally; but i cannot say that they
repelled me from it, though something did. for whatever reason or no
reason, i had never once gone near it, down to the day at which my
story now arrives.

i was resting at my favourite point after a long ramble, and charley
was gathering violets at a little distance from me. i had been
looking at the ghost's walk lying in a deep shade of masonry afar off
and picturing to myself the female shape that was said to haunt it
when i became aware of a figure approaching through the wood. the
perspective was so long and so darkened by leaves, and the shadows of
the branches on the ground made it so much more intricate to the eye,
that at first i could not discern what figure it was. by little and
little it revealed itself
 
 ___________________________
 
e risen to
continue my walk. but i could not. i was rendered motionless. not so
much by her hurried gesture of entreaty, not so much by her quick
advance and outstretched hands, not so much by the great change in
her manner and the absence of her haughty self-restraint, as by a
something in her face that i had pined for and dreamed of when i was
a little child, something i had never seen in any face, something i
had never seen in hers before.

a dread and faintness fell upon me, and i called to charley. lady
dedlock stopped upon the instant and changed back almost to what i
had known her.

"miss summerson, i am afraid i have startled you," she said, now
advancing slowly. "you can scarcely be strong yet. you have been very
ill, i know. i have been much concerned to hear it."

i could no more have removed my eyes from her pale face than i could
have stirred from the bench on which i sat. she gave me her hand, and
its deadly coldness, so at variance with the enforced composure of
her features, d
 
 ___________________________
 
eepened the fascination that overpowered me. i cannot
say what was in my whirling thoughts.

"you are recovering again?" she asked kindly.

"i was quite well but a moment ago, lady dedlock."

"is this your young attendant?"

"yes."

"will you send her on before and walk towards your house with me?"

"charley," said i, "take your flowers home, and i will follow you
directly."

charley, with her best curtsy, blushingly tied on her bonnet and went
her way. when she was gone, lady dedlock sat down on the seat beside
me.

i cannot tell in any words what the state of my mind was when i saw
in her hand my handkerchief with which i had covered the dead baby.

i looked at her, but i could not see her, i could not hear her, i
could not draw my breath. the beating of my heart was so violent and
wild that i felt as if my life were breaking from me. but when she
caught me to her breast,
 
 ___________________________
 
and quiet below me in the sun
and shade lay the old house, with its terraces and turrets, on which
there had seemed to me to be such complete repose when i first saw
it, but which now looked like the obdurate and unpitying watcher of
my mother's misery.

stunned as i was, as weak and helpless at first as i had ever been in
my sick chamber, the necessity of guarding against the danger of
discovery, or even of the remotest suspicion, did me service. i took
such precautions as i could to hide from charley that i had been
crying, and i constrained myself to think of every sacred obligation
that there was upon me to be careful and collected. it was not a
little while before i could succeed or could even restrain bursts of
grief, but after an hour or so i was better and felt that i might
return. i went home very slowly and told charley, whom i found at the
gate looking for me, that i had been tempted to extend my walk after
lady dedlock had left me and that i was over-tired and would lie
down. safe
 
 ___________________________
 
 change that had fallen on
me. i renewed my resolutions and prayed to be strengthened in them,
pouring out my heart for myself and for my unhappy mother and feeling
that the darkness of the morning was passing away. it was not upon my
sleep; and when the next day's light awoke me, it was gone.

my dear girl was to arrive at five o'clock in the afternoon. how to
help myself through the intermediate time better than by taking a
long walk along the road by which she was to come, i did not know; so
charley and i and stubbs--stubbs saddled, for we never drove him
after the one great occasion--made a long expedition along that road
and back. on our return, we held a great review of the house and
garden and saw that everything was in its prettiest condition, and
had the bird out ready as an important part of the establishment.

there were more than two full hours yet to elapse before she could
come, and in that interval, which seemed a long one, i must confess i
was nervously anxious about my altere
 
 ___________________________
 
girl's face so well, and
it was such an honest face in its loveliness, that i was sure
beforehand she could not hide that first look from me. and i
considered whether, if it should signify any one of these meanings,
which was so very likely, could i quite answer for myself?

well, i thought i could. after last night, i thought i could. but to
wait and wait, and expect and expect, and think and think, was such
bad preparation that i resolved to go along the road again and meet
her.

so i said to charley, "charley, i will go by myself and walk along
the road until she comes." charley highly approving of anything that
pleased me, i went and left her at home.

but before i got to the second milestone, i had been in so many
palpitations from seeing dust in the distance (though i knew it was
not, and could not, be the coach yet) that i resolved to turn back
and go home again. and when i had turned, i was in such fear of the
coach coming up behind me (though i still knew that it neither would,
nor c
 
 ___________________________
 
ould, do any such thing) that i ran the greater part of the way
to avoid being overtaken.

then, i considered, when i had got safe back again, this was a nice
thing to have done! now i was hot and had made the worst of it
instead of the best.

at last, when i believed there was at least a quarter of an hour more
yet, charley all at once cried out to me as i was trembling in the
garden, "here she comes, miss! here she is!"

i did not mean to do it, but i ran upstairs into my room and hid
myself behind the door. there i stood trembling, even when i heard my
darling calling as she came upstairs, "esther, my dear, my love,
where are you? little woman, dear dame durden!"

she ran in, and was running out again when she saw me. ah, my angel
girl! the old dear look, all love, all fondness, all affection.
nothing else in it
 
 ___________________________
 
ifficulty that i felt in being quite composed that first evening
when ada asked me, over our work, if the family were at the house,
and when i was obliged to answer yes, i believed so, for lady dedlock
had spoken to me in the woods the day before yesterday, was great.
greater still when ada asked me what she had said, and when i replied
that she had been kind and interested, and when ada, while admitting
her beauty and elegance, remarked upon her proud manner and her
imperious chilling air. but charley helped me through, unconsciously,
by telling us that lady dedlock had only stayed at the house two
nights on her way from london to visit at some other great house in
the next county and that she had left early on the morning after we
had seen her at our view, as we called it. charley verified the adage
about little pitchers, i am sure, for she heard of more sayings and
doings in a day than would have come to my ears in a month.

we were to stay a month at mr. boythorn's. my pet had scarcely be
 
 ___________________________
 
en
there a bright week, as i recollect the time, when one evening after
we had finished helping the gardener in watering his flowers, and
just as the candles were lighted, charley, appearing with a very
important air behind ada's chair, beckoned me mysteriously out of the
room.

"oh! if you please, miss," said charley in a whisper, with her eyes
at their roundest and largest. "you're wanted at the dedlock arms."

"why, charley," said i, "who can possibly want me at the
public-house?"

"i don't know, miss," returned charley, putting her head forward and
folding her hands tight upon the band of her little apron, which she
always did in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or confidential,
"but it's a gentleman, miss, and his compliments, and will you please
to come without saying anything about it."

"whose compliments, charley?"

"his'n, miss," returned charley, whose grammatical education was
advancing, but not very 
 
 ___________________________
 
rapidly.

"and how do you come to be the messenger, charley?"

"i am not the messenger, if you please, miss," returned my little
maid. "it was w. grubble, miss."

"and who is w. grubble, charley?"

"mister grubble, miss," returned charley. "don't you know, miss? the
dedlock arms, by w. grubble," which charley delivered as if she were
slowly spelling out the sign.

"aye? the landlord, charley?"

"yes, miss. if you please, miss, his wife is a beautiful woman, but
she broke her ankle, and it never joined. and her brother's the
sawyer that was put in the cage, miss, and they expect he'll drink
himself to death entirely on beer," said charley.

not knowing what might be the matter, and being easily apprehensive
now, i thought it best to go to this place by myself. i bade charley
be quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl, and having put them
on, went away down the little hilly street
 
 ___________________________
 
to see me and to justify himself for
the present terms on which he stood with mr. jarndyce. as the dear
old infant would be with us directly, he begged that i would make an
appointment for the morning, when he might set himself right through
the means of an unreserved conversation with me. i proposed to walk
with him in the park at seven o'clock, and this was arranged. mr.
skimpole soon afterwards appeared and made us merry for an hour. he
particularly requested to see little coavinses (meaning charley) and
told her, with a patriarchal air, that he had given her late father
all the business in his power and that if one of her little brothers
would make haste to get set up in the same profession, he hoped he
should still be able to put a good deal of employment in his way.

"for i am constantly being taken in these nets," said mr. skimpole,
looking beamingly at us over a glass of wine-and-water, "and am
constantly being bailed out--like a boat. or paid off--like a ship's
company. somebody alwa
 
 ___________________________
 
tten for a while. you are only to remember
now that nothing can change me as you know me. can you feel quite
assured of that, my dear?"

"i can, and i do," i said.

"that's much," he answered. "that's everything. but i must not take
that at a word. i will not write this something in my thoughts until
you have quite resolved within yourself that nothing can change me as
you know me. if you doubt that in the least degree, i will never
write it. if you are sure of that, on good consideration, send
charley to me this night week--'for the letter.' but if you are not
quite certain, never send. mind, i trust to your truth, in this thing
as in everything. if you are not quite certain on that one point,
never send!"

"guardian," said i, "i am already certain, i can no more be changed
in that conviction than you can be changed towards me. i shall send
charley for the letter."

he shook my hand and said no more. nor was any more said in reference
to this conversation, either by him or me, through the wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ole week.
when the appointed night came, i said to charley as soon as i was
alone, "go and knock at mr. jarndyce's door, charley, and say you
have come from me--'for the letter.'" charley went up the stairs, and
down the stairs, and along the passages--the zig-zag way about the
old-fashioned house seemed very long in my listening ears that
night--and so came back, along the passages, and down the stairs, and
up the stairs, and brought the letter. "lay it on the table,
charley," said i. so charley laid it on the table and went to bed,
and i sat looking at it without taking it up, thinking of many
things.

i began with my overshadowed childhood, and passed through those
timid days to the heavy time when my aunt lay dead, with her resolute
face so cold and set, and when i was more solitary with mrs. rachael
than if i had had no one in the world to speak to or to look at. i
passed to the altered days when i was so blest as to find friends in
all around me, and to be beloved. i came to the t
 
 ___________________________
 
eparted, we three were one afternoon
going out for a ride; and i, being dressed before ada and going down,
came upon my guardian, with his back towards me, standing at the
drawing-room window looking out.

he turned on my coming in and said, smiling, "aye, it's you, little
woman, is it?" and looked out again.

i had made up my mind to speak to him now. in short, i had come down
on purpose. "guardian," i said, rather hesitating and trembling,
"when would you like to have the answer to the letter charley came
for?"

"when it's ready, my dear," he replied.

"i think it is ready," said i.

"is charley to bring it?" he asked pleasantly.

"no. i have brought it myself, guardian," i returned.

i put my two arms round his neck and kissed him, and he said was this
the mistress of bleak house, and i said yes; and it made no
difference presently, and we all went out together, and i said
nothing to my precious pet about it.




chapter xlv

in trust


one morning when i had done jingling about with my ba
 
 ___________________________
 
skets of keys,
as my beauty and i were walking round and round the garden i happened
to turn my eyes towards the house and saw a long thin shadow going in
which looked like mr. vholes. ada had been telling me only that
morning of her hopes that richard might exhaust his ardour in the
chancery suit by being so very earnest in it; and therefore, not to
damp my dear girl's spirits, i said nothing about mr. vholes's
shadow.

presently came charley, lightly winding among the bushes and tripping
along the paths, as rosy and pretty as one of flora's attendants
instead of my maid, saying, "oh, if you please, miss, would you step
and speak to mr. jarndyce!"

it was one of charley's peculiarities that whenever she was charged
with a message she always began to deliver it as soon as she beheld,
at any distance, the person for whom it was intended. therefore i saw
charley asking me in her usual form of words to "step and speak" to
mr. jarndyce l
 
 ___________________________
 
ong before i heard her. and when i did hear her, she
had said it so often that she was out of breath.

i told ada i would make haste back and inquired of charley as we went
in whether there was not a gentleman with mr. jarndyce. to which
charley, whose grammar, i confess to my shame, never did any credit
to my educational powers, replied, "yes, miss. him as come down in
the country with mr. richard."

a more complete contrast than my guardian and mr. vholes i suppose
there could not be. i found them looking at one another across a
table, the one so open and the other so close, the one so broad and
upright and the other so narrow and stooping, the one giving out what
he had to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other keeping it
in
 
 ___________________________
 
in shadow away. i thought of it on the outside of the coach,
passing over all the sunny landscape between us and london, chilling
the seed in the ground as it glided along.

of course it became necessary to tell ada where i was going and why i
was going, and of course she was anxious and distressed. but she was
too true to richard to say anything but words of pity and words of
excuse, and in a more loving spirit still--my dear devoted girl!--she
wrote him a long letter, of which i took charge.

charley was to be my travelling companion, though i am sure i wanted
none and would willingly have left her at home. we all went to london
that afternoon, and finding two places in the mail, secured them. at
our usual bed-time, charley and i were rolling away seaward with the
kentish letters.

it was a night's journey in those coach times, but we had the mail to
ourselves and did not find the night very tedious. it passed with me
as i suppose it would with most people under such circumstances. at
one w
 
 ___________________________
 
ving under a thick white fog; and nothing else was moving but
a few early ropemakers, who, with the yarn twisted round their
bodies, looked as if, tired of their present state of existence, they
were spinning themselves into cordage.

but when we got into a warm room in an excellent hotel and sat down,
comfortably washed and dressed, to an early breakfast (for it was too
late to think of going to bed), deal began to look more cheerful. our
little room was like a ship's cabin, and that delighted charley very
much. then the fog began to rise like a curtain, and numbers of ships
that we had had no idea were near appeared. i don't know how many
sail the waiter told us were then lying in the downs. some of these
vessels were of grand size--one was a large indiaman just come home;
and when the sun shone through the clouds, making silvery pools in
the dark sea, the way in which these ships brightened, and shadowed,
and changed, amid a bustle of boats pulling off from the shore to
them and from them 
 
 ___________________________
 
to the shore, and a general life and motion in
themselves and everything around them, was most beautiful.

the large indiaman was our great attraction because she had come into
the downs in the night. she was surrounded by boats, and we said how
glad the people on board of her must be to come ashore. charley was
curious, too, about the voyage, and about the heat in india, and the
serpents and the tigers; and as she picked up such information much
faster than grammar, i told her what i knew on those points. i told
her, too, how people in such voyages were sometimes wrecked and cast
on rocks, where they were saved by the intrepidity and humanity of
one man. and charley asking how that could be, i told her how we knew
at home of such a case.

i had thought of sending richard a note saying i was there,
 
 ___________________________
 
 so much better to go to him without preparation. as he lived
in barracks i was a little doubtful whether this was feasible, but we
went out to reconnoitre. peeping in at the gate of the barrack-yard,
we found everything very quiet at that time in the morning, and i
asked a sergeant standing on the guardhouse-steps where he lived. he
sent a man before to show me, who went up some bare stairs, and
knocked with his knuckles at a door, and left us.

"now then!" cried richard from within. so i left charley in the
little passage, and going on to the half-open door, said, "can i come
in, richard? it's only dame durden."

he was writing at a table, with a great confusion of clothes, tin
cases, books, boots, brushes, and portmanteaus strewn all about the
floor. he was only half dressed--in plain clothes, i observed, not in
uniform--and his hair was unbrushed, and he looked as wild as his
room. all this i saw after he had heartily welcomed me and i was
seated near him, for he started upon hearing my v
 
 ___________________________
 
t was
arranged. i found, from what he told me, that mr. vholes had copies
of these papers and had been in consultation with him throughout.
beyond ascertaining this, and having been the bearer of ada's letter,
and being (as i was going to be) richard's companion back to london,
i had done no good by coming down. admitting this to myself with a
reluctant heart, i said i would return to the hotel and wait until he
joined me there, so he threw a cloak over his shoulders and saw me to
the gate, and charley and i went back along the beach.

there was a concourse of people in one spot, surrounding some naval
officers who were landing from a boat, and pressing about them with
unusual interest. i said to charley this would be one of the great
indiaman's boats now, and we stopped to look.

the gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking
good-humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing
about them as if they were glad to be in england again. "charley,
charley," said i, "come
 
 ___________________________
 
te accustomed to the loss
of my darling yet. three or four hours were not a long time after
years. but my mind dwelt so much upon the uncongenial scene in which
i had left her, and i pictured it as such an overshadowed
stony-hearted one, and i so longed to be near her and taking some
sort of care of her, that i determined to go back in the evening only
to look up at her windows.

it was foolish, i dare say, but it did not then seem at all so to me,
and it does not seem quite so even now. i took charley into my
confidence, and we went out at dusk. it was dark when we came to the
new strange home of my dear girl, and there was a light behind the
yellow blinds. we walked past cautiously three or four times, looking
up, and narrowly missed encountering mr. vholes, who came out of his
office while we were there and turned his head to look up too before
going home. the sight of his lank black figure and the lonesome air
of that nook in the dark were favourable to the state of my mind. i
thought of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the youth and love and beauty of my dear girl, shut up in
such an ill-assorted refuge, almost as if it were a cruel place.

it was very solitary and very dull, and i did not doubt that i might
safely steal upstairs. i left charley below and went up with a light
foot, not distressed by any glare from the feeble oil lanterns on the
way. i listened for a few moments, and in the musty rotting silence
of the house believed that i could hear the murmur of their young
voices. i put my lips to the hearse-like panel of the door as a kiss
for my dear and came quietly down again, thinking that one of these
days i would confess to the visit.

and it really did me good, for though nobody but charley and i knew
anything about it, i so
 
 ___________________________
 
onate protection and forgiveness if he could possibly find
her, and that i was sought for to accompany him in the hope that my
entreaties might prevail upon her if his failed. something to this
general purpose i made out, but i was thrown into such a tumult of
alarm, and hurry and distress, that in spite of every effort i could
make to subdue my agitation, i did not seem, to myself, fully to
recover my right mind until hours had passed.

but i dressed and wrapped up expeditiously without waking charley or
any one and went down to mr. bucket, who was the person entrusted
with the secret. in taking me to him my guardian told me this, and
also explained how it was that he had come to think of me. mr.
bucket, in a low voice, by the light of my guardian's candle, read to
me in the hall a letter that my mother had left upon her table; and i
suppose within ten minutes of my having been aroused i was sitting
beside him, rolling swiftly through the streets.

his manner was very keen, and yet considera
 
 ___________________________
 
besides my very much
mistrusting the probability of his being there without making richard
poorer, i felt as if there were something in his careless gaiety too
inconsistent with what i knew of the depths of ada's life. i clearly
perceived, too, that ada shared my feelings. i therefore resolved,
after much thinking of it, to make a private visit to mr. skimpole
and try delicately to explain myself. my dear girl was the great
consideration that made me bold.

i set off one morning, accompanied by charley, for somers town. as i
approached the house, i was strongly inclined to turn back, for i
felt what a desperate attempt it was to make an impression on mr.
skimpole and how extremely likely it was that he would signally
defeat me. however, i thought that being there, i would go through
with it. i knocked with a trembling hand at mr. skimpole's
door--literally with a hand, for the knocker was gone--and after a
long parley gained admission from an irishwoman, who was in the area
when i knocked, br
 
 ___________________________
 
nk into a lethargy of mind and body that alarmed
us greatly, and the returns of which became more frequent as the
months went on. my dear girl was right in saying that he only pursued
his errors the more desperately for her sake. i have no doubt that
his desire to retrieve what he had lost was rendered the more intense
by his grief for his young wife, and became like the madness of a
gamester.

i was there, as i have mentioned, at all hours. when i was there at
night, i generally went home with charley in a coach; sometimes my
guardian would meet me in the neighbourhood, and we would walk home
together. one evening he had arranged to meet me at eight o'clock. i
could not leave, as i usually did, quite punctually at the time, for
i was working for my dear girl and had a few stitches more to do to
finish what i was about; but it was within a few minutes of the hour
when i bundled up my little work-basket, gave my darling my last kiss
for the night, and hurried downstairs. mr. woodcourt went wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 any one that night. i had not even the
courage to see myself, for i was afraid that my tears might a little
reproach me. i went up to my room in the dark, and prayed in the
dark, and lay down in the dark to sleep. i had no need of any light
to read my guardian's letter by, for i knew it by heart. i took it
from the place where i kept it, and repeated its contents by its own
clear light of integrity and love, and went to sleep with it on my
pillow.

i was up very early in the morning and called charley to come for a
walk. we bought flowers for the breakfast-table, and came back and
arranged them, and were as busy as possible. we were so early that i
had a good time still for charley's lesson before breakfast; charley
(who was not in the least improved in the old defective article of
grammar) came through it with great applause; and we were altogether
very notable. when my guardian appeared he said, "why, little woman,
you look fresher than your flowers!" and mrs. woodcourt repeated and
transl
 
 ___________________________
 
ghly approved. she could never do enough for me and was
remarkably softened now in comparison with what she had been when we
first knew her. there was no trouble she would not have taken to have
been of use to me, but i need hardly say that i only allowed her to
take as little as gratified her kindness without tasking it.

of course this was not a time to neglect my guardian, and of course
it was not a time for neglecting my darling. so i had plenty of
occupation, which i was glad of; and as to charley, she was
absolutely not to be seen for needlework. to surround herself with
great heaps of it--baskets full and tables full--and do a little, and
spend a great deal of time in staring with her round eyes at what
there was to do, and persuade herself that she was going to do it,
were charley's great dignities and delights.

meanwhile, i must say, i could not agree with my guardian on the
subject of the will, and i had some sanguine hopes of jarndyce and
jarndyce. which of us was right will soon 
 
 ___________________________
 
"but the older bleak
house claims priority. when you and my boy are strong enough to do
it, come and take possession of your home."

ada called him "her dearest cousin, john." but he said, no, it must
be guardian now. he was her guardian henceforth, and the boy's; and
he had an old association with the name. so she called him guardian,
and has called him guardian ever since. the children know him by no
other name. i say the children; i have two little daughters.

it is difficult to believe that charley (round-eyed still, and not at
all grammatical) is married to a miller in our neighbourhood; yet so
it is; and even now, looking up from my desk as i write early in the
morning at my summer window, i see the very mill beginning to go
round. i hope the miller will not spoil charley; but he is very fond
of her, and charley is rather vain of such a match, for he is well to
do and was in great request. so far as my small maid is concerned, i
might suppose time to have stood for seven years as still 
 
 ___________________________
 
as the mill
did half an hour ago, since little emma, charley's sister, is exactly
what charley used to be. as to tom, charley's brother, i am really
afraid to say what he did at school in ciphering, but i think it was
decimals. he is apprenticed to the miller, whatever it was, and is a
good bashful fellow, always falling in love with somebody and being
ashamed of it.

caddy jellyby passed her very last holidays with us and was a dearer
creature than ever, perpetually dancing in and out of the house with
the children as if she had never given a dancing-lesson in her life.
caddy keeps her own little carriage now instead