 shortly. on the
day of judgment. this is a good omen for you. accept my blessing!"

she stopped at the bottom of the steep, broad flight of stairs; but
we looked back as we went up, and she was still there, saying, still
with a curtsy and a smile between every little sentence, "youth. and
hope. and beauty. and chancery. and conversation kenge! ha! pray
accept my blessing!"




chapter iv

telescopic philanthropy


we were to pass the night, mr. kenge told us when we arrived in his
room, at mrs. jellyby's; and then he turned to me and said he took it
for granted i knew who mrs. jellyby was.

"i really don't, sir," i returned. "perhaps mr. carstone--or miss
clare--"

but no, they knew nothing whatever about mrs. jellyby. "in-deed! mrs.
jellyby," said mr. kenge, standing with his back to the fire and
casting his eyes over the dusty hearth-rug as if it were mrs.
jellyby's biography, "is a lady of very remarkable strength of
character who devotes herself entirely to the public. she has devoted
her
 
 ___________________________
 
xtensive variety of public subjects at various times
and is at present (until something else attracts her) devoted to the
subject of africa, with a view to the general cultivation of the
coffee berry--and the natives--and the happy settlement, on the banks
of the african rivers, of our superabundant home population. mr.
jarndyce, who is desirous to aid any work that is considered likely
to be a good work and who is much sought after by philanthropists,
has, i believe, a very high opinion of mrs. jellyby."

mr. kenge, adjusting his cravat, then looked at us.

"and mr. jellyby, sir?" suggested richard.

"ah! mr. jellyby," said mr. kenge, "is--a--i don't know that i can
describe him to you better than by saying that he is the husband of
mrs. jellyby."

"a nonentity, sir?" said richard with a droll look.

"i don't say that," returned mr. kenge gravely. "i can't say that,
indeed, for i know nothing whatever of mr. jellyby. i never, to my
knowledge, had the pleasure of seeing mr. jellyby. he may be 
 
 ___________________________
 
a very
superior man, but he is, so to speak, merged--merged--in the more
shining qualities of his wife." mr. kenge proceeded to tell us that
as the road to bleak house would have been very long, dark, and
tedious on such an evening, and as we had been travelling already,
mr. jarndyce had himself proposed this arrangement. a carriage would
be at mrs. jellyby's to convey us out of town early in the forenoon
of to-morrow.

he then rang a little bell, and the young gentleman came in.
addressing him by the name of guppy, mr. kenge inquired whether miss
summerson's boxes and the rest of the baggage had been "sent round."
mr. guppy said yes, they had been sent round, and a coach was waiting
to take us round too as soon as we pleased.

"then it only remains," said mr. kenge, shaking hands with us, "for
me to express my lively satisfaction in (good day, mi
 
 ___________________________
 
box; and we all three laughed and chatted about our inexperience and
the strangeness of london until we turned up under an archway to our
destination--a narrow street of high houses like an oblong cistern to
hold the fog. there was a confused little crowd of people,
principally children, gathered about the house at which we stopped,
which had a tarnished brass plate on the door with the inscription
jellyby.

"don't be frightened!" said mr. guppy, looking in at the
coach-window. "one of the young jellybys been and got his head
through the area railings!"

"oh, poor child," said i; "let me out, if you please!"

"pray be careful of yourself, miss. the young jellybys are always up
to something," said mr. guppy.

i made my way to the poor child, who was one of the dirtiest little
unfortunates i ever saw, and found him very hot and frightened and
crying loudly, fixed by the neck between two iron railings, while a
milkman and a beadle, with the kindest intentions possible, were
endeavouring to drag h
 
 ___________________________
 
hed into the area if i
had not held his pinafore while richard and mr. guppy ran down
through the kitchen to catch him when he should be released. at last
he was happily got down without any accident, and then he began to
beat mr. guppy with a hoop-stick in quite a frantic manner.

nobody had appeared belonging to the house except a person in
pattens, who had been poking at the child from below with a broom; i
don't know with what object, and i don't think she did. i therefore
supposed that mrs. jellyby was not at home, and was quite surprised
when the person appeared in the passage without the pattens, and
going up to the back room on the first floor before ada and me,
announced us as, "them two young ladies, missis jellyby!" we passed
several more children on the way up, whom it was difficult to avoid
treading on in the dark; and as we came into mrs. jellyby's presence,
one of the poor little things fell downstairs--down a whole flight
(as it sounded to me), with a great noise.

mrs. jellyby
 
 ___________________________
 
ich we
could not help showing in our own faces as the dear child's head
recorded its passage with a bump on every stair--richard afterwards
said he counted seven, besides one for the landing--received us with
perfect equanimity. she was a pretty, very diminutive, plump woman of
from forty to fifty, with handsome eyes, though they had a curious
habit of seeming to look a long way off. as if--i am quoting richard
again--they could see nothing nearer than africa!

"i am very glad indeed," said mrs. jellyby in an agreeable voice, "to
have the pleasure of receiving you. i have a great respect for mr.
jarndyce, and no one in whom he is interested can be an object of
indifference to me."

we expressed our acknowledgments and sat down behind the door, where
there was a lame invalid of a sofa. mrs. jellyby had very good hair
but was too much occupied with her african duties to brush it. the
shawl in which she had been loosely muffled dropped onto her chair
when she advanced to us; and as she turned to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ally struck us was a jaded and unhealthy-looking
though by no means plain girl at the writing-table, who sat biting
the feather of her pen and staring at us. i suppose nobody ever was
in such a state of ink. and from her tumbled hair to her pretty feet,
which were disfigured with frayed and broken satin slippers trodden
down at heel, she really seemed to have no article of dress upon her,
from a pin upwards, that was in its proper condition or its right
place.

"you find me, my dears," said mrs. jellyby, snuffing the two great
office candles in tin candlesticks, which made the room taste
strongly of hot tallow (the fire had gone out, and there was nothing
in the grate but ashes, a bundle of wood, and a poker), "you find me,
my dears, as usual, very busy; but that you will excuse. the african
project at present employs my whole time. it involves me in
correspondence with public bodies and with private individuals
anxious for the welfare of their species all over the country. i am
happy to say i
 
 ___________________________
 
t is advancing. we hope by this time next year to have
from a hundred and fifty to two hundred healthy families cultivating
coffee and educating the natives of borrioboola-gha, on the left bank
of the niger."

as ada said nothing, but looked at me, i said it must be very
gratifying.

"it is gratifying," said mrs. jellyby. "it involves the devotion of
all my energies, such as they are; but that is nothing, so that it
succeeds; and i am more confident of success every day. do you know,
miss summerson, i almost wonder that you never turned your thoughts
to africa."

this application of the subject was really so unexpected to me that i
was quite at a loss how to receive it. i hinted that the climate--

"the finest climate in the world!" said mrs. jellyby.

"indeed, ma'am?"

"certainly. with precaution," said mrs. j
 
 ___________________________
 
ellyby. "you may go into
holborn, without precaution, and be run over. you may go into
holborn, with precaution, and never be run over. just so with
africa."

i said, "no doubt." i meant as to holborn.

"if you would like," said mrs. jellyby, putting a number of papers
towards us, "to look over some remarks on that head, and on the
general subject, which have been extensively circulated, while i
finish a letter i am now dictating to my eldest daughter, who is my
amanuensis--"

the girl at the table left off biting her pen and made a return to
our recognition, which was half bashful and half sulky.

"--i shall then have finished for the present," proceeded mrs.
jellyby with a sweet smile, "though my work is never done. where are
you
 
 ___________________________
 
, caddy?"

"'presents her compliments to mr. swallow, and begs--'" said caddy.

"'and begs,'" said mrs. jellyby, dictating, "'to inform him, in
reference to his letter of inquiry on the african project--' no,
peepy! not on my account!"

peepy (so self-named) was the unfortunate child who had fallen
downstairs, who now interrupted the correspondence by presenting
himself, with a strip of plaster on his forehead, to exhibit his
wounded knees, in which ada and i did not know which to pity
most--the bruises or the dirt. mrs. jellyby merely added, with the
serene composure with which she said everything, "go 
 
 ___________________________
 
oing out and to take him up to nurse. he looked very
much astonished at it and at ada's kissing him, but soon fell fast
asleep in my arms, sobbing at longer and longer intervals, until he
was quiet. i was so occupied with peepy that i lost the letter in
detail, though i derived such a general impression from it of the
momentous importance of africa, and the utter insignificance of all
other places and things, that i felt quite ashamed to have thought so
little about it.

"six o'clock!" said mrs. jellyby. "and our dinner hour is nominally
(for we dine at all hours) five! caddy, show miss clare and miss
summerson their rooms. you will like to make some change, perhaps?
you will excuse me, i know, being so much occupied. oh, that very bad
child! pray put him down, miss summerson!"

i begged permission to retain him, truly saying that he was not at
all troublesome, and carried him upstairs and laid him on my bed. ada
and i had two upper rooms with a door of communication between. they
were excessi
 
 ___________________________
 
vely bare and disorderly, and the curtain to my window
was fastened up with a fork.

"you would like some hot water, wouldn't you?" said miss jellyby,
looking round for a jug with a handle to it, but looking in vain.

"if it is not being troublesome," said we.

"oh, it's not the trouble," returned miss jellyby; "the question is,
if there is any."

the evening was so very cold and the rooms had such a marshy smell
that i must confess it was a little miserable, and ada was half
crying. we soon laughed, however, and were busily unpacking when miss
jellyby came back to say that she was sorry there was no hot water,
but they couldn't find the kettle, and the boiler was out of order.

we begged her not to mention it and made all the haste we could to
get down to the fire again. but all the little children 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry good at my table, and i would tell them the story of little red
riding hood while i dressed; which they did, and were as quiet as
mice, including peepy, who awoke opportunely before the appearance of
the wolf.

when we went downstairs we found a mug with "a present from tunbridge
wells" on it lighted up in the staircase window with a floating wick,
and a young woman, with a swelled face bound up in a flannel bandage
blowing the fire of the drawing-room (now connected by an open door
with mrs. jellyby's room) and choking dreadfully. it smoked to that
degree, in short, that we all sat coughing and crying with the
windows open for half an hour, during which mrs. jellyby, with the
same sweetness of temper, directed letters about africa. her being so
employed was, i must say, a great relief to me, for richard told us
that he had washed his hands in a pie-dish and that they had found
the kettle on his dressing-table, and he made ada laugh so that they
made me laugh in the most ridiculous manner.

 
 ___________________________
 
d everything on the table wherever it happened to go, and never
moved it again until she put it on the stairs. the person i had seen
in pattens, who i suppose to have been the cook, frequently came and
skirmished with her at the door, and there appeared to be ill will
between them.

all through dinner--which was long, in consequence of such accidents
as the dish of potatoes being mislaid in the coal skuttle and the
handle of the corkscrew coming off and striking the young woman in
the chin--mrs. jellyby preserved the evenness of her disposition. she
told us a great deal that was interesting about borrioboola-gha and
the natives, and received so many letters that richard, who sat by
her, saw four envelopes in the gravy at once. some of the letters
were proceedings of ladies' committees or resolutions of ladies'
meetings, which she read to us; others were applications from people
excited in various ways about the cultivation of coffee, and natives;
others required answers, and these she sent her
 
 ___________________________
 
evoted to the cause.

i was a little curious to know who a mild bald gentleman in
spectacles was, who dropped into a vacant chair (there was no top or
bottom in particular) after the fish was taken away and seemed
passively to submit himself to borrioboola-gha but not to be actively
interested in that settlement. as he never spoke a word, he might
have been a native but for his complexion. it was not until we left
the table and he remained alone with richard that the possibility of
his being mr. jellyby ever entered my head. but he was mr. jellyby;
and a loquacious young man called mr. quale, with large shining knobs
for temples and his hair all brushed to the back of his head, who
came in the evening, and told ada he was a philanthropist, also
informed her that he called the matrimonial alliance of mrs. jellyby
with mr. jellyby the union of mind and matter.

this young man, besides having a great deal to say for himself about
africa and a project of his for teaching the coffee colonists to
te
 
 ___________________________
 
ach the natives to turn piano-forte legs and establish an export
trade, delighted in drawing mrs. jellyby out by saying, "i believe
now, mrs. jellyby, you have received as many as from one hundred and
fifty to two hundred letters respecting africa in a single day, have
you not?" or, "if my memory does not deceive me, mrs. jellyby, you
once mentioned that you had sent off five thousand circulars from one
post-office at one time?"--always repeating mrs. jellyby's answer to
us like an interpreter. during the whole evening, mr. jellyby sat in
a corner with his head against the wall as if he were subject to low
spirits. it seemed that he had several times opened his mouth when
alone with richard after dinner, as if he had something on his mind,
but had always shut it again, to richard's extreme confusion, without
saying anything.

mrs. jellyby, sitting in quite a nest of waste paper, drank coffee
all the evening and dictated at intervals to her eldest da
 
 ___________________________
 
ughter. she
also held a discussion with mr. quale, of which the subject seemed to
be--if i understood it--the brotherhood of humanity, and gave
utterance to some beautiful sentiments. i was not so attentive an
auditor as i might have wished to be, however, for peepy and the
other children came flocking about ada and me in a corner of the
drawing-room to ask for another story; so we sat down among them and
told them in whispers "puss in boots" and i don't know what else
until mrs. jellyby, accidentally remembering them, sent them to bed.
as peepy cried for me to take him to bed, i carried him upstairs,
where the young woman with the flannel bandage charged into the midst
of the little family like a dragon and overturned them into cribs.

after that i occupied myself in making our room a little tidy and in
coaxing a very cross fire that had been lighted to burn, which at
last it did, quite brightly. on my return downstairs, i felt that
mrs. jellyby looked down upon me rather for 
 
 ___________________________
 
being so frivolous, and i
was sorry for it, though at the same time i knew that i had no higher
pretensions.

it was nearly midnight before we found an opportunity of going to
bed, and even then we left mrs. jellyby among her papers drinking
coffee and miss jellyby biting the feather of her pen.

"what a strange house!" said ada when we got upstairs. "how curious
of my cousin jarndyce to send us here!"

"my love," said i, "it quite confuses me. i want to understand it,
and i can't understand it at all."

"what?" asked ada with her pretty smile.

"all this, my dear," said i. "it must be very good of mrs. jellyby to
take such pains about a scheme for the benefit of natives--and
yet--peepy and the housekeeping!"

ada laughed and put her arm about my neck as 
 
 ___________________________
 
hen
they were leaning on the screen before the fire where i found them,
that he recollected him as "a bluff, rosy fellow." this was the
utmost description ada could give me.

it set me thinking so that when ada was asleep, i still remained
before the fire, wondering and wondering about bleak house, and
wondering and wondering that yesterday morning should seem so long
ago. i don't know where my thoughts had wandered when they were
recalled by a tap at the door.

i opened it softly and found miss jellyby shivering there with a
broken candle in a broken candlestick in one hand and an egg-cup in
the other.

"good night!" she said very sulkily.

"good night!" said i.

"may i come in?" she shortly and unexpectedly asked me in the same
sulky way.

"certainly," said i. "don't wake miss clare."

she would not sit down, but stood by the fire dipping her inky middle
finger in the egg-cup, which contained vinegar, and smearing it over
the ink stains on her face, frowning the whole time and looking very
g
 
 ___________________________
 
is crib, and crept down in his bed-gown and
cap, and was so cold that his teeth were chattering as if he had cut
them all.




chapter v

a morning adventure


although the morning was raw, and although the fog still seemed
heavy--i say seemed, for the windows were so encrusted with dirt that
they would have made midsummer sunshine dim--i was sufficiently
forewarned of the discomfort within doors at that early hour and
sufficiently curious about london to think it a good idea on the part
of miss jellyby when she proposed that we should go out for a walk.

"ma won't be down for ever so long," she said, "and then it's a
chance if breakfast's ready for an hour afterwards, they dawdle so.
as to pa, he gets what he can and goes to the office. he never has
what you would call a regular breakfast. priscilla leaves him out the
loaf and some milk, when there is any, overnight. sometimes there
isn't any milk, and sometimes the cat drinks it. but i'm afraid you
must be tired, miss summerson, and perhaps 
 
 ___________________________
 
you would rather go to
bed."

"i am not at all tired, my dear," said i, "and would much prefer to
go out."

"if you're sure you would," returned miss jellyby, "i'll get my
things on."

ada said she would go too, and was soon astir. i made a proposal to
peepy, in default of being able to do anything better for him, that
he should let me wash him and afterwards lay him down on my bed
again. to this he submitted with the best grace possible, staring at
me during the whole operation as if he never had been, and never
could again be, so astonished in his life--looking very miserable
also, certainly, but making no complaint, and going snugly to sleep
as s
 
 ___________________________
 
oon as it was over. at first i was in two minds about taking such
a liberty, but i soon reflected that nobody in the house was likely
to notice it.

what with the bustle of dispatching peepy and the bustle of getting
myself ready and helping ada, i was soon quite in a glow. we found
miss jellyby trying to warm herself at the fire in the writing-room,
which priscilla was then lighting with a smutty parlour candlestick,
throwing the candle in to make it burn better. everything was just as
we had left it last night and was evidently intended to remain so.
below-stairs the dinner-cloth had not been taken away, but had been
left ready for breakfast. crumbs, dust, and waste-paper were all over
the house. some pewter pots and a milk-can hung on the area railings;
the door stood open; and we m
 
 ___________________________
 
et the cook round the corner coming out
of a public-house, wiping her mouth. she mentioned, as she passed us,
that she had been to see what o'clock it was.

but before we met the cook, we met richard, who was dancing up and
down thavies inn to warm his feet. he was agreeably surprised to see
us stirring so soon and said he would gladly share our walk. so he
took care of ada, and miss jellyby and i went first. i may mention
that miss jellyby had relapsed into her sulky manner and that i
really should not have thought she liked me much unless she had told
me so.

"where would you wish to go?" she asked.

"anywhere, my dear," i replied.

"anywhere's nowhere," said miss jellyby, stopping perversely.

"let us go somewhere at any rate," said i.

she then walked me on very fast.

"i don't care!" she said. "now, you are my witness, miss summerson, i
say i don't care--but if he was to come to our house with his great,
shining, lumpy forehe
 
 ___________________________
 
ad night after night till he was as old as
methuselah, i wouldn't have anything to say to him. such asses as he
and ma make of themselves!"

"my dear!" i remonstrated, in allusion to the epithet and the
vigorous emphasis miss jellyby set upon it. "your duty as a child--"

"oh! don't talk of duty as a child, miss summerson; where's ma's duty
as a parent? all made over to the public and africa, i suppose! then
let the public and africa show duty as a child; it's much more their
affair than mine. you are shocked, i dare say! very well, so am i
shocked too; so we are both shocked, and there's an end of it!"

she walked me on faster yet.

"but for all that, i say again, he may come, and come, and come, and
i won't have anything 
 
 ___________________________
 
k. i wonder the very paving-stones opposite our house can have the
patience to stay there and be a witness of such inconsistencies and
contradictions as all that sounding nonsense, and ma's management!"

i could not but understand her to refer to mr. quale, the young
gentleman who had appeared after dinner yesterday. i was saved the
disagreeable necessity of pursuing the subject by richard and ada
coming up at a round pace, laughing and asking us if we meant to run
a race. thus interrupted, miss jellyby became silent and walked
moodily on at my side while i admired the long successions and
varieties of streets, the quantity of people already going to and
fro, the number of vehicles passing and repassing, the busy
preparations in the setting forth of shop windows and the sweeping
out of shops, and the extraordinary creatures in rags secretly
groping among the swept-out rubbish for pins and other refuse.

"so, cousin," said the cheerful voice of richard to ada behind me.
"we are never to get out
 
 ___________________________
 
us, curtsying, and
smiling, and saying with her yesterday's air of patronage, "the wards
in jarndyce! ve-ry happy, i am sure!"

"you are out early, ma'am," said i as she curtsied to me.

"ye-es! i usually walk here early. before the court sits. it's
retired. i collect my thoughts here for the business of the day,"
said the old lady mincingly. "the business of the day requires a
great deal of thought. chancery justice is so ve-ry difficult to
follow."

"who's this, miss summerson?" whispered miss jellyby, drawing my arm
tighter through her own.

the little old lady's hearing was remarkably quick. she answered for
herself directly.

"a suitor, my child. at your service. i have the honour to attend
court regularly. with my documents. have i the pleasure of addressing
another of the youthful parties in jarndyce?" said the old lady,
recovering herself, with her head on one side, from a very low
curtsy.

richard, anxious to atone for his thoughtlessness of yesterday,
good-naturedly explained that mi
 
 ___________________________
 
ss jellyby was not connected with the
suit.

"ha!" said the old lady. "she does not expect a judgment? she will
still grow old. but not so old. oh, dear, no! this is the garden of
lincoln's inn. i call it my garden. it is quite a bower in the
summer-time. where the birds sing melodiously. i pass the greater
part of the long vacation here. in contemplation. you find the long
vacation exceedingly long, don't you?"

we said yes, as she seemed to expect us to say so.

"when the leaves are falling from the tre
 
 ___________________________
 
es and there are no more
flowers in bloom to make up into nosegays for the lord chancellor's
court," said the old lady, "the vacation is fulfilled and the sixth
seal, mentioned in the revelations, again prevails. pray come and see
my lodging. it will be a good omen for me. youth, and hope, and
beauty are very seldom there. it is a long, long time since i had a
visit from either."

she had taken my hand, and leading me and miss jellyby away, beckoned
richard and ada to come too. i did not know how to excuse myself and
looked to richard for aid. as he was half amused and half curious and
all in doubt how to get rid of the old lady without offence, she
continued to lead us away, and he and ada continued to follow, our
strange conductress informing us all the time, with much smiling
condescension, that she lived close by.

it was quite true, as it soon appeared. she lived so close by that we
had not time to have done humouring h
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
sound of her footsteps might reveal to him what she had said.

passing through the shop on our way out, as we had passed through it
on our way in, we found the old man storing a quantity of packets of
waste-paper in a kind of well in the floor. he seemed to be working
hard, with the perspiration standing on his forehead, and had a piece
of chalk by him, with which, as he put each separate package or
bundle down, he made a crooked mark on the panelling of the wall.

richard and ada, and miss jellyby, and the little old lady had gone
by him, and i was going when he touched me on the arm to stay me, and
chalked the letter j upon the wall--in a very curious manner,
beginning with the end of the letter and shaping it backward. it was
a capital letter, not a printed one, but just such a letter as any
clerk in messrs. kenge and carboy's office would have made.

"can you read it?" he asked me with a keen glance.

"surely," said i. "it's very plain."

"what is it?"

"j."

with another glance at me
 
 ___________________________
 
e me the headache and the heartache both
together. my head ached with wondering how it happened, if men were
neither fools nor rascals; and my heart ached to think they could
possibly be either. but at all events, ada--i may call you ada?"

"of course you may, cousin richard."

"at all events, chancery will work none of its bad influences on us.
we have happily been brought together, thanks to our good kinsman,
and it can't divide us now!"

"never, i hope, cousin richard!" said ada gently.

miss jellyby gave my arm a squeeze and me a very significant look. i
smiled in return, and we made the rest of the way back very
pleasantly.

in half an hour after our arrival, mrs. jellyby appeared; and in the
course of an hour the various things necessary for breakfast
straggled one by one into the dining-room. i do not doubt that mrs.
jellyby had gone to bed and got up in the usual manner, but she
presented no appearance of having changed her dress. she was greatly
occupied during breakfast, for the morn
 
 ___________________________
 
ing's post brought a heavy
correspondence relative to borrioboola-gha, which would occasion her
(she said) to pass a busy day. the children tumbled about, and
notched memoranda of their accidents in their legs, which were
perfect little calendars of distress; and peepy was lost for an hour
and a half, and brought home from newgate market by a policeman. the
equable manner in which mrs. jellyby sustained both his absence and
his restoration to the family circle surprised us all.

she was by that time perseveringly dictating to caddy, and caddy was
fast relapsing into the inky condition in which we had found her. at
one o'clock an open carriage arrived for us, and a cart for our
luggage. mrs. jellyby charged us with many remembrances to her good
friend mr. jarndyce; caddy left her desk to see us depart, kissed me
in the passage, and stood biting her pen and sobbing on the steps;
peepy,
 
 ___________________________
 
 at liberty. a word in earnest is
as good as a speech. i am heartily glad to see you. you are at home.
warm yourself!"

richard shook him by both hands with an intuitive mixture of respect
and frankness, and only saying (though with an earnestness that
rather alarmed me, i was so afraid of mr. jarndyce's suddenly
disappearing), "you are very kind, sir! we are very much obliged to
you!" laid aside his hat and coat and came up to the fire.

"and how did you like the ride? and how did you like mrs. jellyby, my
dear?" said mr. jarndyce to ada.

while ada was speaking to him in reply, i glanced (i need not say
with how much interest) at his face. it was a handsome, lively, quick
face, full of change and motion; and his hair was a silvered
iron-grey. i took him to be nearer sixty than fifty, but he was
upright, hearty, and robust. from the moment of his first speaking to
us his voice had connected itself with an association in my mind that
i could not define; but now, all at once, a something sudden
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his
manner and a pleasant expression in his eyes recalled the gentleman
in the stagecoach six years ago on the memorable day of my journey to
reading. i was certain it was he. i never was so frightened in my
life as when i made the discovery, for he caught my glance, and
appearing to read my thoughts, gave such a look at the door that i
thought we had lost him.

however, i am happy to say he remained where he was, and asked me
what i thought of mrs. jellyby.

"she exerts herself very much for africa, sir," i said.

"nobly!" returned mr. jarndyce. "but you answer like ada." whom i had
not heard. "you all think something else, i see."

"we rather thought," said i, glancing at richard and ada, who
entreated me with their eyes to speak, "that perhaps she was a little
unmindful of her home."

"floored!" cried mr. jarndyce.

i was rather alarmed again.

"well! i want to know your real thoughts, my dear. i may have sent
you there on purpose."

"we though
 
 ___________________________
 
t that, perhaps," said i, hesitating, "it is right to begin
with the obligations of home, sir; and that, perhaps, while those are
overlooked and neglected, no other duties can possibly be substituted
for them."

"the little jellybys," said richard, coming to my relief, "are
really--i can't help expressing myself strongly, sir--in a devil of a
state."

"she means well," said mr. jarndyce hastily. "the wind's in the
east."

"it was in the north, sir, as we came down," observed richard.

"my dear rick," said mr. jarndyce, poking the fire, "i'll take an
oath it's either in the east or going to be. i am always conscious of
an uncomfortable sensation now and then when the wind is blowing in
the east."

"rheumatism, sir?" said r
 
 ___________________________
 
d mr. jarndyce.

he had taken two or three undecided turns up and down while uttering
these broken sentences, retaining the poker in one hand and rubbing
his hair with the other, with a good-natured vexation at once so
whimsical and so lovable that i am sure we were more delighted with
him than we could possibly have expressed in any words. he gave an
arm to ada and an arm to me, and bidding richard bring a candle, was
leading the way out when he suddenly turned us all back again.

"those little jellybys. couldn't you--didn't you--now, if it had
rained sugar-plums, or three-cornered raspberry tarts, or anything of
that sort!" said mr. jarndyce.

"oh, cousin--" ada hastily began.

"good, my pretty pet. i like cousin. cousin john, perhaps, is
better."

"then, cousin john--" ada laughingly began again.

"ha, ha! very good indeed!" said mr. jarndyce with great enjoyment.
"sounds uncommonly natural. yes, my dear?"

"it did better than that. it rained esther."

"aye?" said mr. jarndyce. "what did es
 
 ___________________________
 
o with such
bright young looks in it. you have barely half an hour before dinner.
there's no one here but the finest creature upon earth--a child."

"more children, esther!" said ada.

"i don't mean literally a child," pursued mr. jarndyce; "not a child
in years. he is grown up--he is at least as old as i am--but in
simplicity, and freshness, and enthusiasm, and a fine guileless
inaptitude for all worldly affairs, he is a perfect child."

we felt that he must be very interesting.

"he knows mrs. jellyby," said mr. jarndyce. "he is a musical man, an
amateur, but might have been a professional. he is an artist too, an
amateur, but might have been a professional. he is a man of
attainments and of captivating manners. he has been unfortunate in
his affairs, and unfortunate in his pursuits, and unfortunate in his
family; but he don't care--he's a child!"

"did you imply that he has children of his own, sir?" inquired
richard.

"yes, rick! half-a-dozen. more! nearer a dozen, i should think. but
he h
 
 ___________________________
 
free of them, i scarcely doubted; he was so
very clear about it himself.

"i covet nothing," said mr. skimpole in the same light way.
"possession is nothing to me. here is my friend jarndyce's excellent
house. i feel obliged to him for possessing it. i can sketch it and
alter it. i can set it to music. when i am here, i have sufficient
possession of it and have neither trouble, cost, nor responsibility.
my steward's name, in short, is jarndyce, and he can't cheat me. we
have been mentioning mrs. jellyby. there is a bright-eyed woman, of a
strong will and immense power of business detail, who throws herself
into objects with surprising ardour! i don't regret that i have not a
strong will and an immense power of business detail to throw myself
into objects with surprising ardour. i can admire her without envy. i
can sympathize with the objects. i can dream of them. i can lie down
on the grass--in fine weather--and float along an african river,
embracing all the natives i meet, as sensible of the
 
 ___________________________
 
ery characteristic of his
eccentric gentleness and of the difference between him and those
petulant people who make the weather and the winds (particularly that
unlucky wind which he had chosen for such a different purpose) the
stalking-horses of their splenetic and gloomy humours.

indeed, so much affection for him had been added in this one evening
to my gratitude that i hoped i already began to understand him
through that mingled feeling. any seeming inconsistencies in mr.
skimpole or in mrs. jellyby i could not expect to be able to
reconcile, having so little experience or practical knowledge.
neither did i try, for my thoughts were busy when i was alone, with
ada and richard and with the confidence i had seemed to receive
concerning them. my fancy, made a little wild by the wind perhaps,
would not consent to be all unselfish, either, though i would have
persuaded it to be so if i could. it wandered back to my godmother's
house and came along the intervening track, raising up shadowy
specu
 
 ___________________________
 
gs, they wanted money,
they wanted coals, they wanted soup, they wanted interest, they
wanted autographs, they wanted flannel, they wanted whatever mr.
jarndyce had--or had not. their objects were as various as their
demands. they were going to raise new buildings, they were going to
pay off debts on old buildings, they were going to establish in a
picturesque building (engraving of proposed west elevation attached)
the sisterhood of mediaeval marys, they were going to give a
testimonial to mrs. jellyby, they were going to have their
secretary's portrait painted and presented to his mother-in-law,
whose deep devotion to him was well known, they were going to get up
everything, i really believe, from five hundred thousand tracts to an
annuity and from a marble monument to a silver tea-pot. they took a
multitude of titles. they were the women of england, the daughters of
britain, the sisters of all the cardinal virtues separately, the
females of america, the ladies of a hundred denominations. th
 
 ___________________________
 
eemed to our poor wits, and according to their own accounts, to be
constantly polling people by tens of thousands, yet never bringing
their candidates in for anything. it made our heads ache to think, on
the whole, what feverish lives they must lead.

among the ladies who were most distinguished for this rapacious
benevolence (if i may use the expression) was a mrs. pardiggle, who
seemed, as i judged from the number of her letters to mr. jarndyce,
to be almost as powerful a correspondent as mrs. jellyby herself. we
observed that the wind always changed when mrs. pardiggle became the
subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupted mr.
jarndyce and prevented his going any farther, when he had remarked
that there were two classes of charitable people; one, the people who
did a little and made a great deal of noise; the other, the people
who did a great deal and made no noise at all. we were therefore
curious to see mrs. pardiggle, suspecting her to be a type of the
former class, and we
 
 ___________________________
 
 have supposed
egbert to be one of the most baleful members of that tribe, he gave
me such a savage frown. the face of each child, as the amount of his
contribution was mentioned, darkened in a peculiarly vindictive
manner, but his was by far the worst. i must except, however, the
little recruit into the infant bonds of joy, who was stolidly and
evenly miserable.

"you have been visiting, i understand," said mrs. pardiggle, "at mrs.
jellyby's?"

we said yes, we had passed one night there.

"mrs. jellyby," pursued the lady, always speaking in the same
demonstrative, loud, hard tone, so that her voice impressed my fancy
as if it had a sort of spectacles on too--and i may take the
opportunity of remarking that her spectacles were made the less
engaging by her eyes being what ada called "choking eyes," meaning
very prominent--"mrs. jellyby is a benefactor to society and deserves
a helping hand. my boys have contributed to the african
project--egbert, one and six, being the entire allowance of nine
 
 ___________________________
 

weeks; oswald, one and a penny halfpenny, being the same; the rest,
according to their little means. nevertheless, i do not go with mrs.
jellyby in all things. i do not go with mrs. jellyby in her treatment
of her young family. it has been noticed. it has been observed that
her young family are excluded from participation in the objects to
which she is devoted. she may be right, she may be wrong; but, right
or wrong, this is not my course with my young family. i take them
everywhere."

i was afterwards convinced (and so was ada) that from the
ill-conditioned eldest child, these words extorted a sharp yell. he
turned it off into a yawn, but it began as a yell.

"they attend matins 
 
 ___________________________
 
ncluded with the name of o. a. pardiggle, f.r.s., one pound. that
is their father. we usually observe the same routine. i put down my
mite first; then my young family enrol their contributions, according
to their ages and their little means; and then mr. pardiggle brings
up the rear. mr. pardiggle is happy to throw in his limited donation,
under my direction; and thus things are made not only pleasant to
ourselves, but, we trust, improving to others."

suppose mr. pardiggle were to dine with mr. jellyby, and suppose mr.
jellyby were to relieve his mind after dinner to mr. pardiggle, would
mr. pardiggle, in return, make any confidential communication to mr.
jellyby? i was quite confused to find myself thinking this, but it
came into my head.

"you are very pleasantly situated here!" said mrs. pardiggle.

we were glad to change the subject, and going to the window, pointed
out the beauties of the prospect, on which the spectacles appeared to
me to rest with curious indifference.

"you know mr. g
 
 ___________________________
 
requested him, if he pleased, to go
away immediately.

"cruel miss," said mr. guppy, "hear but another word! i think you
must have seen that i was struck with those charms on the day when i
waited at the whytorseller. i think you must have remarked that i
could not forbear a tribute to those charms when i put up the steps
of the 'ackney-coach. it was a feeble tribute to thee, but it was
well meant. thy image has ever since been fixed in my breast. i have
walked up and down of an evening opposite jellyby's house only to
look upon the bricks that once contained thee. this out of to-day,
quite an unnecessary out so far as the attendance, which was its
pretended object, went, was planned by me alone for thee alone. if i
speak of interest, it is only to recommend myself and my respectful
wretchedness. love was before it, and is before it."

"i should be pained, mr. guppy," said i, rising and putting my hand
upon the bell-rope, "to do you or any one who was sincere the
injustice of slighting any hon
 
 ___________________________
 
inks you can't do
better."

so, richard said there was an end of it, and immediately began, on no
other foundation, to build as many castles in the air as would man
the great wall of china. he went away in high spirits. ada and i,
prepared to miss him very much, commenced our quieter career.

on our arrival in london, we had called with mr. jarndyce at mrs.
jellyby's but had not been so fortunate as to find her at home. it
appeared that she had gone somewhere to a tea-drinking and had taken
miss jellyby with her. besides the tea-drinking, there was to be some
considerable speech-making and letter-writing on the general merits
of the cultivation of coffee, conjointly with natives, at the
settlement of borrioboola-gha. all this involved, no doubt,
sufficient active exercise of pen and ink to make her daughter's part
in the proceedings anything but a holiday.

it being now beyond the time appointed for mrs. jellyby's return, we
called again. she was in town, but not at home, having gone to mile
e
 
 ___________________________
 
ar
child wore was either too large for him or too small. among his other
contradictory decorations he had the hat of a bishop and the little
gloves of a baby. his boots were, on a small scale, the boots of a
ploughman, while his legs, so crossed and recrossed with scratches
that they looked like maps, were bare below a very short pair of
plaid drawers finished off with two frills of perfectly different
patterns. the deficient buttons on his plaid frock had evidently been
supplied from one of mr. jellyby's coats, they were so extremely
brazen and so much too large. most extraordinary specimens of
needlework appeared on several parts of his dress, where it had been
hastily mended, and i recognized the same hand on miss jellyby's. she
was, however, unaccountably improved in her appearance and looked
very pretty. she was conscious of poor little peepy being but a
failure after all her trouble, and she showed it as she came in by
the way in which she glanced first at him and then at us.

"oh, dear 
 
 ___________________________
 
me!" said my guardian. "due east!"

ada and i gave her a cordial welcome and presented her to mr.
jarndyce, to whom she said as she sat down, "ma's compliments, and
she hopes you'll excuse her, because she's correcting proofs of the
plan. she's going to put out five thousand new circulars, and she
knows you'll be interested to hear that. i have brought one of them
with me. ma's compliments." with which she presented it sulkily
enough.

"thank you," said my guardian. "i am much obliged to mrs. jellyby.
oh, dear me! this is a very trying wind!"

we were busy with peepy, taking off his clerical hat, asking him if
he remembered us, and so on. peepy retired behind his elbow at first,
but relented at the sight of sponge-cake and allowed me to take him
on my lap, where he sat munching quietly. mr. jarndyce then
withdrawing into the temporary growlery, miss jellyby opened a
conversation with her usual abruptness.

"we are going on just as bad as ever in thavies inn," said she. "i
have no peace of m
 
 ___________________________
 
y life. talk of africa! i couldn't be worse off if
i was a what's-his-name--man and a brother!"

i tried to say something soothing.

"oh, it's of no use, miss summerson," exclaimed miss jellyby, "though
i thank you for the kind intention all the same. i know how i am
used, and i am not to be talked over. you wouldn't be talked over if
you were used so. peepy, go and play at wild beasts under the piano!"

"i shan't!" said peepy.

"very well, you ungrateful, naughty, hard-hearted boy!" returned miss
jellyby with tears in her eyes. "i'll never take pains to dress you
any more."

"yes, i will go, caddy!" cried peepy, who was really a good child and
who was so moved by his sister's vexatio
 
 ___________________________
 
n that he went at once.

"it seems a little thing to cry about," said poor miss jellyby
apologetically, "but i am quite worn out. i was directing the new
circulars till two this morning. i detest the whole thing so that
that alone makes my head ache till i can't see out of my eyes. and
look at that poor unfortunate child! was there ever such a fright as
he is!"

peepy, happily unconscious of the defects in his appearance, sat on
the carpet behind one of the legs of the piano, looking calmly out of
his den at us while he ate his cake.

"i have sent him to the other end of the room,
 
 ___________________________
 
" observed miss
jellyby, drawing her chair nearer ours, "because i don't want him to
hear the conversation. those little things are so sharp! i was going
to say, we really are going on worse than ever. pa will be a bankrupt
before long, and then i hope ma will be satisfied. there'll he nobody
but ma to thank for it."

we said we hoped mr. jellyby's affairs were not in so bad a state as
that.

"it's of no use hoping, though it's very kind of you," returned miss
jellyby, shaking her head. "pa told me only yesterday morning (and
dreadfully unhappy he is) that he couldn't weather the storm. i
should be surprised if he could. when all our tradesmen send into our
house any stuff they like, and the servants do what they like with
it, and i have no time to improve things if i knew how, and ma don't
care about anything, i should like to make out
 
 ___________________________
 
 how pa is to weather
the storm. i declare if i was pa, i'd run away."

"my dear!" said i, smiling. "your papa, no doubt, considers his
family."

"oh, yes, his family is all very fine, miss summerson," replied miss
jellyby; "but what comfort is his family to him? his family is
nothing but bills, dirt, waste, noise, tumbles downstairs, confusion,
and wretchedness. his scrambling home, from week's end to week's end,
is like one great washing-day--only nothing's washed!"

miss jellyby tapped her foot upon the floor and wiped her eyes.

"i am sure i pity pa to that degree," she said, "and am so angry with
ma that i can't find words to express myself! however, i am not going
to bear it, i am determined. i won't be a slave all my life, and i
won't submit to be proposed to by mr. quale. a pretty thing, indeed,
to marry a philanthropist. as if i hadn't had enough of that!" said
poor miss jellyby.

i must confess that i could not help feeling rather angry with mrs.
jellyby myself,
 
 ___________________________
 
 seeing and hearing this neglected girl and knowing
how much of bitterly satirical truth there was in what she said.

"if it wasn't that we had been intimate when you stopped at our
house," pursued miss jellyby, "i should have been ashamed to come
here to-day, for i know what a figure i must seem to you two. but as
it is, i made up my mind to call, especially as i am not likely to
see you again the next time you come to town."

she said this with such great significance that ada and i glanced at
one another, foreseeing something more.

"no!" said miss jellyby, shaking her head. "not at all likely! i know
i may trust you two. i am sure you won't betray me. i am engaged."

"without their knowledge at ho
 
 ___________________________
 
me?" said i.

"why, good gracious me, miss summerson," she returned, justifying
herself in a fretful but not angry manner, "how can it be otherwise?
you know what ma is--and i needn't make poor pa more miserable by
telling him."

"but would it not be adding to his unhappiness to marry without his
knowledge or consent, my dear?" said i.

"no," said miss jellyby, softening. "i hope not. i should try to make
him happy and comfortable when he came to see me, and peepy and the
others should take it in turns to come and stay with me, and they
should have some care taken of them then."

there was a good deal of affection in poor caddy. she softened more
and more while saying this and cried so much over the unwonted little
home-picture she had raised in her mind that peepy, in his cave under
the piano, was touched, and turned himself over on his back with lo
 
 ___________________________
 
on't know why you should be sorry," she retorted a little
anxiously, "but i am engaged to mr. turveydrop, whether or no, and he
is very fond of me. it's a secret as yet, even on his side, because
old mr. turveydrop has a share in the connexion and it might break
his heart or give him some other shock if he was told of it abruptly.
old mr. turveydrop is a very gentlemanly man indeed--very
gentlemanly."

"does his wife know of it?" asked ada.

"old mr. turveydrop's wife, miss clare?" returned miss jellyby,
opening her eyes. "there's no such person. he is a widower."

we were here interrupted by peepy, whose leg had undergone so much on
account of his sister's unconsciously jerking it like a bell-rope
whenever she was emphatic that the afflicted child now bemoaned his
sufferings with a very low-spirited noise. as he appealed to me for
compassion, and as i was only a listener, i undertook to hold him.
miss jellyby proceeded, after begging peepy's pardon with a kiss and
assuring him that she hadn't
 
 ___________________________
 
 ill of him. i am going there now for my lesson. i couldn't ask
you to go with me, miss summerson; but if you would," said caddy, who
had said all this earnestly and tremblingly, "i should be very
glad--very glad."

it happened that we had arranged with my guardian to go to miss
flite's that day. we had told him of our former visit, and our
account had interested him; but something had always happened to
prevent our going there again. as i trusted that i might have
sufficient influence with miss jellyby to prevent her taking any very
rash step if i fully accepted the confidence she was so willing to
place in me, poor girl, i proposed that she and i and peepy should go
to the academy and afterwards meet my guardian and ada at miss
flite's, whose name i now learnt for the first time. this was on
condition that miss jellyby and peepy should come back with us to
dinner. the last article of the agreement being joyfully acceded to
by both, we smartened peepy up a little with the assistance of a few

 
 ___________________________
 
windows. in the
same house there were also established, as i gathered from the plates
on the door, a drawing-master, a coal-merchant (there was, certainly,
no room for his coals), and a lithographic artist. on the plate
which, in size and situation, took precedence of all the rest, i
read, mr. turveydrop. the door was open, and the hall was blocked up
by a grand piano, a harp, and several other musical instruments in
cases, all in progress of removal, and all looking rakish in the
daylight. miss jellyby informed me that the academy had been lent,
last night, for a concert.

we went upstairs--it had been quite a fine house once, when it was
anybody's business to keep it clean and fresh, and nobody's business
to smoke in it all day--and into mr. turveydrop's great room, which
was built out into a mews at the back and was lighted by a skylight.
it was a bare, resounding room smelling of stables, with cane forms
along the walls, and the walls ornamented at regular intervals with
painted lyres and 
 
 ___________________________
 
curling at the ends all round
his head. he had a little fiddle, which we used to call at school a
kit, under his left arm, and its little bow in the same hand. his
little dancing-shoes were particularly diminutive, and he had a
little innocent, feminine manner which not only appealed to me in an
amiable way, but made this singular effect upon me, that i received
the impression that he was like his mother and that his mother had
not been much considered or well used.

"i am very happy to see miss jellyby's friend," he said, bowing low
to me. "i began to fear," with timid tenderness, "as it was past the
usual time, that miss jellyby was not coming."

"i beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to me, who have
detained her, and to receive my excuses, sir," said i.

"oh, dear!" said he.

"and pray," i entreated, "do not allow me to be the cause of any more
delay."

with that apology i withdrew to a seat between peepy (who, being well
used to it, had already climbed into a corner place) and
 
 ___________________________
 
t size and weight, shelving downward from the crown
to the brim, and in his hand a pair of white gloves with which he
flapped it as he stood poised on one leg in a high-shouldered,
round-elbowed state of elegance not to be surpassed. he had a cane,
he had an eye-glass, he had a snuff-box, he had rings, he had
wristbands, he had everything but any touch of nature; he was not
like youth, he was not like age, he was not like anything in the
world but a model of deportment.

"father! a visitor. miss jellyby's friend, miss summerson."

"distinguished," said mr. turveydrop, "by miss summerson's presence."
as he bowed to me in that tight state, i almost believe i saw creases
come into the whites of his eyes.

"my father," said the son, aside, to me with quite an affecting
belief in him, "is a celebrated character. my father is greatly
admired."

"go on, prince! go on!" said mr. turveydrop, standing with his back
to the fire and waving his gloves condescendingly. "go on, my son!"

at this command, or 
 
 ___________________________
 
e my poor boy
with that part of his art. heaven forbid that i should disparage my
dear child, but he has--no deportment."

"he appears to be an excellent master," i observed.

"understand me, my dear madam, he is an excellent master. all that
can be acquired, he has acquired. all that can be imparted, he can
impart. but there are things--" he took another pinch of snuff and
made the bow again, as if to add, "this kind of thing, for instance."

i glanced towards the centre of the room, where miss jellyby's lover,
now engaged with single pupils, was undergoing greater drudgery than
ever.

"my amiable child," murmured mr. turveydrop, adjusting his cravat.

"your son is indefatigable," said i.

"it is my reward," said mr. turveydrop, "to hear you say so. in some
respects, he treads in the footsteps of his sainted mother. she was a
devoted creature. but wooman, lovely wooman," said mr. turveydrop
with very disagreeable gallantry, "what a sex you are!"

i rose and joined miss jellyby, who was by thi
 
 ___________________________
 
s time putting on her
bonnet. the time allotted to a lesson having fully elapsed, there was
a general putting on of bonnets. when miss jellyby and the
unfortunate prince found an opportunity to become betrothed i don't
know, but they certainly found none on this occasion to exchange a
dozen words.

"my dear," said mr. turveydrop benignly to his son, "do you know the
hour?"

"no, father." the son had no watch. the father had a handsome gold
one, which he pulled out with an air that was an example to mankind.

"my son," said he, "it's two o'clock. recollect your school at
kensington at three."

"that's time enough for me, father," said 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir farther and farther back, until the very roots were
almost ready to fly out of his head in inappeasable philanthropy. all
objects were alike to him, but he was always particularly ready for
anything in the way of a testimonial to any one. his great power
seemed to be his power of indiscriminate admiration. he would sit for
any length of time, with the utmost enjoyment, bathing his temples in
the light of any order of luminary. having first seen him perfectly
swallowed up in admiration of mrs. jellyby, i had supposed her to be
the absorbing object of his devotion. i soon discovered my mistake
and found him to be train-bearer and organ-blower to a whole
procession of people.

mrs. pardiggle came one day for a subscription to something, and with
her, mr. quale. whatever mrs. pardiggle said, mr. quale repeated to
us; and just as he had drawn mrs. jellyby out, he drew mrs. pardiggle
out. mrs. pardiggle wrote a letter of introduction to my guardian in
behalf of her eloquent friend mr. gusher. wit
 
 ___________________________
 
appiness then, and with such
better things before him--what a fatal link was riveting between his
fresh youth and her faded age, between his free hopes and her caged
birds, and her hungry garret, and her wandering mind.

ada loved him too well to mistrust him much in anything he said or
did, and my guardian, though he frequently complained of the east
wind and read more than usual in the growlery, preserved a strict
silence on the subject. so i thought one day when i went to london to
meet caddy jellyby, at her solicitation, i would ask richard to be in
waiting for me at the coach-office, that we might have a little talk
together. i found him there when i arrived, and we walked away arm in
arm.

"well, richard," said i as soon as i could begin to be grave with
him, "are you beginning to feel more settled now?"

"oh, yes, my dear!" returned richard. "i'm all right enough."

"but settled?" said i.

"how do you mean, settled?" returned richard with his gay laugh.

"settled in the law," said i.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
 richard with all the earnestness i felt, and all the hope
i could not quite feel then, and implored him for ada's sake not to
put any trust in chancery. to all i said, richard readily assented,
riding over the court and everything else in his easy way and drawing
the brightest pictures of the character he was to settle into--alas,
when the grievous suit should loose its hold upon him! we had a long
talk, but it always came back to that, in substance.

at last we came to soho square, where caddy jellyby had appointed to
wait for me, as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of newman street.
caddy was in the garden in the centre and hurried out as soon as i
appeared. after a few cheerful words, richard left us together.

"prince has a pupil over the way, esther," said caddy, "and got the
key for us. so if you will walk round and round here with me, we can
lock ourselves in and i can tell you comfortably what i wanted to see
your dear good face about."

"very well, my dear," said i. "nothing could 
 
 ___________________________
 
and had had her white muslin extinguished in shawls, she was
taken away. after a few words of preparation, we then went in search
of mr. turveydrop, whom we found, grouped with his hat and gloves, as
a model of deportment, on the sofa in his private apartment--the only
comfortable room in the house. he appeared to have dressed at his
leisure in the intervals of a light collation, and his dressing-case,
brushes, and so forth, all of quite an elegant kind, lay about.

"father, miss summerson; miss jellyby."

"charmed! enchanted!" said mr. turveydrop, rising with his
high-shouldered bow. "permit me!" handing chairs. "be seated!"
kissing the tips of his left fingers. "overjoyed!" shutting his eyes
and rolling. "my little retreat is made a paradise." recomposing
himself on the sofa like the second gentleman in europe.

"again you find us, miss summerson," said he, "using our little arts
to polish, polish! again the sex stimulates us and rewards us by the
condescension of its lovely presence. it is 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat is this? is this
lunacy! or what is this?"

"father," returned prince with great submission, "i love this young
lady, and we are engaged."

"engaged!" cried mr. turveydrop, reclining on the sofa and shutting
out the sight with his hand. "an arrow launched at my brain by my own
child!"

"we have been engaged for some time, father," faltered prince, "and
miss summerson, hearing of it, advised that we should declare the
fact to you and was so very kind as to attend on the present
occasion. miss jellyby is a young lady who deeply respects you,
father."

mr. turveydrop uttered a groan.

"no, pray don't! pray don't, father," urged his son. "miss jellyby is
a young lady who deeply respects you, and our first desire is to
consider your comfort."

mr. turveydrop sobbed.

"no, pray don't, father!" cried his son.

"boy," said mr. turveydrop, "it is well that your sainted mother is
spared this pang. strike deep, and spare not. strike home, sir,
strike home!"

"pray don't say so, father," implored prin
 
 ___________________________
 
hat i told caddy we must really go to thavies inn at once
if we were to go at all that day. so we took our departure after a
very loving farewell between caddy and her betrothed, and during our
walk she was so happy and so full of old mr. turveydrop's praises
that i would not have said a word in his disparagement for any
consideration.

the house in thavies inn had bills in the windows announcing that it
was to let, and it looked dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than
ever. the name of poor mr. jellyby had appeared in the list of
bankrupts but a day or two before, and he was shut up in the
dining-room with two gentlemen and a heap of blue bags,
account-books, and papers, making the most desperate endeavours to
understand his affairs. they appeared to me to be quite beyond his
comprehension, for when caddy took me into the dining-room by mistake
and we came upon mr. jellyby in his spectacles, forlornly fenced into
a corner by the great dining-table and the two gentlemen, he seemed
to have give
 
 ___________________________
 
n up the whole thing and to be speechless and insensible.

going upstairs to mrs. jellyby's room (the children were all
screaming in the kitchen, and there was no servant to be seen), we
found that lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence, opening,
reading, and sorting letters, with a great accumulation of torn
covers on the floor. she was so preoccupied that at first she did not
know me, though she sat looking at me with that curious, bright-eyed,
far-off look of hers.

"ah! miss summerson!" she said at last. "i was thinking of something
so different! i hope you are well. i
 
 ___________________________
 
 am happy to see you. mr.
jarndyce and miss clare quite well?"

i hoped in return that mr. jellyby was quite well.

"why, not quite, my dear," said mrs. jellyby in the calmest manner.
"he has been unfortunate in his affairs and is a little out of
spirits. happily for me, i am so much engaged that i have no time to
think about it. we have, at the present moment, one hundred and
seventy families, miss summerson, averaging five persons in each,
either gone or going to the left bank of the niger."

i thought of the one family so near us who were neither gone nor
going to the left bank of the niger, and wondered how she could be so
placid.

"you have brough
 
 ___________________________
 
t caddy back, i see," observed mrs. jellyby with a
glance at her daughter. "it has become quite a novelty to see her
here. she has almost deserted her old employment and in fact obliges
me to employ a boy."

"i am sure, ma--" began caddy.

"now you know, caddy," her mother mildly interposed, "that i do
employ a boy, who is now at his dinner. what is the use of your
contradicting?"

"i was not going to contradict, ma," returned caddy. "i was only
going to say that surely you wouldn't have me be a mere drudge all my
life."

"i believe, my 
 
 ___________________________
 
dear," said mrs. jellyby, still opening her letters,
casting her bright eyes smilingly over them, and sorting them as she
spoke, "that you have a business example before you in your mother.
besides. a mere drudge? if you had any sympathy with the destinies of
the human race, it would raise you high above any such idea. but you
have none. i have often told you, caddy, you have no such sympathy."

"not if it's africa, ma, i have not."

"of course you have not. now, if i were not happily so much engaged,
miss summerson," 
 
 ___________________________
 
said mrs. jellyby, sweetly casting her eyes for a
moment on me and considering where to put the particular letter she
had just opened, "this would distress and disappoint me. but i have
so much to think of, in connexion with borrioboola-gha and it is so
necessary i should concentrate myself that there is my remedy, you
see."

as caddy gave me a glance of entreaty, and as mrs. jellyby was
looking far away into africa straight through my bonnet and head, i
thought it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit and
to attract mrs. jellyby's attention.

"perhaps," i began, "you will wonder what has brought me here to
interrupt you."

"i am always delighted to see miss summerson," said mrs. jellyby,
pursuing her employment with a placid smile. "though i wish," and she
shook her head, "she was more interested in the borrioboolan
project."

"i have come with caddy," said
 
 ___________________________
 
 i, "because caddy justly thinks she
ought not to have a secret from her mother and fancies i shall
encourage and aid her (though i am sure i don't know how) in
imparting one."

"caddy," said mrs. jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation
and then serenely pursuing it after shaking her head, "you are going
to tell me some nonsense."

caddy untied the strings of her bonnet, took her bonnet off, and
letting it dangle on the floor by the strings, and crying heartily,
said, "ma, i am engaged."

"oh, you ridiculous child!" observed mrs. jellyby with an abstracted
air as she looked over the dispatch last opened; "what a goose you
are!"

"i am engaged, ma," sobbed caddy, "to young mr. turveydrop,
 
 ___________________________
 
 at the
academy; and old mr. turveydrop (who is a very gentlemanly man
indeed) has given his consent, and i beg and pray you'll give us
yours, ma, because i never could be happy without it. i never, never
could!" sobbed caddy, quite forgetful of her general complainings and
of everything but her natural affection.

"you see again, miss summerson," observed mrs. jellyby serenely,
"what a happiness it is to be so much occupied as i am and to have
this necessity for self-concentration that i have. here is caddy
engaged to a dancing-master's son--mixed up with people who have no
more sympathy with the destinies of the human race than she has
herself! this, too, when mr. quale, one of the first philanthropists
of our time, has mentioned to me that he was really disposed to be
interested in her!"

"ma, i always hated and detested mr. quale!" sobbed caddy.

"caddy, 
 
 ___________________________
 
caddy!" returned mrs. jellyby, opening another letter with
the greatest complacency. "i have no doubt you did. how could you do
otherwise, being totally destitute of the sympathies with which he
overflows! now, if my public duties were not a favourite child to me,
if i were not occupied with large measures on a vast scale, these
petty details might grieve me very much, miss summerson. but can i
permit the film of a silly proceeding on the part of caddy (from whom
i expect nothing else) to interpose between me and the great 
 
 ___________________________
 
african
continent? no. no," repeated mrs. jellyby in a calm clear voice, and
with an agreeable smile, as she opened more letters and sorted them.
"no, indeed."

i was so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception,
though i might have expected it, that i did not know what to say.
caddy seemed equally at a loss. mrs. jellyby continued to open and
sort letters and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of
voice and with a smile of perfect composure, "no, indeed."

"i hope, ma," sobbed poor caddy at last, "you are not angry?"

"oh, caddy, you really are an absurd girl," returned mrs. jellyby,
"to ask such questions after what i have said of the preoccupation of
my mind."

"and i hope, ma, you give us your consent and wish us well?" said
caddy.

"you are a nonsensical child to have done anything of this kind,
 
 ___________________________
 
"
said mrs. jellyby; "and a degenerate child, when you might have
devoted yourself to the great public measure. but the step is taken,
and i have engaged a boy, and there is no more to be said. now, pray,
caddy," said mrs. jellyby, for caddy was kissing her, "don't delay me
in my work, but let me clear off this heavy batch of papers before
the afternoon post comes in!"

i thought i could not do better than take my leave; i was detained
for a moment by caddy's saying, "you won't object to my bringing him
to see you, ma?"

"oh, dear me, caddy," cried mrs. jellyby, who had relapsed into that
distant contemplation, "have you begun again? bring whom?"

"him, ma."

"caddy, caddy!" said mrs. jellyby, quite weary of such little

 
 ___________________________
 
eepy when she had a home
of her own; and finally we went downstairs into the damp dark
kitchen, where peepy and his little brothers and sisters were
grovelling on the stone floor and where we had such a game of play
with them that to prevent myself from being quite torn to pieces i
was obliged to fall back on my fairy-tales. from time to time i heard
loud voices in the parlour overhead, and occasionally a violent
tumbling about of the furniture. the last effect i am afraid was
caused by poor mr. jellyby's breaking away from the dining-table and
making rushes at the window with the intention of throwing himself
into the area whenever he made any new attempt to understand his
affairs.

as i rode quietly home at night after the day's bustle, i thought a
good deal of caddy's engagement and felt confirmed in my hopes (in
spite of the elder mr. turveydrop) that she would be the happier and
better for it. and if there seemed to be but a slender chance of her
and her husband ever finding out what the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and over again in
twenty scales? why was it so worrying to me to have her in our house,
and confidential to me every night, when i yet felt that it was
better and safer somehow that she should be there than anywhere else?
these were perplexities and contradictions that i could not account
for. at least, if i could--but i shall come to all that by and by,
and it is mere idleness to go on about it now.

so when mrs. woodcourt went away, i was sorry to lose her but was
relieved too. and then caddy jellyby came down, and caddy brought
such a packet of domestic news that it gave us abundant occupation.

first caddy declared (and would at first declare nothing else) that i
was the best adviser that ever was known. this, my pet said, was no
news at all; and this, i said, of course, was nonsense. then caddy
told us that she was going to be married in a month and that if ada
and i would be her bridesmaids, she was the happiest girl in the
world. to be sure, this was news indeed; and i thought we never
 
 ___________________________
 
tood about that business was that when he wanted money more
than usual he went to the docks to look for it, and hardly ever found
it.

as soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this shorn
lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in hatton garden
(where i found the children, when i afterwards went there, cutting
the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking themselves
with it), caddy had brought about a meeting between him and old mr.
turveydrop; and poor mr. jellyby, being very humble and meek, had
deferred to mr. turveydrop's deportment so submissively that they had
become excellent friends. by degrees, old mr. turveydrop, thus
familiarized with the idea of his son's marriage, had worked up his
parental feelings to the height of contemplating that event as being
near at hand and had given his gracious consent to the young couple
commencing housekeeping at the academy in newman street when they
would.

"and your papa, caddy. what did he say?"

"oh! poor pa
 
 ___________________________
 
oped and thought i could be a better
daughter to him there than at home. then i mentioned peepy's coming
to stay with me, and then pa began to cry again and said the children
were indians."

"indians, caddy?"

"yes," said caddy, "wild indians. and pa said"--here she began to
sob, poor girl, not at all like the happiest girl in the world--"that
he was sensible the best thing that could happen to them was their
being all tomahawked together."

ada suggested that it was comfortable to know that mr. jellyby did
not mean these destructive sentiments.

"no, of course i know pa wouldn't like his family to be weltering in
their blood," said caddy, "but he means that they are very
unfortunate in being ma's children and that he is very unfortunate in
being ma's husband; and i am sure that's true, though it seems
unnatural to say so."

i asked caddy if mrs. jellyby knew that her wedding-day was fixed.

"oh! you know what ma is, esther," she returned. "it's impossible to
say whether she knows it or not. s
 
 ___________________________
 
hat made her perfectly joyful. this was her staying
with us for three weeks, my staying with her for one, and our all
three contriving and cutting out, and repairing, and sewing, and
saving, and doing the very best we could think of to make the most of
her stock. my guardian being as pleased with the idea as caddy was,
we took her home next day to arrange the matter and brought her out
again in triumph with her boxes and all the purchases that could be
squeezed out of a ten-pound note, which mr. jellyby had found in the
docks i suppose, but which he at all events gave her. what my
guardian would not have given her if we had encouraged him, it would
be difficult to say, but we thought it right to compound for no more
than her wedding-dress and bonnet. he agreed to this compromise, and
if caddy had ever been happy in her life, she was happy when we sat
down to work.

she was clumsy enough with her needle, poor girl, and pricked her
fingers as much as she had been used to ink them. she could not 
 
 ___________________________
 
on when she
proposed it. however, i said, "caddy, i am sure you are very welcome
to learn anything that you can learn of me, my dear," and i showed
her all my books and methods and all my fidgety ways. you would have
supposed that i was showing her some wonderful inventions, by her
study of them; and if you had seen her, whenever i jingled my
housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, certainly you might have
thought that there never was a greater imposter than i with a blinder
follower than caddy jellyby.

so what with working and housekeeping, and lessons to charley, and
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with ada, the
three weeks slipped fast away. then i went home with caddy to see
what could be done there, and ada and charley remained behind to take
care of my guardian.

when i say i went home with caddy, i mean to the furnished lodging in
hatton garden. we went to newman street two or three times, where
preparations were in progress too--a good many, i observed, for
enha
 
 ___________________________
 
ncing the comforts of old mr. turveydrop, and a few for putting
the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the house--but
our great point was to make the furnished lodging decent for the
wedding-breakfast and to imbue mrs. jellyby beforehand with some
faint sense of the occasion.

the latter was the more difficult thing of the two because mrs.
jellyby and an unwholesome boy occupied the front sitting-room (the
back one was a mere closet), and it was littered down with
waste-paper and borrioboolan documents, as an untidy stable might be
littered with straw. mrs. jellyby sat there all day drinking strong
coffee, dictating, and holding borrioboolan interviews by
appointment. the unwholesome boy, who seemed to me to be going
 
 ___________________________
 
 into a
decline, took his meals out of the house. when mr. jellyby came home,
he usually groaned and went down into the kitchen. there he got
something to eat if the servant would give him anything, and then,
feeling that he was in the way, went out and walked about hatton
garden in the wet. the poor children scrambled up and tumbled down
the house as they had always been accustomed to do.

the production of these devoted little sacrifices in any presentable
condition being quite out of the question at a week's notice, i
proposed to caddy that we should make t
 
 ___________________________
 
hem as happy as we could on
her marriage morning in the attic where they all slept, and should
confine our greatest efforts to her mama and her mama's room, and a
clean breakfast. in truth mrs. jellyby required a good deal of
attention, the lattice-work up her back having widened considerably
since i first knew her and her hair looking like the mane of a
dustman's horse.

thinking that the display of caddy's wardrobe would be the best means
of approaching the subject, i invited mrs. jellyby to come and look
at it spread out on caddy's bed in the evening after the unwholesome
boy was gone.

"my dear miss summerson," said she, rising from her desk with her
usual sweetness of temper, "these are really ridiculous preparations,
though your assisting them is a proof of your kindness. there is
something so inexpressibly absurd to me in the idea of caddy being
married! oh, caddy, you silly, silly, silly puss!"

she came upstairs with us notwithstanding and looked at the clothes
in her cus
 
 ___________________________
 
tomary far-off manner. they suggested one distinct idea to
her, for she said with her placid smile, and shaking her head, "my
good miss summerson, at half the cost, this weak child might have
been equipped for africa!"

on our going downstairs again, mrs. jellyby asked me whether this
troublesome business was really to take place next wednesday. and on
my replying yes, she said, "will my room be required, my dear miss
summerson? for it's quite impossible that i can put my papers away."

i took the liberty of saying that the room would certainly be wanted
and that i thought we must put the papers away somewhere. "well, my
dear miss summerson," said mrs. jellyby, "you know best, i dare say.
but by obliging me to employ a boy, caddy has embarrassed me to t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
extent, overwhelmed as i am with public business, that i don't know
which way to turn. we have a ramification meeting, too, on wednesday
afternoon, and the inconvenience is very serious."

"it is not likely to occur again," said i, smiling. "caddy will be
married but once, probably."

"that's true," mrs. jellyby replied; "that's true, my dear. i suppose
we must make the best of it!"

the next question was how mrs. jellyby should be dressed on the
occasion. i thought it very curious to see her looking on serenely
from her writing-table while caddy and i discussed it, occasionally
shaking her head at us with a half-reproachful smile like a superior
spirit who could just bear with our trifling.

the state in which her dresses were, and the extraordinary confusion
in which she kept them, added not a little to our difficulty; but at
length we devised something not very unlike what a common-place
mother might wear on 
 
 ___________________________
 
such an occasion. the abstracted manner in which
mrs. jellyby would deliver herself up to having this attire tried on
by the dressmaker, and the sweetness with which she would then
observe to me how sorry she was that i had not turned my thoughts to
africa, were consistent with the rest of her behaviour.

the lodging was rather confined as to space, but i fancied that if
mrs. jellyby's household had been the only lodgers in saint paul's or
saint peter's, the sole advantage they would have found in the size
of the building would have been its affording a great deal of room to
be dirty in. i believe that nothing belonging to the family which it
had been possible to break was unbroken at the time of those
preparations for caddy's marriage, that nothing which it had been
possible to spoil in any way was unspoilt, and that no domestic
object which was capable of collecting dirt,
 
 ___________________________
 
 from a dear child's knee
to the door-plate, was without as much dirt as could well accumulate
upon it.

poor mr. jellyby, who very seldom spoke and almost always sat when he
was at home with his head against the wall, became interested when he
saw that caddy and i were attempting to establish some order among
all this waste and ruin and took off his coat to help. but such
wonderful things came tumbling out of the closets when they were
opened--bits of mouldy pie, sour bottles, mrs. jellyby's caps,
letters, tea, forks, odd boots and shoes of children, firewood,
wafers, saucepan-lids, damp sugar in odds and ends of paper bags,
footstools, blacklead brushes, bread, mrs. jellyby's bonnets, books
with butter sticking to the binding, guttered candle ends put out
by being turned upside down in broken candlesticks, nutshells,
heads and tails of shrimps, dinner-mats, gloves, coffee-grounds,
umbrellas--that he looked frightened, and left off again. but he came
regularly every evening and s
 
 ___________________________
 
s coat, with his head
against the wall, as though he would have helped us if he had known
how.

"poor pa!" said caddy to me on the night before the great day, when
we really had got things a little to rights. "it seems unkind to
leave him, esther. but what could i do if i stayed! since i first
knew you, i have tidied and tidied over and over again, but it's
useless. ma and africa, together, upset the whole house directly. we
never have a servant who don't drink. ma's ruinous to everything."

mr. jellyby could not hear what she said, but he seemed very low
indeed and shed tears, i thought.

"my heart aches for him; that it does!" sobbed caddy. "i can't help
thinking to-night, esther, how dearly i hope to be happy with prince,
and how dearly pa hoped, i dare say, to be happy with ma. what a
disappointed life!"

"my dear caddy!" said mr. jellyby, looking slowly round from the
wail. it was the first time, i think, i ever heard him say three
words together.

"yes, pa!" cried caddy, going to him and
 
 ___________________________
 
 embracing him
affectionately.

"my dear caddy," said mr. jellyby. "never have--"

"not prince, pa?" faltered caddy. "not have prince?"

"yes, my dear," said mr. jellyby. "have him, certainly. but, never
have--"

i mentioned in my account of our first visit in thavies inn that
richard described mr. jellyby as frequently opening his mouth after
dinner without saying anything. it was a habit of his. he opened his
mouth now a great many times and shook his head in a melancholy
manner.

"what do you wish me not to have? don't have what, dear pa?" asked
caddy, coaxing him, with her arms round his neck.

"never have a mission, my dear child."

mr. jellyby groaned and laid his head against the wall again, and
this was the only time i ever heard him make any approach to
expressing his sentiments on the b
 
 ___________________________
 
orrioboolan question. i suppose he
had been more talkative and lively once, but he seemed to have been
completely exhausted long before i knew him.

i thought mrs. jellyby never would have left off serenely looking
over her papers and drinking coffee that night. it was twelve o'clock
before we could obtain possession of the room, and the clearance it
required then was so discouraging that caddy, who was almost tired
out, sat down in the middle of the dust and cried. but she soon
cheered up, and we did wonders with it before we went to bed.

in the morning it looked, by the aid of a few flowers and a quantity
of soap and water and a little arrangement, quite gay. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 knobs of temples shining very much, was
also there, not in the character of a disappointed lover, but as the
accepted of a young--at least, an unmarried--lady, a miss wisk, who
was also there. miss wisk's mission, my guardian said, was to show
the world that woman's mission was man's mission and that the only
genuine mission of both man and woman was to be always moving
declaratory resolutions about things in general at public meetings.
the guests were few, but were, as one might expect at mrs. jellyby's,
all devoted to public objects only. besides those i have mentioned,
there was an extremely dirty lady with her bonnet all awry and the
ticketed price of her dress still sticking on it, whose neglected
home, caddy told me, was like a filthy wilderness, but whose church
was like a fancy fair. a very contentious gentleman, who said it was
his mission to be everybody's brother but who appeared to be on terms
of coolness with the whole of his large family, completed the party.

a party, having le
 
 ___________________________
 
 other singularity was that nobody with a
mission--except mr. quale, whose mission, as i think i have formerly
said, was to be in ecstasies with everybody's mission--cared at all
for anybody's mission. mrs. pardiggle being as clear that the only
one infallible course was her course of pouncing upon the poor and
applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; as miss wisk
was that the only practical thing for the world was the emancipation
of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. mrs. jellyby, all the
while, sat smiling at the limited vision that could see anything but
borrioboola-gha.

but i am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the ride
home instead of first marrying caddy. we all went to church, and mr.
jellyby gave her away. of the air with which old mr. turveydrop, with
his hat under his left arm (the inside presented at the clergyman
like a cannon) and his eyes creasing themselves up into his wig,
stood stiff and high-shouldered behind us bridesmaids during th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
ceremony, and afterwards saluted us, i could never say enough to do
it justice. miss wisk, whom i cannot report as prepossessing in
appearance, and whose manner was grim, listened to the proceedings,
as part of woman's wrongs, with a disdainful face. mrs. jellyby, with
her calm smile and her bright eyes, looked the least concerned of all
the company.

we duly came back to breakfast, and mrs. jellyby sat at the head of
the table and mr. jellyby at the foot. caddy had previously stolen
upstairs to hug the children again and tell them that her name was
turveydrop. but this piece of information, instead of being an
agreeable surprise to peepy, threw him on his back in such transports
of kicking grief that i could do nothing on being sent for but accede
to the proposal that he should be admitted to the breakfast table. so
he came down and sat in my lap; and mrs. jellyby, after saying, in
reference to the state of his pinafore, "oh, you na
 
 ___________________________
 
vastly superior to all the company--it was a very
unpromising case.

at last the time came when poor caddy was to go and when all her
property was packed on the hired coach and pair that was to take her
and her husband to gravesend. it affected us to see caddy clinging,
then, to her deplorable home and hanging on her mother's neck with
the greatest tenderness.

"i am very sorry i couldn't go on writing from dictation, ma," sobbed
caddy. "i hope you forgive me now."

"oh, caddy, caddy!" said mrs. jellyby. "i have told you over and over
again that i have engaged a boy, and there's an end of it."

"you are sure you are not the least angry with me, ma? say you are
sure before i go away, ma?"

"you foolish caddy," returned mrs. jellyby, "do i look angry, or have
i inclination to be angry, or time to be angry? how can you?"

"take a little care of pa while i am gone, mama!"

mrs. jellyby positively laughed at the fancy. "you romantic child,"
said she, lightly patting caddy's back. "go along. i am ex
 
 ___________________________
 
pt to take offence."

"this day week, father, we shall be sure to be home to dinner."

"good!" said mr. turveydrop. "you will find fires, my dear caroline,
in your own room, and dinner prepared in my apartment. yes, yes,
prince!" anticipating some self-denying objection on his son's part
with a great air. "you and our caroline will be strange in the upper
part of the premises and will, therefore, dine that day in my
apartment. now, bless ye!"

they drove away, and whether i wondered most at mrs. jellyby or at
mr. turveydrop, i did not know. ada and my guardian were in the same
condition when we came to talk it over. but before we drove away too,
i received a most unexpected and eloquent compliment from mr.
jellyby. he came up to me in the hall, took both my hands, pressed
them earnestly, and opened his mouth twice. i was so sure of his
meaning that i said, quite flurried, "you are very welcome, sir. pray
don't mention it!"

"i hope this marriage is for the best, guardian," said i when we
three
 
 ___________________________
 
usiness,
devoted to such settlements of accounts, such repeated journeys to
and fro between the growlery and all other parts of the house, so
many rearrangements of drawers and presses, and such a general new
beginning altogether, that i had not a moment's leisure. but when
these arrangements were completed and everything was in order, i paid
a visit of a few hours to london, which something in the letter i had
destroyed at chesney wold had induced me to decide upon in my own
mind.

i made caddy jellyby--her maiden name was so natural to me that i
always called her by it--the pretext for this visit and wrote her a
note previously asking the favour of her company on a little business
expedition. leaving home very early in the morning, i got to london
by stage-coach in such good time that i got to newman street with the
day before me.

caddy, who had not seen me since her wedding-day, was so glad and so
affectionate that i was half inclined to fear i should make her
husband jealous. but he was, 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat the old gentleman had all the good things and all the good
lodging, while she and her husband had what they could get, and were
poked into two corner rooms over the mews.)

"and how is your mama, caddy?" said i.

"why, i hear of her, esther," replied caddy, "through pa, but i see
very little of her. we are good friends, i am glad to say, but ma
thinks there is something absurd in my having married a
dancing-master, and she is rather afraid of its extending to her."

it struck me that if mrs. jellyby had discharged her own natural
duties and obligations before she swept the horizon with a telescope
in search of others, she would have taken the best precautions
against becoming absurd, but i need scarcely observe that i kept this
to myself.

"and your papa, caddy?"

"he comes here every evening," returned caddy, "and is so fond of
sitting in the corner there that it's a treat to see him."

looking at the corner, i plainly perceived the mark of mr. jellyby's
head against the wall. it was cons
 
 ___________________________
 
f his, esther."

i expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it
necessary to add that i readily dispensed with this attention.

"it takes him a long time to dress," said caddy, "because he is very
much looked up to in such things, you know, and has a reputation to
support. you can't think how kind he is to pa. he talks to pa of an
evening about the prince regent, and i never saw pa so interested."

there was something in the picture of mr. turveydrop bestowing his
deportment on mr. jellyby that quite took my fancy. i asked caddy if
he brought her papa out much.

"no," said caddy, "i don't know that he does that, but he talks to
pa, and pa greatly admires him, and listens, and likes it. of course
i am aware that pa has hardly any claims to deportment, but they get
on together delightfully. you can't think what good companions they
make. i never saw pa take snuff before in my life, but he takes one
pinch out of mr. turveydrop's box regularly and keeps putting it to
his nose and tak
 
 ___________________________
 
ing it away again all the evening."

that old mr. turveydrop should ever, in the chances and changes of
life, have come to the rescue of mr. jellyby from borrioboola-gha
appeared to me to be one of the pleasantest of oddities.

"as to peepy," said caddy with a little hesitation, "whom i was most
afraid of--next to having any family of my own, esther--as an
inconvenience to mr. turveydrop, the kindness of the old gentleman to
that child is beyond everything. he asks to see him, my dear! he lets
him take the newspaper up to him in bed; he gives him the crusts of
his toast to eat; he sends him on little errands about the house; he
tells him to
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," said i, "between
this gentleman--"

"william guppy, of penton place, pentonville, in the county of
middlesex," he murmured.

"between this gentleman, mr. william guppy, of penton place,
pentonville, in the county of middlesex, and myself."

"thank you, miss," said mr. guppy. "very full--er--excuse me--lady's
name, christian and surname both?"

i gave them.

"married woman, i believe?" said mr. guppy. "married woman. thank
you. formerly caroline jellyby, spinster, then of thavies inn, within
the city of london, but extra-parochial; now of newman street, oxford
street. much obliged."

he ran home and came running back again.

"touching that matter, you know, i really and truly am very sorry
that my arrangements in life, combined with circumstances over which
i have no control, should prevent a renewal of what was wholly
terminated some time back," said mr. guppy to me forlornly and
despondently, "but it couldn't be. now could it, you know! i on
 
 ___________________________
 
ou consider him in present danger, sir?" inquires the trooper.

"yes, i fear so."

"then, sir," returns the trooper in a decisive manner, "it appears to
me--being naturally in the vagabond way myself--that the sooner he
comes out of the street, the better. you, phil! bring him in!"

mr. squod tacks out, all on one side, to execute the word of command;
and the trooper, having smoked his pipe, lays it by. jo is brought
in. he is not one of mrs. pardiggle's tockahoopo indians; he is not
one of mrs. jellyby's lambs, being wholly unconnected with
borrioboola-gha; he is not softened by distance and unfamiliarity; he
is not a genuine foreign-grown savage; he is the ordinary home-made
article. dirty, ugly, disagreeable to all the senses, in body a
common creature of the common streets, only in soul a heathen. homely
filth begrimes him, homely parasites devour him, homely sores are in
him, homely rags are on him; native ignorance, the growth of english
soil and climate, sinks his immortal nature lower 
 
 ___________________________
 
d sit
softly down, with a face of loving anxiety for caddy and the very
little child. whatever caddy's condition really was, she never failed
to declare to prince that she was all but well--which i, heaven
forgive me, never failed to confirm. this would put prince in such
good spirits that he would sometimes take the kit from his pocket and
play a chord or two to astonish the baby, which i never knew it to do
in the least degree, for my tiny namesake never noticed it at all.

then there was mrs. jellyby. she would come occasionally, with her
usual distraught manner, and sit calmly looking miles beyond her
grandchild as if her attention were absorbed by a young borrioboolan
on its native shores. as bright-eyed as ever, as serene, and as
untidy, she would say, "well, caddy, child, and how do you do
to-day?" and then would sit amiably smiling and taking no notice of
the reply or would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number
of letters she had lately received and answered or of the
coff
 
 ___________________________
 
r peepy and would take the
child out walking with great pomp, always on those occasions sending
him home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally with a
halfpenny in his pocket. but even this disinterestedness was attended
with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for before peepy was
sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with the professor of
deportment, he had to be newly dressed, at the expense of caddy and
her husband, from top to toe.

last of our visitors, there was mr. jellyby. really when he used to
come in of an evening, and ask caddy in his meek voice how she was,
and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no attempt
to say anything more, i liked him very much. if he found me bustling
about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took his coat off, as
if with an intention of helping by a great exertion; but he never got
any further. his sole occupation was to sit with his head against the
wall, looking hard at the thoughtful baby; and i could not
 
 ___________________________
 
nster that the cause was to come on. it had come on
there, i dare say, a hundred times before, but i could not divest
myself of an idea that it might lead to some result now. we left home
directly after breakfast to be at westminster hall in good time and
walked down there through the lively streets--so happily and
strangely it seemed!--together.

as we were going along, planning what we should do for richard and
ada, i heard somebody calling "esther! my dear esther! esther!" and
there was caddy jellyby, with her head out of the window of a little
carriage which she hired now to go about in to her pupils (she had so
many), as if she wanted to embrace me at a hundred yards' distance. i
had written her a note to tell her of all that my guardian had done,
but had not had a moment to go and see her. of course we turned back,
and the affectionate girl was in that state of rapture, and was so
overjoyed to talk about the night when she brought me the flowers,
and was so determined to squeeze my face 
 
 ___________________________
 
and was in great request. so far as my small maid is concerned, i
might suppose time to have stood for seven years as still as the mill
did half an hour ago, since little emma, charley's sister, is exactly
what charley used to be. as to tom, charley's brother, i am really
afraid to say what he did at school in ciphering, but i think it was
decimals. he is apprenticed to the miller, whatever it was, and is a
good bashful fellow, always falling in love with somebody and being
ashamed of it.

caddy jellyby passed her very last holidays with us and was a dearer
creature than ever, perpetually dancing in and out of the house with
the children as if she had never given a dancing-lesson in her life.
caddy keeps her own little carriage now instead of hiring one, and
lives full two miles further westward than newman street. she works
very hard, her husband (an excellent one) being lame and able to do
very little. still, she is more than contented and does all she has
to do with all her heart. mr. jelly
 
 ___________________________
 
by spends his evenings at her new
house with his head against the wall as he used to do in her old one.
i have heard that mrs. jellyby was understood to suffer great
mortification from her daughter's ignoble marriage and pursuits, but
i hope she got over it in time. she has been disappointed in
borrioboola-gha, which turned out a failure in consequence of the
king of borrioboola wanting to sell everybody--who survived the
climate--for rum, but she has taken up with the rights of women to
sit in parliament, and caddy tells me it is a mission involving more
correspondence than the old one. i had almost forgotten caddy's poor
lit