y's presence.

the old gentleman is rusty to look at, but is reputed to have made
good thrift out of aristocratic marriage settlements and aristocratic
wills, and to be very rich. he is surrounded by a mysterious halo of
family confidences, of which he is known to be the silent depository.
there are noble mausoleums rooted for centuries in retired glades of
parks among the growing timber and the fern, which perhaps hold fewer
noble secrets than walk abroad among men, shut up in the breast of
mr. tulkinghorn. he is of what is called the old school--a phrase
generally meaning any school that seems never to have been young--and
wears knee-breeches tied with ribbons, and gaiters or stockings. one
peculiarity of his black clothes and of his black stockings, be they
silk or worsted, is that they never shine. mute, close, irresponsive
to any glancing light, his dress is like himself. he never converses
when not professionally consulted. he is found sometimes, speechless
but quite at home, at corners of d
 
 ___________________________
 
inner-tables in great country
houses and near doors of drawing-rooms, concerning which the
fashionable intelligence is eloquent, where everybody knows him and
where half the peerage stops to say "how do you do, mr. tulkinghorn?"
he receives these salutations with gravity and buries them along with
the rest of his knowledge.

sir leicester dedlock is with my lady and is happy to see mr.
tulkinghorn. there is an air of prescription about him which is
always agreeable to sir leicester; he receives it as a kind of
tribute. he likes mr. tulkinghorn's dress; there is a kind of tribute
in that too. it is eminently respectable, and likewise, in a general
way, retainer-like. it expresses, as it were, the steward of the
legal 
 
 ___________________________
 
mysteries, the butler of the legal cellar, of the dedlocks.

has mr. tulkinghorn any idea of this himself? it may be so, or it may
not, but there is this remarkable circumstance to be noted in
everything associated with my lady dedlock as one of a class--as one
of the leaders and representatives of her little world. she supposes
herself to be an inscrutable being, quite out of the reach and ken of
ordinary mortals--seeing herself in her glass, where indeed she looks
so. yet every dim little star revolving about her, from her maid to
the manager of the italian opera, knows h
 
 ___________________________
 
n, sir," says mr. sladdery, the librarian, "or if you
want to get this dwarf or giant into the houses of my high connexion,
sir, or if you want to secure to this entertainment the patronage of
my high connexion, sir, you must leave it, if you please, to me, for
i have been accustomed to study the leaders of my high connexion,
sir, and i may tell you without vanity that i can turn them round my
finger"--in which mr. sladdery, who is an honest man, does not
exaggerate at all.

therefore, while mr. tulkinghorn may not know what is passing in the
dedlock mind at present, it is very possible that he may.

"my lady's cause has been again before the chancellor, has it, mr.
tulkinghorn?" says sir leicester, giving him his hand.

"yes. it has been on again to-day," mr. tulkinghorn replies, making
one of his quiet bows to my lady, who is on a sofa near the fire,
shading her face with a hand-screen.

"it would be useless to ask," says my lady with the dreariness of the
place in lincolnshire still upon her, "
 
 ___________________________
 
whether anything has been
done."

"nothing that you would call anything has been done to-day," replies
mr. tulkinghorn.

"nor ever will be," says my lady.

sir leicester has no objection to an interminable chancery suit. it
is a slow, expensive, british, constitutional kind of thing. to be
sure, he has not a vital interest in the suit in question, her part
in which was the only property my lady brought him; and he has a
shadowy impression that for his name--the name of dedlock--to be in a
cause, and not in the title of that cause, is a most ridiculous
accident. but he regards the court of chancery, even if it s
 
 ___________________________
 
lement (humanly speaking) of everything. and he is upon the whole
of a fixed opinion that to give the sanction of his countenance to
any complaints respecting it would be to encourage some person in the
lower classes to rise up somewhere--like wat tyler.

"as a few fresh affidavits have been put upon the file," says mr.
tulkinghorn, "and as they are short, and as i proceed upon the
troublesome principle of begging leave to possess my clients with any
new proceedings in a cause"--cautious man mr. tulkinghorn, taking no
more responsibility than necessary--"and further, as i see you are
going to paris, i have brought them in my pocket."

(sir leicester was going to paris too, by the by, but the delight of
the fashionable intelligence was in his lady.)

mr. tulkinghorn takes out his papers, asks permission to place them
on a golden talisman of a table at my lady's elbow, puts on his
spectacles, and begins to read by the light of a shaded lamp.

"'in chancery. between john jarndyce--'"

my lady interru
 
 ___________________________
 
pts, requesting him to miss as many of the formal
horrors as he can.

mr. tulkinghorn glances over his spectacles and begins again lower
down. my lady carelessly and scornfully abstracts her attention. sir
leicester in a great chair looks at the file and appears to have a
stately liking for the legal repetitions and prolixities as ranging
among the national bulwarks. it happens that the fire is hot where my
lady sits and that the hand-screen is more beautiful than useful,
being priceless but small. my lady, changing her position, sees the
papers on the table--looks at them neare
 
 ___________________________
 
r--looks at them nearer
still--asks impulsively, "who copied that?"

mr. tulkinghorn stops short, surprised by my lady's animation and her
unusual tone.

"is it what you people call law-hand?" she asks, looking full at him
in her careless way again and toying with her screen.

"not quite. probably"--mr. tulkinghorn examines it as he speaks--"the
legal character which it has was acquired after the original hand was
formed. why do you ask?"

"anything to vary this detestable monotony. oh, go on, do!"

mr. tulkinghorn reads again. the heat is greater; my lady screens her
face. sir leicester dozes, starts up suddenly, and cries, "eh? what
do you say?"

"i say i am afraid," says mr. tulkinghorn, who had risen hastily,
"that lady dedlock is ill."

"faint," my lady murmurs with white lips, "only that; but it is 
 
 ___________________________
 
like
the faintness of death. don't speak to me. ring, and take me to my
room!"

mr. tulkinghorn retires into another chamber; bells ring, feet
shuffle and patter, silence ensues. mercury at last begs mr.
tulkinghorn to return.

"better now," quoth sir leicester, motioning the lawyer to sit down
and read to him alone. "i have been quite alarmed. i never knew my
lady swoon before. but the weather is extremely trying, and she
really has been bored to death down at our place in lincolnshire."




chapter iii

a progress


i have a great deal of difficulty in beginning to write my portion of
t
 
 ___________________________
 
rouncewell, "mr. guppy! nonsense, i never heard
of him!"

"if you please, he told me that!" says rosa. "but he said that he and
the other young gentleman came from london only last night by the
mail, on business at the magistrates' meeting, ten miles off, this
morning, and that as their business was soon over, and they had heard
a great deal said of chesney wold, and really didn't know what to do
with themselves, they had come through the wet to see it. they are
lawyers. he says he is not in mr. tulkinghorn's office, but he is
sure he may make use of mr. tulkinghorn's name if necessary."
finding, now she leaves off, that she has been making quite a long
speech, rosa is shyer than ever.

now, mr. tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place,
and besides, is supposed to have made mrs. rouncewell's will. the old
lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,
and dismisses rosa. the grandson, however, being smitten by a sudden
wish to see the house himself, proposes 
 
 ___________________________
 
m, but is not referring
to it. with the round top of an inkstand and two broken bits of
sealing-wax he is silently and slowly working out whatever train of
indecision is in his mind. now the inkstand top is in the middle, now
the red bit of sealing-wax, now the black bit. that's not it. mr.
tulkinghorn must gather them all up and begin again.

here, beneath the painted ceiling, with foreshortened allegory
staring down at his intrusion as if it meant to swoop upon him, and
he cutting it dead, mr. tulkinghorn has at once his house and office.
he keeps no staff, only one middle-aged man, usually a little out at
elbows, who sits in a high pew in the hall and is rarely overburdened
with business. mr. tulkinghorn is not in a common way. he wants no
clerks. he is a great reservoir of confidences, not to be so tapped.
his clients want him; he is all in all. drafts that he requires to be
drawn are drawn by special-pleaders in the temple on mysterious
instructions; fair copies that he requires to be made ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e made at the
stationers', expense being no consideration. the middle-aged man in
the pew knows scarcely more of the affairs of the peerage than any
crossing-sweeper in holborn.

the red bit, the black bit, the inkstand top, the other inkstand top,
the little sand-box. so! you to the middle, you to the right, you to
the left. this train of indecision must surely be worked out now or
never. now! mr. tulkinghorn gets up, adjusts his spectacles, puts on
his hat, puts the manuscript in his pocket, goes out, tells the
middle-aged man out at elbows, "i shall be back presently." very
rarely tells him anything more explicit.

mr. tulkinghorn goes, as the crow came--not quite so straight, but
nearly--to cook's court, cursitor street. to snagsby's,
law-stationer's, deeds engrossed and copied, law-writing executed in
all its branches, &c., &c., &c.

it is somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon, an
 
 ___________________________
 
er at home?"

guster is minding the shop, for the 'prentices take tea in the
kitchen with mr. and mrs. snagsby; consequently, the robe-maker's two
daughters, combing their curls at the two glasses in the two
second-floor windows of the opposite house, are not driving the two
'prentices to distraction as they fondly suppose, but are merely
awakening the unprofitable admiration of guster, whose hair won't
grow, and never would, and it is confidently thought, never will.

"master at home?" says mr. tulkinghorn.

master is at home, and guster will fetch him. guster disappears, glad
to get out of the shop, which she regards with mingled dread and
veneration as a storehouse of awful implements of the great torture
of the law--a place not to be entered after the gas is turned off.

mr. snagsby appears, greasy, warm, herbaceous, and chewing. bolts a
bit of bread and butter. says, "bless my soul, sir! mr. tulkinghorn!"

"i want half a word with you, snagsby."

"certainly, sir! dear me, sir, why didn't you 
 
 ___________________________
 
send your young man
round for me? pray walk into the back shop, sir." snagsby has
brightened in a moment.

the confined room, strong of parchment-grease, is warehouse,
counting-house, and copying-office. mr. tulkinghorn sits, facing
round, on a stool at the desk.

"jarndyce and jarndyce, snagsby."

"yes, sir." mr. snagsby turns up the gas and coughs behind his hand,
modestly anticipating profit. mr. snagsby, as a timid man, is
accustomed to cough with a variety of expressions, and so to save
words.

"you copied some affidavits in that cause for me lately."

"yes, sir, we did."

"there was one of them," says mr. tulkinghorn, carelessly
feeling--tight, unopenable oyster of the old school!--in the wrong
coat-pock
 
 ___________________________
 
in a moment who copied it, sir, by referring to
my book."

mr. snagsby takes his book down from the safe, makes another bolt of
the bit of bread and butter which seemed to have stopped short, eyes
the affidavit aside, and brings his right forefinger travelling down
a page of the book, "jewby--packer--jarndyce."

"jarndyce! here we are, sir," says mr. snagsby. "to be sure! i might
have remembered it. this was given out, sir, to a writer who lodges
just over on the opposite side of the lane."

mr. tulkinghorn has seen the entry, found it before the
law-stationer, read it while the forefinger was coming down the hill.

"what do you call him? nemo?" says mr. tulkinghorn. "nemo, sir. here
it is. forty-two folio. given out on the wednesday night at eight
o'clock, brought in on the thursday morning at half after nine."

"nemo!" repeats mr. tulkinghorn. "nemo is latin for no one."

"it must be english for some one, sir, i think," mr. snagsby submits
with his deferential cough. "it is a person's name. here
 
 ___________________________
 
 tea. mr. snagsby addresses an explanatory cough to mrs.
snagsby, as who should say, "my dear, a customer!"

"half after nine, sir," repeats mr. snagsby. "our law-writers, who
live by job-work, are a queer lot; and this may not be his name, but
it's the name he goes by. i remember now, sir, that he gives it in a
written advertisement he sticks up down at the rule office, and the
king's bench office, and the judges' chambers, and so forth. you know
the kind of document, sir--wanting employ?"

mr. tulkinghorn glances through the little window at the back of
coavinses', the sheriff's officer's, where lights shine in coavinses'
windows. coavinses' coffee-room is at the back, and the shadows of
several gentlemen under a cloud loom cloudily upon the blinds. mr.
snagsby takes the opportunity of slightly turning his head to glance
over his shoulder at his little woman and to make apologetic motions
with his mouth to this effect: "tul-king-horn--rich--in-flu-en-tial!"

"have you given this man work before?
 
 ___________________________
 
" asks mr. tulkinghorn.

"oh, dear, yes, sir! work of yours."

"thinking of more important matters, i forget where you said he
lived?"

"across the lane, sir. in fact, he lodges at a--" mr. snagsby makes
another bolt, as if the bit of bread and buffer were insurmountable
"--at a rag and bottle shop."

"can you show me the place as i go back?"

"with the greatest pleasure, sir!"

mr. snagsby pulls off his sleeves and his grey coat, pulls on his
black coat, takes his hat from its peg. "oh! here is my little
woman!" he 
 
 ___________________________
 
says aloud. "my dear, will you be so kind as to tell one
of the lads to look after the shop while i step across the lane with
mr. tulkinghorn? mrs. snagsby, sir--i shan't be two minutes, my
love!"

mrs. snagsby bends to the lawyer, retires behind the counter, peeps
at them through the window-blind, goes softly into the back office,
refers to the entries in the book still lying open. is evidently
curious.

"you will find that the place is rough, sir," says mr. snagsby,
walking deferentially in the road and leaving the narrow pavement to
the lawyer; "and the party is very rough. but they're a wild lot in
general, sir. the advantage of 
 
 ___________________________
 
f much disregarded merchandise,
lying and being in the shadow of the wall of lincoln's inn, and kept,
as is announced in paint, to all whom it may concern, by one krook.

"this is where he lives, sir," says the law-stationer.

"this is where he lives, is it?" says the lawyer unconcernedly.
"thank you."

"are you not going in, sir?"

"no, thank you, no; i am going on to the fields at present. good
evening. thank you!" mr. snagsby lifts his hat and returns to his
little woman and his tea.

but mr. tulkinghorn does not go on to the fields at present. he goes
a short way, turns back, comes again to the shop of mr. krook, and
enters it straight. it is dim enough, with a blot-headed candle or so
in the windows, and an old man and a cat sitting in the back part by
a fire. the old man rises and comes forward, with another blot-headed
candle in his hand.

"pray is your lodger within?"

"male or female, sir?" says mr. krook.

"male. the person who does copying."

mr. krook has eyed his man narrowly. knows h
 
 ___________________________
 
im by sight. has an
indistinct impression of his aristocratic repute.

"did you wish to see him, sir?"

"yes."

"it's what i seldom do myself," says mr. krook with a grin. "shall i
call him down? but it's a weak chance if he'd come, sir!"

"i'll go up to him, then," says mr. tulkinghorn.

"second floor, sir. take the candle. up there!" mr. krook, with his
cat beside him, stands at the bottom of the staircase, looking after
mr. tulkinghorn. "hi-hi!" he says when mr. tulkinghorn has nearly
disappeared. the lawyer looks down over the hand-rail. the cat
expands her wicked mouth and snarls at him.

"order, lady jane! behave yourself to visitors, my lady! you know
what they say of my lodger?" whispers krook, going up a step or two.

"what do they say of him?"

"they say he has sold himself to the enemy, but you and i know
better--he don't buy. i'll tell you what, though; my lodger is so
black-humoured and gloomy that i believe he'd as soon make that
bargain as any other. d
 
 ___________________________
 
on't put him out, sir. that's my advice!"

mr. tulkinghorn with a nod goes on his way. he comes to the dark door
on the second floor. he knocks, receives no answer, opens it, and
accidentally extinguishes his candle in doing so.

the air of the room is almost bad enough to have extinguished it if
he had not. it is a small room, nearly black with soot, and grease,
and dirt. in the rusty skeleton of a grate, pinched at the middle as
if poverty had gripped it, a red coke fire burns low. in the corner
by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk, a 
 
 ___________________________
 
and say, "what's that?"

"it's me," returns the old man of the house, whose breath is in his
ear. "can't you wake him?"

"no."

"what have you done with your candle?"

"it's gone out. here it is."

krook takes it, goes to the fire, stoops over the red embers, and
tries to get a light. the dying ashes have no light to spare, and his
endeavours are vain. muttering, after an ineffectual call to his
lodger, that he will go downstairs and bring a lighted candle from
the shop, the old man departs. mr. tulkinghorn, for some new reason
that he has, does not await his return in the room, but on the stairs
outside.

the welcome light soon shines upon the wall, as krook comes slowly up
with his green-eyed cat following at his heels. "does the man
generally sleep like this?" inquired the lawyer in a low voice. "hi!
i don't know," says krook, shaking his head and lifting his eyebrows.
"i know next to nothing of his habits except that he keeps himself
very close."

thus whispering, they both go in together. as 
 
 ___________________________
 
the light goes in, the
great eyes in the shutters, darkening, seem to close. not so the eyes
upon the bed.

"god save us!" exclaims mr. tulkinghorn. "he is dead!" krook drops
the heavy hand he has taken up so suddenly that the arm swings over
the bedside.

they look at one another for a moment.

"send for some doctor! call for miss flite up the stairs, sir. here's
poison by the bed! call out for flite, will you?" says krook, with
his lean hands spread out above the body like a vampire's wings.

mr. tulkinghorn hurries to the landing and calls, "miss flite! flite!
make haste, here, whoever you are! flite!" krook follows him with his
eyes, a
 
 ___________________________
 
g, finds opportunity to steal to the old
portmanteau and steal back again.

"run, flite, run! the nearest doctor! run!" so mr. krook addresses a
crazy little woman who is his female lodger, who appears and vanishes
in a breath, who soon returns accompanied by a testy medical man
brought from his dinner, with a broad, snuffy upper lip and a broad
scotch tongue.

"ey! bless the hearts o' ye," says the medical man, looking up at
them after a moment's examination. "he's just as dead as phairy!"

mr. tulkinghorn (standing by the old portmanteau) inquires if he has
been dead any time.

"any time, sir?" says the medical gentleman. "it's probable he wull
have been dead aboot three hours."

"about that time, i should say," observes a dark young man on the
other side of the bed.

"air you in the maydickle prayfession yourself, sir?" inquires the
first.

the dark young man says yes.

"then i'll just tak' my depairture," replies the other, "for i'm nae
gude here!" with which remark he finishes his brief atten
 
 ___________________________
 
's edge with his face towards that other face and his
hand upon the region of the heart. "i recollect once thinking there
was something in his manner, uncouth as it was, that denoted a fall
in life. was that so?" he continues, looking round.

krook replies, "you might as well ask me to describe the ladies whose
heads of hair i have got in sacks downstairs. than that he was my
lodger for a year and a half and lived--or didn't live--by
law-writing, i know no more of him."

during this dialogue mr. tulkinghorn has stood aloof by the old
portmanteau, with his hands behind him, equally removed, to all
appearance, from all three kinds of interest exhibited near the
bed--from the young surgeon's professional interest in death,
noticeable as being quite apart from his remarks on the deceased as
an individual; from the old man's unction; and the little crazy
woman's awe. his imperturbable face has been as inexpressive as his
rusty clothes. one could not even say he has been thinking all this
while. he has 
 
 ___________________________
 
shown neither patience nor impatience, nor attention
nor abstraction. he has shown nothing but his shell. as easily might
the tone of a delicate musical instrument be inferred from its case,
as the tone of mr. tulkinghorn from his case.

he now interposes, addressing the young surgeon in his unmoved,
professional way.

"i looked in here," he observes, "just before you, with the
intention of giving this deceased man, whom i never saw alive, some
employment at his trade of copying. i had heard of him from my
stationer--snagsby of cook's court. since no one here knows anything
about him, it might be as well to send for snagsby. ah!" to the
little crazy woman, who has often seen him in court, and whom he has
often s
 
 ___________________________
 
een, and who proposes, in frightened dumb-show, to go for the
law-stationer. "suppose you do!"

while she is gone, the surgeon abandons his hopeless investigation
and covers its subject with the patchwork counterpane. mr. krook and
he interchange a word or two. mr. tulkinghorn says nothing, but
stands, ever, near the old portmanteau.

mr. snagsby arrives hastily in his grey coat and his black sleeves.
"dear me, dear me," he says; "and it has come to this, has it! bless
my soul!"

"can you give the person of the house any information about this
unfortunate creature, snagsby?" inquires mr. tulkinghorn. "he was in
arrears with his rent, it seems. and he must be buried, you know."

"well, sir," says mr. snagsby, coughing his apologetic cough behind
his hand, "i really do
 
 ___________________________
 
n't know what advice i could offer, except
sending for the beadle."

"i don't speak of advice," returns mr. tulkinghorn. "i could
advise--"

"no one better, sir, i am sure," says mr. snagsby, with his
deferential cough.

"i speak of affording some clue to his connexions, or to where he
came from, or to anything concerning him."

"i assure you, sir," says mr. snagsby after prefacing his reply with
his cough of general propitiation, "that i no more know where he came
from than i know--"

"where he has gone to, perhaps," suggests the surgeon to help him
out.

a pause. mr. tulkinghorn looking at the law-stationer. m
 
 ___________________________
 
into job-work at our
place; and that is the most i know of him except that he was a quick
hand, and a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him
out, say, five and forty folio on the wednesday night, you would have
it brought in on the thursday morning. all of which--" mr. snagsby
concludes by politely motioning with his hat towards the bed, as much
as to add, "i have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm if he
were in a condition to do it."

"hadn't you better see," says mr. tulkinghorn to krook, "whether he
had any papers that may enlighten you? there will be an inquest, and
you will be asked the question. you can read?"

"no, i can't," returns the old man with a sudden grin.

"snagsby," says mr. tulkinghorn, "look over the room for him. he will
get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise. being here, i'll wait
if you make haste, and then i can testify on his behalf, if it should
ever be necessary, that all was fair and right. if you will hold the
candle for mr. snagsby, my
 
 ___________________________
 
 friend, he'll soon see whether there is
anything to help you."

"in the first place, here's an old portmanteau, sir," says snagsby.

ah, to be sure, so there is! mr. tulkinghorn does not appear to have
seen it before, though he is standing so close to it, and though
there is very little else, heaven knows.

the marine-store merchant holds the light, and the law-stationer
conducts the search. the surgeon leans against the corner of the
chimney-piece; miss flite peeps and trembles just within the door.
the apt old scholar of the old school, with his dull black breeches
tied with ribbons at the knees, his large black waistcoat, his
long-sleeved black coat, and his wisp of
 
 ___________________________
 
he young surgeon
examines the dress on the law-writer. a knife and some odd halfpence
are all he finds. mr. snagsby's suggestion is the practical
suggestion after all, and the beadle must be called in.

so the little crazy lodger goes for the beadle, and the rest come out
of the room. "don't leave the cat there!" says the surgeon; "that
won't do!" mr. krook therefore drives her out before him, and she
goes furtively downstairs, winding her lithe tail and licking her
lips.

"good night!" says mr. tulkinghorn, and goes home to allegory and
meditation.

by this time the news has got into the court. groups of its
inhabitants assemble to discuss the thing, and the outposts of the
army of observation (principally boys) are pushed forward to mr.
krook's window, which they closely invest. a policeman has already
walked up to the room, and walked down again to the door, where he
stands like a tower, only condescending to see the boys at his base
occasionally; but whenever he does see them, they quail and f
 
 ___________________________
 
meeting room) should see all that is to be seen. for they are the
public chroniclers of such inquiries by the line; and he is not
superior to the universal human infirmity, but hopes to read in print
what "mooney, the active and intelligent beadle of the district,"
said and did and even aspires to see the name of mooney as familiarly
and patronizingly mentioned as the name of the hangman is, according
to the latest examples.

little swills is waiting for the coroner and jury on their return.
mr. tulkinghorn, also. mr. tulkinghorn is received with distinction
and seated near the coroner between that high judicial officer, a
bagatelle-board, and the coal-box. the inquiry proceeds. the jury
learn how the subject of their inquiry died, and learn no more about
him. "a very eminent solicitor is in attendance, gentlemen," says the
coroner, "who, i am informed, was accidentally present when discovery
of the death was made, but he could only repeat the evidence you have
already heard from the surgeon, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
n! here's a man unknown, proved to have been in
the habit of taking opium in large quantities for a year and a half,
found dead of too much opium. if you think you have any evidence to
lead you to the conclusion that he committed suicide, you will come
to that conclusion. if you think it is a case of accidental death,
you will find a verdict accordingly.

verdict accordingly. accidental death. no doubt. gentlemen, you are
discharged. good afternoon.

while the coroner buttons his great-coat, mr. tulkinghorn and he give
private audience to the rejected witness in a corner.

that graceless creature only knows that the dead man (whom he
recognized just now by his yellow face and black hair) was sometimes
hooted and pursued about the streets. that one cold winter night when
he, the boy, was shivering in a doorway near his crossing, the man
turned to look at him, and came back, and having questioned him and
found that he had not a friend in the world, said, "neither have i.
not one!" and gave him the p
 
 ___________________________
 

when he has nothing else to do, he can always contemplate his own
greatness. it is a considerable advantage to a man to have so
inexhaustible a subject. after reading his letters, he leans back in
his corner of the carriage and generally reviews his importance to
society.

"you have an unusual amount of correspondence this morning?" says my
lady after a long time. she is fatigued with reading. has almost read
a page in twenty miles.

"nothing in it, though. nothing whatever."

"i saw one of mr. tulkinghorn's long effusions, i think?"

"you see everything," says sir leicester with admiration.

"ha!" sighs my lady. "he is the most tiresome of men!"

"he sends--i really beg your pardon--he sends," says sir leicester,
selecting the letter and unfolding it, "a message to you. our
stopping to change horses as i came to his postscript drove it out of
my memory. i beg you'll excuse me. he says--" sir leicester is so
long in taking out his eye-glass and adjusting it that my lady looks
a little irritated. 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd him--very strange
appearances may be seen in active motion outside. with this
difference, that being realities and not phantoms, there is the
greater danger of their breaking in.

chesney wold is quite full anyhow, so full that a burning sense of
injury arises in the breasts of ill-lodged ladies'-maids, and is not
to be extinguished. only one room is empty. it is a turret chamber of
the third order of merit, plainly but comfortably furnished and
having an old-fashioned business air. it is mr. tulkinghorn's room,
and is never bestowed on anybody else, for he may come at any time.
he is not come yet. it is his quiet habit to walk across the park
from the village in fine weather, to drop into this room as if he had
never been out of it since he was last seen there, to request a
servant to inform sir leicester that he is arrived in case he should
be wanted, and to appear ten minutes before dinner in the shadow of
the library-door. he sleeps in his turret with a complaining
flag-staff over his head,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and has some leads outside on which, any
fine morning when he is down here, his black figure may be seen
walking before breakfast like a larger species of rook.

every day before dinner, my lady looks for him in the dusk of the
library, but he is not there. every day at dinner, my lady glances
down the table for the vacant place that would be waiting to receive
him if he had just arrived, but there is no vacant place. every night
my lady casually asks her maid, "is mr. tulkinghorn come?"

every night the answer is, "no, my lady, not yet."

one night, while having her hair undressed, my lady loses herself in
deep thought after this reply until she sees her own brooding face in
the opposite glass, and a pair of black eyes curiously observing her.

"be so good as to attend," says my lady then, addressing the
reflection of hortense, "to your business. you can contemplate your
beauty at another time."

"pardon! it was your ladyship's beauty."

"that," says my lady, "you needn
 
 ___________________________
 
't contemplate at all."

at length, one afternoon a little before sunset, when the bright
groups of figures which have for the last hour or two enlivened the
ghost's walk are all dispersed and only sir leicester and my lady
remain upon the terrace, mr. tulkinghorn appears. he comes towards
them at his usual methodical pace, which is never quickened, never
slackened. he wears his usual expressionless mask--if it be a
mask--and carries family secrets in every limb of his body and every
crease of his dress. whether his whole soul is devoted to the great
or whether he yields them nothing beyond the services he sells is his
personal secret. he keeps it, as he keeps the secrets of his clients;
he is his own client in that matter, and will never betray himself.
 
 ___________________________
 


"how do you do, mr. tulkinghorn?" says sir leicester, giving him his
hand.

mr. tulkinghorn is quite well. sir leicester is quite well. my lady
is quite well. all highly satisfactory. the lawyer, with his hands
behind him, walks at sir leicester's side along the terrace. my lady
walks upon the other side.

"we expected you before," says sir leicester. a gracious observation.
as much as to say, "mr. tulkinghorn, we remember your existence when
you are not here to remind us of it by your presence. we bestow a
fragment of our minds upon you, sir, you see!"

mr. tulkinghorn, comprehending it, inclines his head and says he is
much obliged.

"i should have come down sooner," he explains, "but that i have been
much engaged with those matters in the several suits between yourself
and boythorn."

"a man of a very ill-regulated mind," observes sir leicester with
severity. "an extremely dangerous person in any 
 
 ___________________________
 
community. a man of a
very low character of mind."

"he is obstinate," says mr. tulkinghorn.

"it is natural to such a man to be so," says sir leicester, looking
most profoundly obstinate himself. "i am not at all surprised to hear
it."

"the only question is," pursues the lawyer, "whether you will give up
anything."

"no, sir," replies sir leicester. "nothing. i give up?"

"i don't mean anything of importance. that, of course, i know you
would not abandon. i mean any minor point."

"mr. tulkinghorn," returns sir leicester, "there can be no minor
point between myself and mr. boythorn. if i go farther, and observe
that i cannot readily conceive how any right of mine can be a minor
point, i speak not so much in reference to myself as an individual as
in reference to the family position i have it in charge to maintain."

mr. tulkinghorn inclines his head again. "i have now my
instructions," he says. "mr. boythorn will give us a good deal of
trouble--"

"it is the character of such a mind, mr.
 
 ___________________________
 
 tulkinghorn," sir leicester
interrupts him, "to give trouble. an exceedingly ill-conditioned,
levelling person. a person who, fifty years ago, would probably have
been tried at the old bailey for some demagogue proceeding, and
severely punished--if not," adds sir leicester after a moment's
pause, "if not hanged, drawn, and quartered."

sir leicester appears to discharge his stately breast of a burden in
passing this capital sentence, as if it were the next satisfactory
thing to having the sentence executed
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"but night is coming on," says he, "and my lady will take cold. my
dear, let us go in."

as they turn towards the hall-door, lady dedlock addresses mr.
tulkinghorn for the first time.

"you sent me a message respecting the person whose writing i happened
to inquire about. it was like you to remember the circumstance; i had
quite forgotten it. your message reminded me of it again. i can't
imagine what association i had with a hand like that, but i surely
had some."

"you had some?" mr. tulkinghorn repeats.

"oh, yes!" returns my lady carelessly. "i think i must have had some.
and did you really take the trouble to find out the writer of that
actual thing--what is it!--affidavit?"

"yes."

"how very odd!"

they pass into a sombre breakfast-room on the ground floor, lighted
in the day by two deep windows. it is now twilight. the fire glows
brightly on the panelled wall and palely on the window-glass, where,
through the cold reflection of the blaze, the colder landscape
shudders in the wind
 
 ___________________________
 
ding his face.
he looks across his arm at my lady.

"yes," he says, "i inquired about the man, and found him. and, what
is very strange, i found him--"

"not to be any out-of-the-way person, i am afraid!" lady dedlock
languidly anticipates.

"i found him dead."

"oh, dear me!" remonstrated sir leicester. not so much shocked by the
fact as by the fact of the fact being mentioned.

"i was directed to his lodging--a miserable, poverty-stricken
place--and i found him dead."

"you will excuse me, mr. tulkinghorn," observes sir leicester. "i
think the less said--"

"pray, sir leicester, let me hear the story out" (it is my lady
speaking). "it is quite a story for twilight. how very shocking!
dead?"

mr. tulkinghorn re-asserts it by another inclination of his head.
"whether by his own hand--"

"upon my honour!" cries sir leicester. "really!"

"do let me hear the story!" says my lady.

"whatever you desire, my dear. but, i must say--"

"no, you mustn't say! go on, mr. tulkinghorn."

sir leicester's gallan
 
 ___________________________
 
ter, both in appearance and condition."

"what did they call the wretched being?"

"they called him what he had called himself, but no one knew his
name."

"not even any one who had attended on him?"

"no one had attended on him. he was found dead. in fact, i found
him."

"without any clue to anything more?"

"without any; there was," says the lawyer meditatively, "an old
portmanteau, but--no, there were no papers."

during the utterance of every word of this short dialogue, lady
dedlock and mr. tulkinghorn, without any other alteration in their
customary deportment, have looked very steadily at one another--as
was natural, perhaps, in the discussion of so unusual a subject. sir
leicester has looked at the fire, with the general expression of the
dedlock on the staircase. the story being told, he renews his stately
protest, saying that as it is quite clear that no association in my
lady's mind can possibly be traceable to this poor wretch (unless he
was a begging-letter writer), he trusts to hear 
 
 ___________________________
 
no more about a
subject so far removed from my lady's station.

"certainly, a collection of horrors," says my lady, gathering up her
mantles and furs, "but they interest one for the moment! have the
kindness, mr. tulkinghorn, to open the door for me."

mr. tulkinghorn does so with deference and holds it open while she
passes out. she passes close to him, with her usual fatigued manner
and insolent grace. they meet again at dinner--again, next
day--again, for many days in succession. lady dedlock is always the
same exhausted deity, surrounded by worshippers, and terribly liable
to be bored to death, even while presiding at her own shrine. mr.
tulkinghorn is always the same speechless repository of noble
confidences, so oddly out of place and yet so perfectly 
 
 ___________________________
 
nopoly himself in being unjustly treated by this
monstrous system.

"there again!" said mr. gridley with no diminution of his rage. "the
system! i am told on all hands, it's the system. i mustn't look to
individuals. it's the system. i mustn't go into court and say, 'my
lord, i beg to know this from you--is this right or wrong? have you
the face to tell me i have received justice and therefore am
dismissed?' my lord knows nothing of it. he sits there to administer
the system. i mustn't go to mr. tulkinghorn, the solicitor in
lincoln's inn fields, and say to him when he makes me furious by
being so cool and satisfied--as they all do, for i know they gain by
it while i lose, don't i?--i mustn't say to him, 'i will have
something out of some one for my ruin, by fair means or foul!' he is
not responsible. it's the system. but, if i do no violence to any of
them, here--i may! i don't know what may happen if i am carried
beyond myself at last! i will accuse the individual workers of that
system against 
 
 ___________________________
 
erate that they will lose even their bark--but not
their bite.

the day changes as it wears itself away and becomes dark and drizzly.
jo fights it out at his crossing among the mud and wheels, the
horses, whips, and umbrellas, and gets but a scanty sum to pay for
the unsavoury shelter of tom-all-alone's. twilight comes on; gas
begins to start up in the shops; the lamplighter, with his ladder,
runs along the margin of the pavement. a wretched evening is
beginning to close in.

in his chambers mr. tulkinghorn sits meditating an application to the
nearest magistrate to-morrow morning for a warrant. gridley, a
disappointed suitor, has been here to-day and has been alarming. we
are not to be put in bodily fear, and that ill-conditioned fellow
shall be held to bail again. from the ceiling, foreshortened
allegory, in the person of one impossible roman upside down, points
with the arm of samson (out of joint, and an odd one) obtrusively
toward the window. why should mr. tulkinghorn, for such no reason,
lo
 
 ___________________________
 
ok out of window? is the hand not always pointing there? so he does
not look out of window.

and if he did, what would it be to see a woman going by? there are
women enough in the world, mr. tulkinghorn thinks--too many; they are
at the bottom of all that goes wrong in it, though, for the matter of
that, they create business for lawyers. what would it be to see a
woman going by, even though she were going secretly? they are all
secret. mr. tulkinghorn knows that very well.

but they are not all like the woman who now leaves him and his house
behind, between whose plain dress and her refined manner there is
something exceedingly inconsistent. she should be an upper servant by
her attire, yet in her air and step, though both are hurried and
assumed--as far as she can assume in the muddy streets, which she
treads with an unaccustomed foot--she is a lady. her face is veiled,
and still she sufficiently betrays herself to make more than one of
tho
 
 ___________________________
 
s phil.

"good night!"

"good night, guv'ner."

phil cannot even go straight to bed, but finds it necessary to
shoulder round two sides of the gallery and then tack off at his
mattress. the trooper, after taking a turn or two in the
rifle-distance and looking up at the moon now shining through the
skylights, strides to his own mattress by a shorter route and goes to
bed too.




chapter xxii

mr. bucket


allegory looks pretty cool in lincoln's inn fields, though the
evening is hot, for both mr. tulkinghorn's windows are wide open, and
the room is lofty, gusty, and gloomy. these may not be desirable
characteristics when november comes with fog and sleet or january
with ice and snow, but they have their merits in the sultry long
vacation weather. they enable allegory, though it has cheeks like
peaches, and knees like bunches of blossoms, and rosy swellings for
calves to its legs and muscles to its arms, to look tolerably cool
to-night.

plenty of dust comes in at mr. tulkinghorn's windows, and plen
 
 ___________________________
 
ty more
has generated among his furniture and papers. it lies thick
everywhere. when a breeze from the country that has lost its way
takes fright and makes a blind hurry to rush out again, it flings as
much dust in the eyes of allegory as the law--or mr. tulkinghorn, one
of its trustiest representatives--may scatter, on occasion, in the
eyes of the laity.

in his lowering magazine of dust, the universal article into which
his papers and himself, and all his clients, and all things of earth,
animate and inanimate, are resolving, mr. tulkinghorn sits at one of
the open windows enjoying a bottle of old port. though a hard-grained
man, close, dry, and silent, he can enjoy old wine with the best. he
has a priceless bin of port in some artful cellar under the fi
 
 ___________________________
 
 has dined to-day, and has his bit of fish and his steak or chicken
brought in from the coffee-house, he descends with a candle to the
echoing regions below the deserted mansion, and heralded by a remote
reverberation of thundering doors, comes gravely back encircled by an
earthy atmosphere and carrying a bottle from which he pours a radiant
nectar, two score and ten years old, that blushes in the glass to
find itself so famous and fills the whole room with the fragrance of
southern grapes.

mr. tulkinghorn, sitting in the twilight by the open window, enjoys
his wine. as if it whispered to him of its fifty years of silence and
seclusion, it shuts him up the closer. more impenetrable than ever,
he sits, and drinks, and mellows as it were in secrecy, pondering at
that twilight hour on all the mysteries he knows, associated with
darkening woods in the country, and vast blank shut-up houses in
town, and perhaps sparing a thought or two for himself, and his
family history, and his money, and his will--
 
 ___________________________
 
all a mystery to every
one--and that one bachelor friend of his, a man of the same mould and
a lawyer too, who lived the same kind of life until he was
seventy-five years old, and then suddenly conceiving (as it is
supposed) an impression that it was too monotonous, gave his gold
watch to his hair-dresser one summer evening and walked leisurely
home to the temple and hanged himself.

but mr. tulkinghorn is not alone to-night to ponder at his usual
length. seated at the same table, though with his chair modestly and
uncomfortably drawn a little way from it, sits a bald, mild, shining
man who coughs respectfully behind his hand when the lawyer bids him
fill his glass.

"now, snagsby," says mr. tulkinghorn, "to go over this odd story
again."

"if you please, sir."

"you told me when you were so good as to step round here last
night--"

"for which i must ask you to excuse me if it was a liberty, s
 
 ___________________________
 
ir; but
i remember that you had taken a sort of an interest in that person,
and i thought it possible that you might--just--wish--to--"

mr. tulkinghorn is not the man to help him to any conclusion or to
admit anything as to any possibility concerning himself. so mr.
snagsby trails off into saying, with an awkward cough, "i must ask
you to excuse the liberty, sir, i am sure."

"not at all," says mr. tulkinghorn. "you told me, snagsby, that you
put on your hat and came round without mentioning your intention to
your wife. that was prudent i think, because it's not a matter of
such importance that it requires to be mentioned."

"well, sir," returns mr. snagsby, "you see, my little woman is--not
to put too fine a point upon it--inquisitive. she's inquisitive. poor
little thing, she's liable to spasms, and it's good for her to have
her mind employed. in consequence of which she employs it--i should
say up
 
 ___________________________
 
, sir, and to-night, too. my little woman is at present in--not
to put too fine a point on it--in a pious state, or in what she
considers such, and attends the evening exertions (which is the name
they go by) of a reverend party of the name of chadband. he has a
great deal of eloquence at his command, undoubtedly, but i am not
quite favourable to his style myself. that's neither here nor there.
my little woman being engaged in that way made it easier for me to
step round in a quiet manner."

mr. tulkinghorn assents. "fill your glass, snagsby."

"thank you, sir, i am sure," returns the stationer with his cough of
deference. "this is wonderfully fine wine, sir!"

"it is a rare wine now," says mr. tulkinghorn. "it is fifty years
old."

"is it indeed, sir? but i am not surprised to hear it, i am sure. it
might be--any age almost." after rendering this general tribute to
the port, mr. snagsby in his modesty coughs an apology behind his
hand for drinking anything so precious.

"will you run over, once a
 
 ___________________________
 
reaked, nor has a step been audible upon the floor. yet this third
person stands there with his attentive face, and his hat and stick in
his hands, and his hands behind him, a composed and quiet listener.
he is a stoutly built, steady-looking, sharp-eyed man in black, of
about the middle-age. except that he looks at mr. snagsby as if he
were going to take his portrait, there is nothing remarkable about
him at first sight but his ghostly manner of appearing.

"don't mind this gentleman," says mr. tulkinghorn in his quiet way.
"this is only mr. bucket."

"oh, indeed, sir?" returns the stationer, expressing by a cough that
he is quite in the dark as to who mr. bucket may be.

"i wanted him to hear this story," says the lawyer, "because i have
half a mind (for a reason) to know more of it, and he is very
intelligent in such things. what do you say to this, bucket?"

"it's very plain, sir. since our people have moved this boy on, and
he's not to be found on his old lay, if mr. snagsby don't object to
g
 
 ___________________________
 
 part of mr. snagsby, bucket dips down
to the bottom of his mind.

"don't you be afraid of hurting the boy," he says. "you won't do
that. it's all right as far as the boy's concerned. we shall only
bring him here to ask him a question or so i want to put to him, and
he'll be paid for his trouble and sent away again. it'll be a good
job for him. i promise you, as a man, that you shall see the boy sent
away all right. don't you be afraid of hurting him; you an't going to
do that."

"very well, mr. tulkinghorn!" cries mr. snagsby cheerfully. and
reassured, "since that's the case--"

"yes! and lookee here, mr. snagsby," resumes bucket, taking him aside
by the arm, tapping him familiarly on the breast, and speaking in a
confidential tone. "you're a man of the world, you know, and a man of
business, and a man of sense. that's what you are."

"i am sure i am much obliged to you for your good opinion," returns
the stationer with his cough of modesty, "but--"

"that's what you are, you know," says bucket. 
 
 ___________________________
 
h him quite
affectionately. "--on account of which, and at the same time to
oblige a real good customer, you mean to go down with me, in
confidence, to tom-all-alone's and to keep the whole thing quiet ever
afterwards and never mention it to any one. that's about your
intentions, if i understand you?"

"you are right, sir. you are right," says mr. snagsby.

"then here's your hat," returns his new friend, quite as intimate
with it as if he had made it; "and if you're ready, i am."

they leave mr. tulkinghorn, without a ruffle on the surface of his
unfathomable depths, drinking his old wine, and go down into the
streets.

"you don't happen to know a very good sort of person of the name of
gridley, do you?" says bucket in friendly converse as they descend
the stairs.

"no," says mr. snagsby, considering, "i don't know anybody of that
name. why?"

"nothing particular," says bucket; "only having allowed his temper to
get a little the better of him and having been threatening some
respectable people, he
 
 ___________________________
 
hich they descended into that pit, they
gradually emerge from it, the crowd flitting, and whistling, and
skulking about them until they come to the verge, where restoration
of the bull's-eyes is made to darby. here the crowd, like a concourse
of imprisoned demons, turns back, yelling, and is seen no more.
through the clearer and fresher streets, never so clear and fresh to
mr. snagsby's mind as now, they walk and ride until they come to mr.
tulkinghorn's gate.

as they ascend the dim stairs (mr. tulkinghorn's chambers being on
the first floor), mr. bucket mentions that he has the key of the
outer door in his pocket and that there is no need to ring. for a man
so expert in most things of that kind, bucket takes time to open the
door and makes some noise too. it may be that he sounds a note of
preparation.

howbeit, they come at last into the hall, where a lamp is burning,
and so into mr. tulkinghorn's usual room--the room where he drank his
old wine to-night. he is not there, but his two old-fashio
 
 ___________________________
 
d out of
you. but, however, here's five shillings for you. take care how you
spend it, and don't get yourself into trouble." bucket stealthily
tells the coins from one hand into the other like counters--which is
a way he has, his principal use of them being in these games of
skill--and then puts them, in a little pile, into the boy's hand and
takes him out to the door, leaving mr. snagsby, not by any means
comfortable under these mysterious circumstances, alone with the
veiled figure. but on mr. tulkinghorn's coming into the room, the
veil is raised and a sufficiently good-looking frenchwoman is
revealed, though her expression is something of the intensest.

"thank you, mademoiselle hortense," says mr. tulkinghorn with his
usual equanimity. "i will give you no further trouble about this
little wager."

"you will do me the kindness to remember, sir, that i am not at
present placed?" says mademoiselle.

"certainly, certainly!"

"and to confer upon me the favour of your distinguished
recommendation?"
 
 ___________________________
 


"by all means, mademoiselle hortense."

"a word from mr. tulkinghorn is so powerful."

"it shall not be wanting, mademoiselle."

"receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude, dear sir."

"good night."

mademoiselle goes out with an air of native gentility; and mr.
bucket, to whom it is, on an emergency, as natural to be groom of the
ceremonies as it is to be anything else, shows her downstairs, not
without gallantry.

"well, bucket?" quoth mr. tulkinghorn on his return.

"it's all squared, you see, as i squared it myself, sir. there an't a
doubt that it was the other one with this one's dress on. the boy was
exact respecting colours and everything. mr. snagsby, i promised you
as a man that he should be sent away all right. don't say it wasn't
done!"

"you have kept your word, sir," returns the stationer; "and if i can
be of no further use, mr. tulkinghorn, i think, as my little woman
will be getting anxious--"

"thank you, snagsby, no further us
 
 ___________________________
 
e," says mr. tulkinghorn. "i am
quite indebted to you for the trouble you have taken already."

"not at all, sir. i wish you good night."

"you see, mr. snagsby," says mr. bucket, accompanying him to the door
and shaking hands with him over and over again, "what i like in you
is that you're a man it's of no use pumping; that's what you are.
when you know you have done a right thing, you put it away, and it's
done with and gone, and there's an end of it. that's what you do."

"that is certainly what i endeavour to do, s
 
 ___________________________
 
t," said bucket in the same tone. then resuming his
encouragement, he pursued aloud: "worn out, mr. gridley? after
dodging me for all these weeks and forcing me to climb the roof here
like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor? that ain't like
being worn out. i should think not! now i tell you what you want. you
want excitement, you know, to keep you up; that's what you want.
you're used to it, and you can't do without it. i couldn't myself.
very well, then; here's this warrant got by mr. tulkinghorn of
lincoln's inn fields, and backed into half-a-dozen counties since.
what do you say to coming along with me, upon this warrant, and
having a good angry argument before the magistrates? it'll do you
good; it'll freshen you up and get you into training for another turn
at the chancellor. give in? why, i am surprised to hear a man of your
energy talk of giving in. you mustn't do that. you're half the fun of
the fair in the court of chancery. george, you lend mr. gridley a
hand, and let's see now
 
 ___________________________
 
apter xxv

mrs. snagsby sees it all


there is disquietude in cook's court, cursitor street. black
suspicion hides in that peaceful region. the mass of cook's courtiers
are in their usual state of mind, no better and no worse; but mr.
snagsby is changed, and his little woman knows it.

for tom-all-alone's and lincoln's inn fields persist in harnessing
themselves, a pair of ungovernable coursers, to the chariot of mr.
snagsby's imagination; and mr. bucket drives; and the passengers are
jo and mr. tulkinghorn; and the complete equipage whirls though the
law-stationery business at wild speed all round the clock. even in
the little front kitchen where the family meals are taken, it rattles
away at a smoking pace from the dinner-table, when mr. snagsby pauses
in carving the first slice of the leg of mutton baked with potatoes
and stares at the kitchen wall.

mr. snagsby cannot make out what it is that he has had to do with.
something is wrong somewhere, but what something, what may come of
it, to whom,
 
 ___________________________
 
 when, and from which unthought of and unheard of quarter
is the puzzle of his life. his remote impressions of the robes and
coronets, the stars and garters, that sparkle through the
surface-dust of mr. tulkinghorn's chambers; his veneration for the
mysteries presided over by that best and closest of his customers,
whom all the inns of court, all chancery lane, and all the legal
neighbourhood agree to hold in awe; his remembrance of detective mr.
bucket with his forefinger and his confidential manner, impossible to
be evaded or declined, persuade him that he is a party to some
dangerous secret without knowing what it is. and it is the fearful
peculiarity of this condition that, at any hour of his daily li
 
 ___________________________
 
im, where
the grim judy is always motionless, and the old gentleman with his
cap over one eye is always sliding off the seat into the straw and
looking upward at him out of his other eye with a helpless expression
of being jolted in the back.




chapter xxvii

more old soldiers than one


mr. george has not far to ride with folded arms upon the box, for
their destination is lincoln's inn fields. when the driver stops his
horses, mr. george alights, and looking in at the window, says,
"what, mr. tulkinghorn's your man, is he?"

"yes, my dear friend. do you know him, mr. george?"

"why, i have heard of him--seen him too, i think. but i don't know
him, and he don't know me."

there ensues the carrying of mr. smallweed upstairs, which is done to
perfection with the trooper's help. he is borne into mr.
tulkinghorn's great room and deposited on the turkey rug before the
fire. mr. tulkinghorn is not within at the present moment but will be
back directly. the occupant of the pew in the hall, having said 
 
 ___________________________
 
ictures--and comes back to
the fire repeating, "sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and manor of
chesney wold, hey?"

"worth a mint of money, mr. george!" whispers grandfather smallweed,
rubbing his legs. "powerfully rich!"

"who do you mean? this old gentleman, or the baronet?"

"this gentleman, this gentleman."

"so i have heard; and knows a thing or two, i'll hold a wager. not
bad quarters, either," says mr. george, looking round again. "see the
strong-box yonder!"

this reply is cut short by mr. tulkinghorn's arrival. there is no
change in him, of course. rustily drest, with his spectacles in his
hand, and their very case worn threadbare. in manner, close and dry.
in voice, husky and low. in face, watchful behind a blind; habitually
not uncensorious and contemptuous perhaps. the peerage may have
warmer worshippers and faithfuller believers than mr. tulkinghorn,
after all, if everything were known.

"good morning, mr. smallweed, good morning!" he says as he comes in.
"you have brought the sergeant,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i see. sit down, sergeant."

as mr. tulkinghorn takes off his gloves and puts them in his hat, he
looks with half-closed eyes across the room to where the trooper
stands and says within himself perchance, "you'll do, my friend!"

"sit down, sergeant," he repeats as he comes to his table, which is
set on one side of the fire, and takes his easy-chair. "cold and raw
this morning, cold and raw!" mr. tulkinghorn warms before the bars,
alternately, the palms and knuckles of his hands and looks (from
behind that blind which is always down) at the trio sitting in a
little semicircle before him.

"now, i can feel what i am about" (as perhaps he can in two senses),
"mr. smallweed." the old gentleman is newly shaken up by judy to bear
his part in the conversation. "you have brought our good friend the
sergeant, i see."

"yes, sir," returns mr. smallweed, very servile to the lawyer's
wealth and influence.

"a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd what does the sergeant say about this business?"

"mr. george," says grandfather smallweed with a tremulous wave of his
shrivelled hand, "this is the gentleman, sir."

mr. george salutes the gentleman but otherwise sits bolt upright and
profoundly silent--very forward in his chair, as if the full
complement of regulation appendages for a field-day hung about him.

mr. tulkinghorn proceeds, "well, george--i believe your name is
george?"

"it is so, sir."

"what do you say, george?"

"i ask your pardon, sir," returns the trooper, "but i should wish to
know what you say?"

"do you mean in point of reward?"

"i mean in point of everything, sir."

this is so very trying to mr. smallweed's temper that he suddenly
breaks out with "you're a brimstone beast!" and as suddenly asks
pardon of mr. tulkinghorn, excusing himself for this slip of the
tongue by saying to judy, "i was th
 
 ___________________________
 
inking of your grandmother, my
dear."

"i supposed, sergeant," mr. tulkinghorn resumes as he leans on one
side of his chair and crosses his legs, "that mr. smallweed might
have sufficiently explained the matter. it lies in the smallest
compass, however. you served under captain hawdon at one time, and
were his attendant in illness, and rendered him many little services,
and were rather in his confidence, i am told. that is so, is it not?"

"yes, sir, that is so," says mr. george with military brevity.

"therefore you may happen to have in your possession
something--anythi
 
 ___________________________
 
ineas, you would consider handsome, i dare say."

"noble, my dear friend!" cries grandfather smallweed, screwing up his
eyes.

"if not, say how much more, in your conscience as a soldier, you can
demand. there is no need for you to part with the writing, against
your inclination--though i should prefer to have it."

mr. george sits squared in exactly the same attitude, looks at the
painted ceiling, and says never a word. the irascible mr. smallweed
scratches the air.

"the question is," says mr. tulkinghorn in his methodical, subdued,
uninterested way, "first, whether you have any of captain hawdon's
writing?"

"first, whether i have any of captain hawdon's writing, sir," repeats
mr. george.

"secondly, what will satisfy you for the trouble of producing it?"

"secondly, what will satisfy me for the trouble of producing it,
sir," repeats mr. george.

"thirdly, you can judge for yourself whether it is at all like that,"
says mr. tulkinghorn, suddenly handing him some sheets of written
paper tied tog
 
 ___________________________
 
ether.

"whether it is at all like that, sir. just so," repeats mr. george.

all three repetitions mr. george pronounces in a mechanical manner,
looking straight at mr. tulkinghorn; nor does he so much as glance at
the affidavit in jarndyce and jarndyce, that has been given to him
for his inspection (though he still holds it in his hand), but
continues to look at the lawyer with an air of troubled meditation.

"well?" says mr. tulkinghorn. "what do you say?"

"well, sir," replies mr. george, rising erect and looking immense, "i
would rather, if you'll excuse me, have nothing to do with this."

mr. tulkinghorn, outwardly quite undisturbed, demands, "why not?"

"why, sir," returns the trooper. "except on military compulsion, i am
not a man of business. among civilians i am what they call in
scotland a ne'er-do-weel. i have no head for papers, sir. i can stand
any fire better than a fire of cross questions. i mentioned to mr.
small
 
 ___________________________
 
ers an occasional sentence, as, "you are the
best judge of your own interest, sergeant." "take care you do no harm
by this." "please yourself, please yourself." "if you know what you
mean, that's quite enough." these he utters with an appearance of
perfect indifference as he looks over the papers on his table and
prepares to write a letter.

mr. george looks distrustfully from the painted ceiling to the
ground, from the ground to mr. smallweed, from mr. smallweed to mr.
tulkinghorn, and from mr. tulkinghorn to the painted ceiling again,
often in his perplexity changing the leg on which he rests.

"i do assure you, sir," says mr. george, "not to say it offensively,
that between you and mr. smallweed here, i really am being smothered
fifty times over. i really am, sir. i am not a match for you
gentlemen. will you allow me to ask why you want to see the captain's
hand, in the case that i could find any specimen of it?"

mr. tulkinghorn quietly shakes his head. "no. if you were a man of
business, serg
 
 ___________________________
 
eant, you would not need to be informed that there are
confidential reasons, very harmless in themselves, for many such
wants in the profession to which i belong. but if you are afraid of
doing any injury to captain hawdon, you may set your mind at rest
about that."

"aye! he is dead, sir."

"is he?" mr. tulkinghorn quietly sits down to write.

"well, sir," says the trooper, looking into his hat after another
disconcerted pause, "i am sorry not to have given you more
satisfaction. if it would be any satisfaction to any one that i
should be confirmed in my judgment that i would rather have nothing
to do with this by a friend of mine who has a better head for
business than i have, and who is an old soldier, i am willing to
consult with him. i--i really am so completely smothered myself at
present," says mr. 
 
 ___________________________
 
l by the lapel of his
coat and flashing some half-quenched green fire out of his angry
eyes, "i'd tear the writing away from him. he's got it buttoned in
his breast. i saw him put it there. judy saw him put it there. speak
up, you crabbed image for the sign of a walking-stick shop, and say
you saw him put it there!"

this vehement conjuration the old gentleman accompanies with such a
thrust at his granddaughter that it is too much for his strength, and
he slips away out of his chair, drawing mr. tulkinghorn with him,
until he is arrested by judy, and well shaken.

"violence will not do for me, my friend," mr. tulkinghorn then
remarks coolly.

"no, no, i know, i know, sir. but it's chafing and
galling--it's--it's worse than your smattering chattering magpie of a
grandmother," to the imperturbable judy, who only looks at the fire,
"to know he has got what's wanted and won't give it up. he, not to
give it up! he! a vagabond! but never mind, sir, never mind. at the
most, he has only his own way for a 
 
 ___________________________
 
little while. i have him
periodically in a vice. i'll twist him, sir. i'll screw him, sir. if
he won't do it with a good grace, i'll make him do it with a bad one,
sir! now, my dear mr. george," says grandfather smallweed, winking at
the lawyer hideously as he releases him, "i am ready for your kind
assistance, my excellent friend!"

mr. tulkinghorn, with some shadowy sign of amusement manifesting
itself through his self-possession, stands on the hearth-rug with his
back to the fire, watching the disappearance of mr. smallweed and
acknowledging the trooper's parting salute with one slight nod.

it is more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman, mr. george
finds, than to bear a hand in carrying him downstairs, for when he is
replaced in his conveyance, he is so loquacious on the subject of the
guineas and retains such an affectionate hol
 
 ___________________________
 
makes a man like me look lonely. but it's well i never made that
evolution of matrimony. i shouldn't have been fit for it. i am such a
vagabond still, even at my present time of life, that i couldn't hold
to the gallery a month together if it was a regular pursuit or if i
didn't camp there, gipsy fashion. come! i disgrace nobody and cumber
nobody; that's something. i have not done that for many a long year!"

so he whistles it off and marches on.

arrived in lincoln's inn fields and mounting mr. tulkinghorn's stair,
he finds the outer door closed and the chambers shut, but the trooper
not knowing much about outer doors, and the staircase being dark
besides, he is yet fumbling and groping about, hoping to discover a
bell-handle or to open the door for himself, when mr. tulkinghorn
comes up the stairs (quietly, of course) and angrily asks, "who is
that? what are you doing there?"

"i ask your pardon, sir. it's george. the sergeant."

"and couldn't george, the sergeant, see that my door was locked?"

 
 ___________________________
 

"why, no, sir, i couldn't. at any rate, i didn't," says the trooper,
rather nettled.

"have you changed your mind? or are you in the same mind?" mr.
tulkinghorn demands. but he knows well enough at a glance.

"in the same mind, sir."

"i thought so. that's sufficient. you can go. so you are the man,"
says mr. tulkinghorn, opening his door with the key, "in whose
hiding-place mr. gridley was found?"

"yes, i am the man," says the trooper, stopping two or three stairs
down. "what then, sir?"

"what then? i don't like your associates. you should not have seen
the inside of my door this morning if i had thought of your being
that man. gridley? a threatening, murderous, dangerous fellow."

with these words, spoken in an unusually high tone for him, the
lawyer goes into his rooms and shuts the door with a thundering

 
 ___________________________
 
s she?"

"mrs. rouncewell? no, volumnia. she has a son. indeed, she had two."

my lady, whose chronic malady of boredom has been sadly aggravated by
volumnia this evening, glances wearily towards the candlesticks and
heaves a noiseless sigh.

"and it is a remarkable example of the confusion into which the
present age has fallen; of the obliteration of landmarks, the opening
of floodgates, and the uprooting of distinctions," says sir leicester
with stately gloom, "that i have been informed by mr. tulkinghorn
that mrs. rouncewell's son has been invited to go into parliament."

miss volumnia utters a little sharp scream.

"yes, indeed," repeats sir leicester. "into parliament."

"i never heard of such a thing! good gracious, what is the man?"
exclaims volumnia.

"he is called, i believe--an--ironmaster." sir leicester says it
slowly and with gravity and doubt, as not being sure but that he is
called a lead-mistress or that the right word may be some other word
expressive of some other relationship to
 
 ___________________________
 
 some other metal.

volumnia utters another little scream.

"he has declined the proposal, if my information from mr. tulkinghorn
be correct, as i have no doubt it is. mr. tulkinghorn being always
correct and exact; still that does not," says sir leicester, "that
does not lessen the anomaly, which is fraught with strange
considerations--startling considerations, as it appears to me."

miss volumnia rising with a look candlestick-wards, sir leicester
politely performs the grand tour of the drawing-room, brings one, and
lights it at my lady's shaded lamp.

"i must beg you, my lady," he says while doing so, "to remain a few
moments, for this individual of whom i speak arrived t
 
 ___________________________
 
hairs, a
table and cover, long-necked bottle (containing wine), one flask, one
spanish female's costume, three-quarter face portrait of miss jogg
the model, and a suit of armour containing don quixote." or "one
stone terrace (cracked), one gondola in distance, one venetian
senator's dress complete, richly embroidered white satin costume with
profile portrait of miss jogg the model, one scimitar superbly
mounted in gold with jewelled handle, elaborate moorish dress (very
rare), and othello."

mr. tulkinghorn comes and goes pretty often, there being estate
business to do, leases to be renewed, and so on. he sees my lady
pretty often, too; and he and she are as composed, and as
indifferent, and take as little heed of one another, as ever. yet it
may be that my lady fears this mr. tulkinghorn and that he knows it.
it may be that he pursues her doggedly and steadily, with no touch of
compunction, remorse, or pity. it may be that her beauty and all the
state and brilliancy surrounding her only gives him
 
 ___________________________
 
"now, i may say to your ladyship at once," says mr. guppy, a little
emboldened, "it is no matter arising out of jarndyce and jarndyce
that made me so desirous to speak to your ladyship, which conduct i
have no doubt did appear, and does appear, obtrusive--in fact, almost
blackguardly."

after waiting for a moment to receive some assurance to the contrary,
and not receiving any, mr. guppy proceeds, "if it had been jarndyce
and jarndyce, i should have gone at once to your ladyship's
solicitor, mr. tulkinghorn, of the fields. i have the pleasure of
being acquainted with mr. tulkinghorn--at least we move when we meet
one another--and if it had been any business of that sort, i should
have gone to him."

my lady turns a little round and says, "you had better sit down."

"thank your ladyship." mr. guppy does so. "now, your ladyship"--mr.
guppy refers to a little slip of paper on which he has made small
notes of his line of argument and which seems to involve him in the
densest obscurity whenever he look
 
 ___________________________
 
s at it--"i--oh, yes!--i place
myself entirely in your ladyship's hands. if your ladyship was to
make any complaint to kenge and carboy or to mr. tulkinghorn of the
present visit, i should be placed in a very disagreeable situation.
that, i openly admit. consequently, i rely upon your ladyship's
honour."

my lady, with a disdainful gesture of the hand that holds the screen,
assures him of his being worth no complaint from her.

"thank your ladyship," says mr. guppy; "quite satisfactory.
now--i--dash it!--the fact is that i put down a head or two here of
the order of the points i thought of touching upon, and they're
written short, and i can't quite 
 
 ___________________________
 


"besides which, it was nothing to you, you know, whether he was or
not," says judy. also with a secretly glistening eye.

"he never saw me in his life to know me," observed small; "i don't
know why i should introduce him, i am sure!"

"no, he never communicated with us, which is to be deplored," the old
gentleman strikes in, "but i have come to look after the property--to
look over the papers, and to look after the property. we shall make
good our title. it is in the hands of my solicitor. mr. tulkinghorn,
of lincoln's inn fields, over the way there, is so good as to act as
my solicitor; and grass don't grow under his feet, i can tell ye.
krook was mrs. smallweed's only brother; she had no relation but
krook, and krook had no relation but mrs. smallweed. i am speaking of
your brother, you brimstone black-beetle, that was seventy-six years
of age."

mrs. smallweed instantly begins to shake her head and pipe up,
"seventy-six pound seven and sevenpence! seventy-six thousand bags of
money! seventy-s
 
 ___________________________
 
ll touch
the property!" as his dutiful grandchildren set him up, panting, and
putting him through the usual restorative process of shaking and
punching, he still repeats like an echo, "the--the property! the
property! property!"

mr. weevle and mr. guppy look at each other, the former as having
relinquished the whole affair, the latter with a discomfited
countenance as having entertained some lingering expectations yet.
but there is nothing to be done in opposition to the smallweed
interest. mr. tulkinghorn's clerk comes down from his official pew in
the chambers to mention to the police that mr. tulkinghorn is
answerable for its being all correct about the next of kin and that
the papers and effects will be formally taken possession of in due
time and course. mr. smallweed is at once permitted so far to assert
his supremacy as to be carried on a visit of sentiment into the next
house and upstairs into miss flite's deserted room, where he looks
like a hideous bird of prey newly added to her aviary
 
 ___________________________
 
 as nearly out as he can stumble.

mr. guppy thinks that's all.

"you had better be sure that you wish to say nothing more to me, this
being the last time you will have the opportunity."

mr. guppy is quite sure. and indeed he has no such wish at present,
by any means.

"that is enough. i will dispense with excuses. good evening to you!"
and she rings for mercury to show the young man of the name of guppy
out.

but in that house, in that same moment, there happens to be an old
man of the name of tulkinghorn. and that old man, coming with his
quiet footstep to the library, has his hand at that moment on the
handle of the door--comes in--and comes face to face with the young
man as he is leaving the room.

one glance between the old man and the lady, and for an instant the
blind that is always down flies up. suspicion, eager and sharp, looks
out. another instant, close again.

"i beg your pardon, lady dedlock. i beg your pardon a thousand times.
it is so very unusual to find you here at this hour. i
 
 ___________________________
 
 supposed the
room was empty. i beg your pardon!"

"stay!" she negligently calls him back. "remain here, i beg. i am
going out to dinner. i have nothing more to say to this young man!"

the disconcerted young man bows, as he goes out, and cringingly hopes
that mr. tulkinghorn of the fields is well.

"aye, aye?" says the lawyer, looking at him from under his bent
brows, though he has no need to look again--not he. "from kenge and
carboy's, surely?"

"kenge and carboy's, mr. tulkinghorn. name of guppy, sir."

"to be sure. why, thank you, mr. guppy, i am very well!"

"happy to hear it, sir. you can't be too well, sir, for the credit of
the profession."

"thank you, mr. guppy!"

mr. guppy sneaks away. mr. tulkinghorn, such a foil in his
old-fashioned rusty black to lady dedlock's brightness, hands her
down the staircase to her carriage. he returns rubbing his chin, and
rubs it a good deal in the course of the evening.




chapter xxxiv

a turn of the screw


"now, what," says mr
 
 ___________________________
 


"come, mat," says mr. george when he has recovered himself, "we must
try the lawyer. now, what do you think of this rascal?"

mr. bagnet, stopping to take a farewell look into the parlour,
replies with one shake of his head directed at the interior, "if my
old girl had been here--i'd have told him!" having so discharged
himself of the subject of his cogitations, he falls into step and
marches off with the trooper, shoulder to shoulder.

when they present themselves in lincoln's inn fields, mr. tulkinghorn
is engaged and not to be seen. he is not at all willing to see them,
for when they have waited a full hour, and the clerk, on his bell
being rung, takes the opportunity of mentioning as much, he brings
forth no more encouraging message than that mr. tulkinghorn has
nothing to say to them and they had better not wait. they do wait,
however, with the perseverance of military tactics, and at last the
bell rings again and the client in possession comes out of mr.
tulkinghorn's room.

the client is 
 
 ___________________________
 
emble that goes through her quaint old figure. but
mr. george is so occupied with the almanac over the fire-place
(calculating the coming months by it perhaps) that he does not look
round until she has gone away and the door is closed upon her.

"george," mr. bagnet gruffly whispers when he does turn from the
almanac at last. "don't be cast down! 'why, soldiers, why--should we
be melancholy, boys?' cheer up, my hearty!"

the clerk having now again gone in to say that they are still there
and mr. tulkinghorn being heard to return with some irascibility,
"let 'em come in then!" they pass into the great room with the
painted ceiling and find him standing before the fire.

"now, you men, what do you want? sergeant, i told you the last time i
saw you that i don't desire your company here."

sergeant replies--dashed within the last few minutes as to his usual
manner of speech, and even as to his usual carriage--that he has
received this letter, has been to mr. smallweed about it, and has
been referred t
 
 ___________________________
 
here.

"i have nothing to say to you," rejoins mr. tulkinghorn. "if you get
into debt, you must pay your debts or take the consequences. you have
no occasion to come here to learn that, i suppose?"

sergeant is sorry to say that he is not prepared with the money.

"very well! then the other man--this man, if this is he--must pay it
for you."

sergeant is sorry to add that the other man is not prepared with the
money either.

"very well! then you must pay it between you or you must both be sued
for it and both suffer. you have had the money and must refund 
 
 ___________________________
 
o you. i don't like your associates and don't want
you here. this matter is not at all in my course of practice and is
not in my office. mr. smallweed is good enough to offer these affairs
to me, but they are not in my way. you must go to melchisedech's in
clifford's inn."

"i must make an apology to you, sir," says mr. george, "for pressing
myself upon you with so little encouragement--which is almost as
unpleasant to me as it can be to you--but would you let me say a
private word to you?"

mr. tulkinghorn rises with his hands in his pockets and walks into
one of the window recesses. "now! i have no time to waste." in the
midst of his perfect assumption of indifference, he directs a sharp
look at the trooper, taking care to stand with his own back to the
light and to have the other with his face towards it.

"well, sir," says mr. george, "this man with me is the other party
implicated in this unfortunate affair--nominally, only nominally--and
my sole object is to prevent his getting into trouble 
 
 ___________________________
 
you choose to leave it here, i can do this for you--i
can replace this matter on its old footing, and i can go so far
besides as to give you a written undertaking that this man bagnet
shall never be troubled in any way until you have been proceeded
against to the utmost, that your means shall be exhausted before the
creditor looks to his. this is in fact all but freeing him. have you
decided?"

the trooper puts his hand into his breast and answers with a long
breath, "i must do it, sir."

so mr. tulkinghorn, putting on his spectacles, sits down and writes
the undertaking, which he slowly reads and explains to bagnet, who
has all this time been staring at the ceiling and who puts his hand
on his bald head again, under this new verbal shower-bath, and seems
exceedingly in need of the old girl through whom to express his
sentiments. the trooper then takes from his breast-pocket a folded
paper, which he lays with an unwilling hand at the lawyer's elbow.
"'tis only a letter of instructions, sir. the la
 
 ___________________________
 
st i ever had from
him."

look at a millstone, mr. george, for some change in its expression,
and you will find it quite as soon as in the face of mr. tulkinghorn
when he opens and reads the letter! he refolds it and lays it in his
desk with a countenance as unperturbable as death.

nor has he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same
frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly, "you can go. show
these men out, there!" being shown out, they repair to mr. bagnet's
residence to dine.

boiled beef and greens constitute the day's variety on the former
repast of boiled pork and greens, and mrs. bagnet serves out the meal
in the same way and
 
 ___________________________
 
quite at
home here again, i dare say? glad to see you, glad to see you!"

mr. weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about. mr. guppy's eye follows
mr. weevle's eye. mr. weevle's eye comes back without any new
intelligence in it. mr. guppy's eye comes back and meets mr.
smallweed's eye. that engaging old gentleman is still murmuring, like
some wound-up instrument running down, "how de do, sir--how
de--how--" and then having run down, he lapses into grinning silence,
as mr. guppy starts at seeing mr. tulkinghorn standing in the
darkness opposite with his hands behind him.

"gentleman so kind as to act as my solicitor," says grandfather
smallweed. "i am not the sort of client for a gentleman of such note,
but he is so good!"

mr. guppy, slightly nudging his friend to take another look, makes a
shuffling bow to mr. tulkinghorn, who returns it with an easy nod.
mr. tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do and
were rather amused by the novelty.

"a good deal of property here, sir, i should
 
 ___________________________
 
n the chimney very thin. did you ever see
such a brute? looks as if she knew all about it, don't she? almost
looks as if she was krook. shoohoo! get out, you goblin!"

lady jane, in the doorway, with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and
her club of a tail, shows no intention of obeying; but mr.
tulkinghorn stumbling over her, she spits at his rusty legs, and
swearing wrathfully, takes her arched back upstairs. possibly to roam
the house-tops again and return by the chimney.

"mr. guppy," says mr. tulkinghorn, "could i have a word with you?"

mr. guppy is engaged in collecting the galaxy gallery of british
beauty from the wall and depositing those works of art in their old
ignoble band-box. "sir," he returns, reddening, "i wish to act with
courtesy towards every member of the profession, and especially, i am
sure, towards a member of it so well known as yourself--i will truly
add, sir, so distinguished as yourself. still, mr. tulkinghorn, sir,
i must stipulate that if you have any word with me, that
 
 ___________________________
 
 word is
spoken in the presence of my friend."

"oh, indeed?" says mr. tulkinghorn.

"yes, sir. my reasons are not of a personal nature at all, but they
are amply sufficient for myself."

"no doubt, no doubt." mr. tulkinghorn is as imperturbable as the
hearthstone to which he has quietly walked. "the matter is not of
that consequence that i need put you to the trouble of making any
conditions, mr. guppy." he pauses here to smile, and his smile is as
dull and rusty as his pantaloons. "you are to be congratulated, mr.
guppy; you are a fortunate young man, sir."

"pretty well so, mr. tulkinghorn; i don't complain."

"complain? high friends, free admission to great houses, and access
to elegant ladies! why, mr. guppy, t
 
 ___________________________
 
here are people in london who
would give their ears to be you."

mr. guppy, looking as if he would give his own reddening and still
reddening ears to be one of those people at present instead of
himself, replies, "sir, if i attend to my profession and do what is
right by kenge and carboy, my friends and acquaintances are of no
consequence to them nor to any member of the profession, not
excepting mr. tulkinghorn of the fields. i am not under any
obligation to explain myself further; and with all respect for you,
sir, and without offence--i repeat, without offence--"

"oh, certainly!"

"--i don't intend to do it."

"quite so," says mr. tulkinghorn with a calm nod. "very good; i see
by these portraits that you take a strong interest in the fashionable
great, sir?"

he addresses this to the astounded tony, who admits the soft
impeachment.

"a virtue in which few englishmen are deficient," observes mr.
tul
 
 ___________________________
 
itions, be
unpleasantly connected with the word bribery, and because some
graceless jokers have consequently suggested the omission from the
church service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the high
court of parliament and have recommended instead that the prayers of
the congregation be requested for six hundred and fifty-eight
gentlemen in a very unhealthy state.

"i suppose," observes volumnia, having taken a little time to recover
her spirits after her late castigation, "i suppose mr. tulkinghorn
has been worked to death."

"i don't know," says sir leicester, opening his eyes, "why mr.
tulkinghorn should be worked to death. i don't know what mr.
tulkinghorn's engagements may be. he is not a candidate."

volumnia had thought he might have been employed. sir leicester could
desire to know by whom, and what for. volumnia, abashed again,
suggests, by somebody--to advise and make arrangements. sir leicester
is not aware that any client of mr. tulkinghorn has been in need of
his assistance.


 
 ___________________________
 
lady dedlock, seated at an open window with her arm upon its
cushioned ledge and looking out at the evening shadows falling on the
park, has seemed to attend since the lawyer's name was mentioned.

a languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility now
observes from his couch that man told him ya'as'dy that tulkinghorn
had gone down t' that iron place t' give legal 'pinion 'bout
something, and that contest being over t' day, 'twould be highly
jawlly thing if tulkinghorn should 'pear with news that coodle man
was floored.

mercury in attendance with coffee informs sir leicester, hereupon,
that mr. tulkinghorn has arrived and is taking dinner. my lady turns
her head inward for the moment, then looks out again as before.

volumnia is charmed to hear that her delight is come. he is so
original, such a stolid creature, such an immense being for knowing
all sorts of things and never telling them! volumnia is persuaded
that he must be a freemason. is sure he is at th
 
 ___________________________
 
and is made a perfect idol of with
candlesticks and trowels. these lively remarks the fair dedlock
delivers in her youthful manner, while making a purse.

"he has not been here once," she adds, "since i came. i really had
some thoughts of breaking my heart for the inconstant creature. i had
almost made up my mind that he was dead."

it may be the gathering gloom of evening, or it may be the darker
gloom within herself, but a shade is on my lady's face, as if she
thought, "i would he were!"

"mr. tulkinghorn," says sir leicester, "is always welcome here and
always discreet wheresoever he is. a very valuable person, and
deservedly respected."

the debilitated cousin supposes he is "'normously rich fler."

"he has a stake in the country," says sir leicester, "i have no
doubt. he is, of course, handsomely paid, and he associates almost on
a footing of equality with the highest society."

everybody starts. for a gun is fired close by.

"good gracious, what's that?" cries volumnia with her little wither
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
scream.

"a rat," says my lady. "and they have shot him."

enter mr. tulkinghorn, followed by mercuries with lamps and candles.

"no, no," says sir leicester, "i think not. my lady, do you object to
the twilight?"

on the contrary, my lady prefers it.

"volumnia?"

oh! nothing is so delicious to volumnia as to sit and talk in the
dark.

"then take them away," says sir leicester. "tulkinghorn, i beg your
pardon. how do you do?"

mr. tulkinghorn with his usual leisurely ease advances, renders his
passing homage to my lady, shakes sir leicester's hand, and subsides
into the chair proper to him when he has anything to communicate, on
the opposite side of the baronet's little newspaper-table. sir
leicester is apprehensive that my lady, not being very well, will
take cold at that open window. my lady is obliged to him, but would
rather sit there for the air. sir leicester rises, adjusts her scarf
about her, and returns to his seat. mr. tul
 
 ___________________________
 
kinghorn in the meanwhile
takes a pinch of snuff.

"now," says sir leicester. "how has that contest gone?"

"oh, hollow from the beginning. not a chance. they have brought in
both their people. you are beaten out of all reason. three to one."

it is a part of mr. tulkinghorn's policy and mastery to have no
political opinions; indeed, no opinions. therefore he says "you" are
beaten, and not "we."

sir leicester is majestically wroth. volumnia never heard of such a
thing. 'the debilitated cousin holds that it's sort of thing that's
sure tapn slongs votes--giv'n--mob.

"it's the place, you know," mr. tulkinghorn goes on to say in the
fast-increasing darkness when there is silence again, "where they
wanted to put up mrs. rouncewell's son."

"a proposal which, as you co
 
 ___________________________
 
rrectly informed me at the time, he had
the becoming taste and perception," observes sir leicester, "to
decline. i cannot say that i by any means approve of the sentiments
expressed by mr. rouncewell when he was here for some half-hour in
this room, but there was a sense of propriety in his decision which i
am glad to acknowledge."

"ha!" says mr. tulkinghorn. "it did not prevent him from being very
active in this election, though."

sir leicester is distinctly heard to gasp before speaking. "did i
understand you? did you say that mr. rouncewell had been very active
in this election?"

"uncommonly active."

"against--"

"oh, dear yes, against you. he is a very good speaker. plain and
emphatic. he made a damaging effect, and has great influence. in the
business part of the proceedings he carried all before him."

it is evident to the whole company, t
 
 ___________________________
 
hough nobody can see him, that
sir leicester is staring majestically.

"and he was much assisted," says mr. tulkinghorn as a wind-up, "by
his son."

"by his son, sir?" repeats sir leicester with awful politeness.

"by his son."

"the son who wished to marry the young woman in my lady's service?"

"that son. he has but one."

"then upon my honour," says sir leicester after a terrific pause
during which he has been heard to snort and felt to stare, "then
upon my honour, upon my life, upon my reputation and principles,
the floodgates of society are burst open, and the waters
have--a--obliterated the landmarks of th
 
 ___________________________
 
nt out to her that she probably
would, in good time, find a husband at chesney wold by whom she would
not be--" sir leicester adds, after a moment's consideration,
"dragged from the altars of her forefathers."

these remarks he offers with his unvarying politeness and deference
when he addresses himself to his wife. she merely moves her head in
reply. the moon is rising, and where she sits there is a little
stream of cold pale light, in which her head is seen.

"it is worthy of remark," says mr. tulkinghorn, "however, that these
people are, in their way, very proud."

"proud?" sir leicester doubts his hearing.

"i should not be surprised if they all voluntarily abandoned the
girl--yes, lover and all--instead of her abandoning them, supposing
she remained at chesney wold under such circumstances."

"well!" says sir leicester tremulously. "well! you should know, mr.
tulkinghorn. you have been among them."

"really, sir leicester," returns the lawyer, "i state the fact. why,
i could tell you a story-
 
 ___________________________
 
-with lady dedlock's permission."

her head concedes it, and volumnia is enchanted. a story! oh, he is
going to tell something at last! a ghost in it, volumnia hopes?

"no. real flesh and blood." mr. tulkinghorn stops for an instant and
repeats with some little emphasis grafted upon his usual monotony,
"real flesh and blood, miss dedlock. sir leicester, these particulars
have only lately become known to me. they are very brief. they
exemplify what i have said. i suppress names for the present. lady
dedlock will not think me ill-bred, i hope?"

by the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking
towards the moonlight. by the light of the moon lady dedlock can be
seen, perfectly still.

"a tow
 
 ___________________________
 
nsman of this mrs. rouncewell, a man in exactly parallel
circumstances as i am told, had the good fortune to have a daughter
who attracted the notice of a great lady. i speak of really a great
lady, not merely great to him, but married to a gentleman of your
condition, sir leicester."

sir leicester condescendingly says, "yes, mr. tulkinghorn," implying
that then she must have appeared of very considerable moral
dimensions indeed in the eyes of an iron-master.

"the lady was wealthy and beautiful, and had a liking for the girl,
and treated her with great kindness, and kept her always near her.
now this lady preserved a secret under all her greatness, which she
had preserved for many years. in fact, she had in early life been
engaged to marry a young rake--he was a captain in the army--nothing
connected with whom came to any good. sh
 
 ___________________________
 
eshold. the
majority incline to the debilitated cousin's sentiment, which is in
few words--"no business--rouncewell's fernal townsman." sir leicester
generally refers back in his mind to wat tyler and arranges a
sequence of events on a plan of his own.

there is not much conversation in all, for late hours have been kept
at chesney wold since the necessary expenses elsewhere began, and
this is the first night in many on which the family have been alone.
it is past ten when sir leicester begs mr. tulkinghorn to ring for
candles. then the stream of moonlight has swelled into a lake, and
then lady dedlock for the first time moves, and rises, and comes
forward to a table for a glass of water. winking cousins, bat-like in
the candle glare, crowd round to give it; volumnia (always ready for
something better if procurable) takes another, a very mild sip of
which contents her; lady dedlock, graceful, self-possessed, looked
after by admiring eyes, passes away slowly down the long perspective
by the side of
 
 ___________________________
 
 that nymph, not at all improving her as a question of
contrast.




chapter xli

in mr. tulkinghorn's room


mr. tulkinghorn arrives in his turret-room a little breathed by the
journey up, though leisurely performed. there is an expression on his
face as if he had discharged his mind of some grave matter and were,
in his close way, satisfied. to say of a man so severely and strictly
self-repressed that he is triumphant would be to do him as great an
injustice as to suppose him troubled with love or sentiment or any
romantic weakness. he is sedately satisfied. perhaps there is a
rather increased sense of power upon hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 attention before going to bed. but he
happens not to be in a business mind. after a glance at the documents
awaiting his notice--with his head bent low over the table, the old
man's sight for print or writing being defective at night--he opens
the french window and steps out upon the leads. there he again walks
slowly up and down in the same attitude, subsiding, if a man so cool
may have any need to subside, from the story he has related
downstairs.

the time was once when men as knowing as mr. tulkinghorn would walk
on turret-tops in the starlight and look up into the sky to read
their fortunes there. hosts of stars are visible to-night, though
their brilliancy is eclipsed by the splendour of the moon. if he be
seeking his own star as he methodically turns and turns upon the
leads, it should be but a pale one to be so rustily represented
below. if he be tracing out his destiny, that may be written in other
characters nearer to his hand.

as he paces the leads with his eyes most probably as high 
 
 ___________________________
 
 whole man the same dark, cold object, at the same
distance, which nothing has ever diminished.

"is this true concerning the poor girl?"

he slightly inclines and advances his head as not quite understanding
the question.

"you know what you related. is it true? do her friends know my story
also? is it the town-talk yet? is it chalked upon the walls and cried
in the streets?"

so! anger, and fear, and shame. all three contending. what power this
woman has to keep these raging passions down! mr. tulkinghorn's
thoughts take such form as he looks at her, with his ragged grey
eyebrows a hair's breadth more contracted than usual under her gaze.

"no, lady dedlock. that was a hypothetical case, arising out of sir
leicester's unconsciously carrying the matter with so high a hand.
but it would be a real case if they knew--what we know."

"then they do not know it yet?"

"no."

"can i save the poor girl from injury before they know it?"

"really, lady dedlock," mr. tulkinghorn replies, "i cannot give a
sa
 
 ___________________________
 
n do, when i saw mr.
rouncewell here. i knew very well that if he could have had the power
of seeing me as i was, he would consider the poor girl tarnished by
having for a moment been, although most innocently, the subject of my
great and distinguished patronage. but i have an interest in her, or
i should rather say--no longer belonging to this place--i had, and if
you can find so much consideration for the woman under your foot as
to remember that, she will be very sensible of your mercy."

mr. tulkinghorn, profoundly attentive, throws this off with a shrug
of self-depreciation and contracts his eyebrows a little more.

"you have prepared me for my exposure, and i thank you for that too.
is there anything that you require of me? is there any claim that i
can release or any charge or trouble that i can spare my husband in
obtaining his release by certifying to the exactness of your
discovery? i will write anything, here and now, that you will
dictate. i am ready to do it."

and she would do it, th
 
 ___________________________
 
 now."

"lady dedlock, there is nothing to be done. i will take leave to say
a few words when you have finished."

their need for watching one another should be over now, but they do
it all this time, and the stars watch them both through the opened
window. away in the moonlight lie the woodland fields at rest, and
the wide house is as quiet as the narrow one. the narrow one! where
are the digger and the spade, this peaceful night, destined to add
the last great secret to the many secrets of the tulkinghorn
existence? is the man born yet, is the spade wrought yet? curious
questions to consider, more curious perhaps not to consider, under
the watching stars upon a summer night.

"of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine," lady dedlock
presently proceeds, "i say not a word. if i were not dumb, you would
be deaf. let that go by. it is not for your ears."

he makes a feint of offering a protest, but she sweeps it away with
her disdainful hand.

"of other and very different things i come to spea
 
 ___________________________
 
k to you. my jewels
are all in their proper places of keeping. they will be found there.
so, my dresses. so, all the valuables i have. some ready money i had
with me, please to say, but no large amount. i did not wear my own
dress, in order that i might avoid observation. i went to be
henceforward lost. make this known. i leave no other charge with
you."

"excuse me, lady dedlock," says mr. tulkinghorn, quite unmoved. "i am
not sure that i understand you. you want--"

"to be lost to all here. i leave chesney wold to-night. i go this
hour."

mr. tulkinghorn shakes his head. she rises, but he, without moving
hand from chair-back or from old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill,
shakes his head.

"what? not go as i have said?"

"no, lady dedlock," he very calmly replies.

"do you know the relief that my disappearance will be? have you
forgotten the stain and blot upon this place, and where it is,
 
 ___________________________
 
 inner door and has it in
her hand when he says to her, without himself stirring hand or foot
or raising his voice, "lady dedlock, have the goodness to stop and
hear me, or before you reach the staircase i shall ring the
alarm-bell and rouse the house. and then i must speak out before
every guest and servant, every man and woman, in it."

he has conquered her. she falters, trembles, and puts her hand
confusedly to her head. slight tokens these in any one else, but when
so practised an eye as mr. tulkinghorn's sees indecision for a moment
in such a subject, he thoroughly knows its value.

he promptly says again, "have the goodness to hear me, lady dedlock,"
and motions to the chair from which she has risen. she hesitates, but
he motions again, and she sits down.

"the relations between us are of an unfortunate description, lady
dedlock; but as they are not of my making, i will not apologize for
them. the position i hold in reference to sir leicester is so well
known to you that i can hardly imagine
 
 ___________________________
 
 it again."

"your flight, lady dedlock, would spread the whole truth, and a
hundred times the whole truth, far and wide. it would be impossible
to save the family credit for a day. it is not to be thought of."

there is a quiet decision in his reply which admits of no
remonstrance.

"when i speak of sir leicester being the sole consideration, he and
the family credit are one. sir leicester and the baronetcy, sir
leicester and chesney wold, sir leicester and his ancestors and his
patrimony"--mr. tulkinghorn very dry here--"are, i need not say to
you, lady dedlock, inseparable."

"go on!"

"therefore," says mr. tulkinghorn, pursuing his case in his jog-trot
style, "i have much to consider. this is to be hushed up if it can
be. how can it be, if sir leicester is driven out of his wits or laid
upon a death-bed? if i inflicted this shock upon him to-morrow
morning, how could the immediate change in him be accounted for? what
could have caused it? what could have divided you? lady dedlock, the
wall-cha
 
 ___________________________
 

infatuation. he might not be able to overcome that infatuation, even
knowing what we know. i am putting an extreme case, but it might be
so. if so, it were better that he knew nothing. better for common
sense, better for him, better for me. i must take all this into
account, and it combines to render a decision very difficult."

she stands looking out at the same stars without a word. they are
beginning to pale, and she looks as if their coldness froze her.

"my experience teaches me," says mr. tulkinghorn, who has by this
time got his hands in his pockets and is going on in his business
consideration of the matter like a machine. "my experience teaches
me, lady dedlock, that most of the people i know would do far better
to leave marriage alone. it is at the bottom of three fourths of
their troubles. so i thought when sir leicester married, and so i
always have thought since. no more about that. i must now be guided
by circumstances. in the meanwhile i must beg you to keep your own
counsel, and i
 
 ___________________________
 
please."

"and i am to hide my guilt, as i have done so many years?"

"as you have done so many years. i should not have made that
reference myself, lady dedlock, but i may now remind you that your
secret can be no heavier to you than it was, and is no worse and no
better than it was. i know it certainly, but i believe we have never
wholly trusted each other."

she stands absorbed in the same frozen way for some little time
before asking, "is there anything more to be said to-night?"

"why," mr. tulkinghorn returns methodically as he softly rubs his
hands, "i should like to be assured of your acquiescence in my
arrangements, lady dedlock."

"you may be assured of it."

"good. and i would wish in conclusion to remind you, as a business
precaution, in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in any
communication with sir leicester, that throughout our interview i
have expressly stated my sole consideration to be sir leicester's
feelings and honour and the family reputation. i should have been

 
 ___________________________
 
happy to have made lady dedlock a prominent consideration, too, if
the case had admitted of it; but unfortunately it does not."

"i can attest your fidelity, sir."

both before and after saying it she remains absorbed, but at length
moves, and turns, unshaken in her natural and acquired presence,
towards the door. mr. tulkinghorn opens both the doors exactly as he
would have done yesterday, or as he would have done ten years ago,
and makes his old-fashioned bow as she passes out. it is not an
ordinary look that he receives from the handsome face as it goes into
the darkness, and it is not an ordinary movement, though a very
slight one, that acknowledges his courtesy. but as he reflects when
he is left alone, the woman has been putting no common constraint
upon herself.

he would know it all the better if he saw the woma
 
 ___________________________
 
e
humbler ambition dreams of bliss, in keepers' lodges, and in holy
matrimony with will or sally. up comes the bright sun, drawing
everything up with it--the wills and sallys, the latent vapour in the
earth, the drooping leaves and flowers, the birds and beasts and
creeping things, the gardeners to sweep the dewy turf and unfold
emerald velvet where the roller passes, the smoke of the great
kitchen fire wreathing itself straight and high into the lightsome
air. lastly, up comes the flag over mr. tulkinghorn's unconscious
head cheerfully proclaiming that sir leicester and lady dedlock are
in their happy home and that there is hospitality at the place in
lincolnshire.




chapter xlii

in mr. tulkinghorn's chambers


from the verdant undulations and the spreading oaks of the dedlock
property, mr. tulkinghorn transfers himself to the stale heat and
dust of london. his manner of coming and going between the two places
is one of his impenetrabilities. he walks into chesney wold as if it
were next door 
 
 ___________________________
 
me?"

"well, sir," says mr. snagsby, holding his hat at the side of his
head in his deference towards his best customer, "i was wishful to
say a word to you, sir."

"can you say it here?"

"perfectly, sir."

"say it then." the lawyer turns, leans his arms on the iron railing
at the top of the steps, and looks at the lamplighter lighting the
court-yard.

"it is relating," says mr. snagsby in a mysterious low voice, "it is
relating--not to put too fine a point upon it--to the foreigner,
sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn eyes him with some surprise. "what foreigner?"

"the foreign female, sir. french, if i don't mistake? i am not
acquainted with that language myself, but i should judge from her
manners and appearance that she was french; anyways, certainly
foreign. her that was upstairs, sir, when mr. bucket and me had the
honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping-boy that night."

"oh! yes, yes. mademoiselle hortense."

"indeed, sir?" mr. snagsby coughs his cough of submission behind his
hat. "i am not acqu
 
 ___________________________
 
ainted myself with the names of foreigners in
general, but i have no doubt it would be that." mr. snagsby appears
to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of repeating
the name, but on reflection coughs again to excuse himself.

"and what can you have to say, snagsby," demands mr. tulkinghorn,
"about her?"

"well, sir," returns the stationer, shading his communication with
his hat, "it falls a little hard upon me. my domestic happiness is
very great--at least, it's as great as can be expected, i'm sure--but
my little woman is rather given to jealousy. not to put too fine a
point upon it, she is very much given to jealousy. and you see, a
foreign female of that genteel appearance coming into the shop, and
hovering--i should be the last to make use of a strong expression if
i could av
 
 ___________________________
 
oid it, but hovering, sir--in the court--you know it
is--now ain't it? i only put it to yourself, sir."

mr. snagsby, having said this in a very plaintive manner, throws in a
cough of general application to fill up all the blanks.

"why, what do you mean?" asks mr. tulkinghorn.

"just so, sir," returns mr. snagsby; "i was sure you would feel it
yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of my feelings when
coupled with the known excitableness of my little woman. you see, the
foreign female--which you mentioned her name just now, with quite a
native sound i am sure--caught up the word snagsby that night, being
uncommon quick, and made inquiry, and got the direction and come at
dinner-time. now guster, our young woman, is timid and has fits, and
she, taking fright at
 
 ___________________________
 
 the foreigner's looks--which are fierce--and at
a grinding manner that she has of speaking--which is calculated to
alarm a weak mind--gave way to it, instead of bearing up against it,
and tumbled down the kitchen stairs out of one into another, such
fits as i do sometimes think are never gone into, or come out of, in
any house but ours. consequently there was by good fortune ample
occupation for my little woman, and only me to answer the shop. when
she did say that mr. tulkinghorn, being always denied to her by his
employer (which i had no doubt at the time was a foreign mode of
viewing a clerk), she would do herself the pleasure of continually
calling at my place until she was let in here. since then she has
been, as i began by saying, hovering, hovering, sir"--mr. snagsby
repeats the word with pathetic emphasis--"in the court. the effects
of which movement it is impossible to calculate. i shouldn't wonder
if it might have already given rise to the painfullest mistakes 
 
 ___________________________
 
even
in the neighbours' minds, not mentioning (if such a thing was
possible) my little woman. whereas, goodness knows," says mr.
snagsby, shaking his head, "i never had an idea of a foreign female,
except as being formerly connected with a bunch of brooms and a baby,
or at the present time with a tambourine and earrings. i never had, i
do assure you, sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn had listened gravely to this complaint and inquires
when the stationer has finished, "and that's all, is it, snagsby?"

"why yes, sir, that's all," says mr. snagsby, ending with a cough
that plainly adds, "and it's enough too--for me."

"i don't know what mademoiselle hortense may want or mean, unless she
is mad," says the lawyer.

"even if she was, you know, sir," mr. snagsby pleads, "it wouldn't be
a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a foreign
dagger planted in the fam
 
 ___________________________
 
ily."

"no," says the other. "well, well! this shall be stopped. i am sorry
you have been inconvenienced. if she comes again, send her here."

mr. snagsby, with much bowing and short apologetic coughing, takes
his leave, lightened in heart. mr. tulkinghorn goes upstairs, saying
to himself, "these women were created to give trouble the whole earth
over. the mistress not being enough to deal with, here's the maid
now! but i will be short with this jade at least!"

so saying, he unlocks his door, gropes his way into his murky rooms,
lights his candles, and looks about him. it is too dark to see much
of the allegory overhead there, but that importunate roman, who is
for ever toppling out of the clouds and pointing, is at his old work
pretty distinctl
 
 ___________________________
 
t at him sideways, softly
closes the door before replying.

"i have had great deal of trouble to find you, sir."

"have you!"

"i have been here very often, sir. it has always been said to me, he
is not at home, he is engage, he is this and that, he is not for
you."

"quite right, and quite true."

"not true. lies!"

at times there is a suddenness in the manner of mademoiselle hortense
so like a bodily spring upon the subject of it that such subject
involuntarily starts and fails back. it is mr. tulkinghorn's case at
present, though mademoiselle hortense, with her eyes almost shut up
(but still looking out sideways), is only smiling contemptuously and
shaking her head.

"now, mistress," says the lawyer, tapping the key hastily upon the
chimney-piece. "if you have anything to say, say it, say it."

"sir, you have not use me well. you have been mean and shabby."

"mean and shabby, eh?" returns the lawyer, rubbing his nose with the
key.

"yes. what is it that i tell you? you know you have. you have
a
 
 ___________________________
 
ttrapped me--catched me--to give you information; you have asked me
to show you the dress of mine my lady must have wore that night, you
have prayed me to come in it here to meet that boy. say! is it not?"
mademoiselle hortense makes another spring.

"you are a vixen, a vixen!" mr. tulkinghorn seems to meditate as he
looks distrustfully at her, then he replies, "well, wench, well. i
paid you."

"you paid me!" she repeats with fierce disdain. "two sovereign! i
have not change them, i re-fuse them, i des-pise them, i throw them
from me!" which she literally does, taking them out of her bosom as
she speaks and flinging them with such violence on the floor that
they jerk up again into the light before they roll away into corners
and slowly settle down there after spinning vehemently.

"n
 
 ___________________________
 
ow!" says mademoiselle hortense, darkening her large eyes again.
"you have paid me? eh, my god, oh yes!"

mr. tulkinghorn rubs his head with the key while she entertains
herself with a sarcastic laugh.

"you must be rich, my fair friend," he composedly observes, "to throw
money about in that way!"

"i am rich," she returns. "i am very rich in hate. i hate my lady, of
all my heart. you know that."

"know it? how should i know it?"

"because you have known it perfectly before you prayed me to give you
that information. because you have known perfectly that i was
en-r-r-r-raged!" it appears impossible for mademoisell
 
 ___________________________
 
e to roll the
letter "r" sufficiently in this word, notwithstanding that she
assists her energetic delivery by clenching both her hands and
setting all her teeth.

"oh! i knew that, did i?" says mr. tulkinghorn, examining the wards
of the key.

"yes, without doubt. i am not blind. you have made sure of me because
you knew that. you had reason! i det-est her." mademoiselle folds her
arms and throws this last remark at him over one of her shoulders.

"having said this, have you anything else to say, mademoiselle?"

"i am not yet placed. place me well. find me a good condition! if you
cannot, or do not choose to do that, employ me to pursue her, to
chase her, to disgrace and to dishonour her. i will help
 
 ___________________________
 
 you well,
and with a good will. it is what you do. do i not know that?"

"you appear to know a good deal," mr. tulkinghorn retorts.

"do i not? is it that i am so weak as to believe, like a child, that
i come here in that dress to rec-eive that boy only to decide a
little bet, a wager? eh, my god, oh yes!" in this reply, down to the
word "wager" inclusive, mademoiselle has been ironically polite and
tender, then as suddenly dashed into the bitterest and most defiant
scorn, with her black eyes in one and the same moment very nearly
shut and staringly wide open.

"now, let us see," says mr. tulkinghorn, tapping his c
 
 ___________________________
 
 but the keys of
prisons are larger. in this city there are houses of correction
(where the treadmills are, for women), the gates of which are very
strong and heavy, and no doubt the keys too. i am afraid a lady of
your spirit and activity would find it an inconvenience to have one
of those keys turned upon her for any length of time. what do you
think?"

"i think," mademoiselle replies without any action and in a clear,
obliging voice, "that you are a miserable wretch."

"probably," returns mr. tulkinghorn, quietly blowing his nose. "but i
don't ask what you think of myself; i ask what you think of the
prison."

"nothing. what does it matter to me?"

"why, it matters this much, mistress," says the lawyer, deliberately
putting away his handkerchief and adjusting his frill; "the law is so
despotic here that it interferes to prevent any of our good english
citizens from being troubled, even by a lady's visits against his
desire. and on his complaining that he is so troubled, it takes hold
of the tro
 
 ___________________________
 
ublesome lady and shuts her up in prison under hard
discipline. turns the key upon her, mistress." illustrating with the
cellar-key.

"truly?" returns mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice. "that is
droll! but--my faith!--still what does it matter to me?"

"my fair friend," says mr. tulkinghorn, "make another visit here, or
at mr. snagsby's, and you shall learn."

"in that case you will send me to the prison, perhaps?"

"perhaps."

it would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle's state of
agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth, otherwise a tigerish
expansion thereabouts might look as if a very little more would make
her do it.

"in a word, mistress," says mr. tulkinghorn, "i am sorry to be
unpolite, but if you ever present yourself uninvited here--or
there--again, i will give yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ill try if you dare to do it!"

"and if," pursues the lawyer without minding her, "i place you in
that good condition of being locked up in jail, it will be some time
before you find yourself at liberty again."

"i will prove you," repeats mademoiselle in her former whisper.

"and now," proceeds the lawyer, still without minding her, "you had
better go. think twice before you come here again."

"think you," she answers, "twice two hundred times!"

"you were dismissed by your lady, you know," mr. tulkinghorn
observes, following her out upon the staircase, "as the most
implacable and unmanageable of women. now turn over a new leaf and
take warning by what i say to you. for what i say, i mean; and what i
threaten, i will do, mistress."

she goes down without answering or looking behind her. when she is
gone, he goes down too, and returning with his cobweb-covered bottle,
devotes himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its contents, now and
then, as he throws his head back in his chair, catching sight of 
 
 ___________________________
 
e miss summerson had taken that unfortunate interest
in him. 'tis my case, sir, i assure you."

"and mine, mr. george."

the trooper looks sideways at allan's sunburnt cheek and bright dark
eye, rapidly measures his height and build, and seems to approve of
him.

"since you have been out, sir, i have been thinking that i
unquestionably know the rooms in lincoln's inn fields, where bucket
took the lad, according to his account. though he is not acquainted
with the name, i can help you to it. it's tulkinghorn. that's what it
is."

allan looks at him inquiringly, repeating the name.

"tulkinghorn. that's the name, sir. i know the man, and know him to
have been in communication with bucket before, respecting a deceased
person who had given him offence. i know the man, sir. to my sorrow."

allan naturally asks what kind of man he is.

"what kind of man! do you mean to look at?"

"i think i know that much of him. i mean to deal with. generally,
what kind of man?"

"why, then i'll tell you, sir," returns
 
 ___________________________
 
 the trooper, stopping short
and folding his arms on his square chest so angrily that his face
fires and flushes all over; "he is a confoundedly bad kind of man. he
is a slow-torturing kind of man. he is no more like flesh and blood
than a rusty old carbine is. he is a kind of man--by george!--that
has caused me more restlessness, and more uneasiness, and more
dissatisfaction with myself than all other men put together. that's
the kind of man mr. tulkinghorn is!"

"i am sorry," says allan, "to have touched so sore a place."

"sore?" the trooper plants his legs wider apart, wets the palm of his
broad right hand, and lays it on the imaginary moustache. "it's no
fault of yours, sir; but you shall judge. he has got a power over me.
he is the man i spoke of just now as being able to tumble me out of
this place neck and crop. he keeps me on a constant see-saw. he won't
hold off, and he won't come on. if i have a payment to make him, or
time to ask him fo
 
 ___________________________
 
george has been so excited that he finds it necessary to wipe his
forehead on his shirt-sleeve. even while he whistles his impetuosity
away with the national anthem, some involuntary shakings of his head
and heavings of his chest still linger behind, not to mention an
occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of his open shirt-collar,
as if it were scarcely open enough to prevent his being troubled by a
choking sensation. in short, allan woodcourt has not much doubt about
the going down of mr. tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

jo and his conductor presently return, and jo is assisted to his
mattress by the careful phil, to whom, after due administration of
medicine by his own hands, allan confides all needful means and
instructions. the morning is by this time getting on apace. he
repairs to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without
seeking rest, goes away to mr. jarndyce to communicate his discovery.

with him mr. jarndyce returns alone, confidentially telling him that
there a
 
 ___________________________
 
he would under
her mantle of pride is beaten down, though she has no assurance
that what she is to those around her she will remain another day,
it is not in her nature when envious eyes are looking on to
yield or to droop. they say of her that she has lately grown
more handsome and more haughty. the debilitated cousin says of
her that she's beauty nough--tsetup shopofwomen--but rather
larming kind--remindingmanfact--inconvenient woman--who will
getoutofbedandbawthstahlishment--shakespeare.

mr. tulkinghorn says nothing, looks nothing. now, as heretofore, he
is to be found in doorways of rooms, with his limp white cravat
loosely twisted into its old-fashioned tie, receiving patronage from
the peerage and making no sign. of all men he is still the last who
might be supposed to have any influence upon my lady. of all women
she is still the last who might be supposed to have any dread of him.

one thing has been much on her mind since their late interview in his
turret-room at chesney wold. she is no
 
 ___________________________
 
ughtiest and coldest state. as indifferent
as if all passion, feeling, and interest had been worn out in the
earlier ages of the world and had perished from its surface with its
other departed monsters.

mercury has announced mr. rouncewell, which is the cause of her
appearance. mr. rouncewell is not in the library, but she repairs to
the library. sir leicester is there, and she wishes to speak to him
first.

"sir leicester, i am desirous--but you are engaged."

oh, dear no! not at all. only mr. tulkinghorn.

always at hand. haunting every place. no relief or security from him
for a moment.

"i beg your pardon, lady dedlock. will you allow me to retire?"

with a look that plainly says, "you know you have the power to remain
if you will," she tells him it is not necessary and moves towards a
chair. mr. tulkinghorn brings it a little forward for her with his
clumsy bow and retires into a window opposite. interposed between her
and the fading light of day in the now quiet street, his shadow falls
upo
 
 ___________________________
 
 which
bold boys aspire to throw their friends' caps (its only present use),
retains its place among the rusty foliage, sacred to the memory of
departed oil. nay, even oil itself, yet lingering at long intervals
in a little absurd glass pot, with a knob in the bottom like an
oyster, blinks and sulks at newer lights every night, like its high
and dry master in the house of lords.

therefore there is not much that lady dedlock, seated in her chair,
could wish to see through the window in which mr. tulkinghorn stands.
and yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if it were
her heart's desire to have that figure moved out of the way.

sir leicester begs his lady's pardon. she was about to say?

"only that mr. rouncewell is here (he has called by my appointment)
and that we had better make an end of the question of that girl. i am
tired to death of the matter."

"what can i do--to--assist?" demands sir leicester in some
considerable doubt.

"let us see him here and have done with it. will yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u tell them to
send him up?"

"mr. tulkinghorn, be so good as to ring. thank you. request," says
sir leicester to mercury, not immediately remembering the business
term, "request the iron gentleman to walk this way."

mercury departs in search of the iron gentleman, finds, and produces
him. sir leicester receives that ferruginous person graciously.

"i hope you are well, mr. rouncewell. be seated. (my solicitor, mr.
tulkinghorn.) my lady was desirous, mr. rouncewell," sir leicester
skilfully transfers him with a solemn wave of his hand, "wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 her sent back
to the village, or would you like to take her with you, or what would
you prefer?"

"lady dedlock, if i may speak plainly--"

"by all means."

"--i should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of
the incumbrance and remove her from her present position."

"and to speak as plainly," she returns with the same studied
carelessness, "so should i. do i understand that you will take her
with you?"

the iron gentleman makes an iron bow.

"sir leicester, will you ring?" mr. tulkinghorn steps forward from
his window and pulls the bell. "i had forgotten you. thank you." he
makes his usual bow and goes quietly back again. mercury,
swift-responsive, appears, receives instructions whom to produce,
skims away, produces the aforesaid, and departs.

rosa has been crying and is yet in distress. on her coming in, the
ironmaster leaves his chair, takes her arm in his, and remains with
her near the door ready to depart.

"you are taken charge of, you see," says my lady in her weary manne
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
"and are going away well protected. i have mentioned that you are a
very good girl, and you have nothing to cry for."

"she seems after all," observes mr. tulkinghorn, loitering a little
forward with his hands behind him, "as if she were crying at going
away."

"why, she is not well-bred, you see," returns mr. rouncewell with
some quickness in his manner, as if he were glad to have the lawyer
to retort upon, "and she is an inexperienced little thing and knows
no better. if she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, no
doubt."

"no doubt," is mr. tulkinghorn's composed reply.

rosa sobs out that she is very sorry to leave my lady, and that she
was h
 
 ___________________________
 
nate
and faithful in parting and in whom my mother, i dare say, has done
something to awaken such feelings--though of course lady dedlock, by
her heartfelt interest and her genial condescension, has done much
more."

if he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks. he points
it, however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner of
speech, though in saying it he turns towards that part of the dim
room where my lady sits. sir leicester stands to return his parting
salutation, mr. tulkinghorn again rings, mercury takes another
flight, and mr. rouncewell and rosa leave the house.

then lights are brought in, discovering mr. tulkinghorn still
standing in his window with his hands behind him and my lady still
sitting with his figure before her, closing up her view of the night
as well as of the day. she is very pale. mr. tulkinghorn, observing
it as she rises to retire, thinks, "well she may be! the power of
this woman is astonishing. she has been acting a part the whole
time." but he 
 
 ___________________________
 
--his one unchanging character--and
as he holds the door open for this woman, fifty pairs of eyes, each
fifty times sharper than sir leicester's pair, should find no flaw in
him.

lady dedlock dines alone in her own room to-day. sir leicester is
whipped in to the rescue of the doodle party and the discomfiture of
the coodle faction. lady dedlock asks on sitting down to dinner,
still deadly pale (and quite an illustration of the debilitated
cousin's text), whether he is gone out? yes. whether mr. tulkinghorn
is gone yet? no. presently she asks again, is he gone yet? no. what
is he doing? mercury thinks he is writing letters in the library.
would my lady wish to see him? anything but that.

but he wishes to see my lady. within a few more minutes he is
reported as sending his respects, and could my lady please to receive
him for a word or two after her dinner? my lady will receive him now.
he comes now, apologizing for intruding, even by her permission,
while she is at table. when they are alone, my 
 
 ___________________________
 
e outward passion than himself. as for
him, he methodically discusses his matter of business as if she were
any insensible instrument used in business.

"really? then you see, lady dedlock," he returns, "you are not to be
trusted. you have put the case in a perfectly plain way, and
according to the literal fact; and that being the case, you are not
to be trusted."

"perhaps you may remember that i expressed some anxiety on this same
point when we spoke at night at chesney wold?"

"yes," says mr. tulkinghorn, coolly getting up and standing on the
hearth. "yes. i recollect, lady dedlock, that you certainly referred
to the girl, but that was before we came to our arrangement, and both
the letter and the spirit of our arrangement altogether precluded any
action on your part founded upon my discovery. there can be no doubt
about that. as to sparing the girl, of what importance or value is
she? spare! lady dedlock, here is a family name compromised. one
might have supposed that the course was straight o
 
 ___________________________
 
woman understands me," mr.
tulkinghorn thinks as she lets her glance fall again. "she cannot be
spared. why should she spare others?"

for a little while they are silent. lady dedlock has eaten no dinner,
but has twice or thrice poured out water with a steady hand and drunk
it. she rises from table, takes a lounging-chair, and reclines in it,
shading her face. there is nothing in her manner to express weakness
or excite compassion. it is thoughtful, gloomy, concentrated. "this
woman," thinks mr. tulkinghorn, standing on the hearth, again a dark
object closing up her view, "is a study."

he studies her at his leisure, not speaking for a time. she too
studies something at her leisure. she is not the first to speak,
appearing indeed so unlikely to be so, though he stood there until
midnight, that even he is driven upon breaking silence.

"lady dedlock, the most disagreeable part of this business interview
remains, but it is business. our agreement is broken. a lady of your
sense and strength of chara
 
 ___________________________
 
cter will be prepared for my now declaring
it void and taking my own course."

"i am quite prepared."

mr. tulkinghorn inclines his head. "that is all i have to trouble you
with, lady dedlock."

she stops him as he is moving out of the room by asking, "this is the
notice i was to receive? i wish not to misapprehend you."

"not exactly the notice you were to receive, lady dedlock, because
the contemplated notice supposed the agreement to have been observed.
but virtually the same, virtually the same. the difference is merely
in a lawyer's mind."

"you intend to give me no other notice?"

"you are right. no."

"d
 
 ___________________________
 
o you contemplate undeceiving sir leicester to-night?"

"a home question!" says mr. tulkinghorn with a slight smile and
cautiously shaking his head at the shaded face. "no, not to-night."

"to-morrow?"

"all things considered, i had better decline answering that question,
lady dedlock. if i were to say i don't know when, exactly, you would
not believe me, and it would answer no purpose. it may be to-morrow.
i would rather say no more. you are prepared, and i hold out no
expectations which circumstances might fail to justify. i wish you
good evening."

she removes her hand, turns her pale 
 
 ___________________________
 
ut to open
it.

"do you intend to remain in the house any time? i heard you were
writing in the library. are you going to return there?"

"only for my hat. i am going home."

she bows her eyes rather than her head, the movement is so slight and
curious, and he withdraws. clear of the room he looks at his watch
but is inclined to doubt it by a minute or thereabouts. there is a
splendid clock upon the staircase, famous, as splendid clocks not
often are, for its accuracy. "and what do you say," mr. tulkinghorn
inquires, referring to it. "what do you say?"

if it said now, "don't go home!" what a famous clock, hereafter, if
it said to-night of all the nights that it has counted off, to this
old man of all the young and old men who have ever stood before it,
"don't go home!" with its sharp clear bell it strikes three quarters
after seven and ticks on again. "why, you are worse than i thought
you," says mr. tulkinghorn, muttering reproof to his watch. "two
minutes wrong? at this rate you won't last my t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
on the shore where the watcher stands to see the ship with her spread
wings cross the path of light that appears to be presented to only
him; but even on this stranger's wilderness of london there is some
rest. its steeples and towers and its one great dome grow more
ethereal; its smoky house-tops lose their grossness in the pale
effulgence; the noises that arise from the streets are fewer and are
softened, and the footsteps on the pavements pass more tranquilly
away. in these fields of mr. tulkinghorn's inhabiting, where the
shepherds play on chancery pipes that have no stop, and keep their
sheep in the fold by hook and by crook until they have shorn them
exceeding close, every noise is merged, this moonlight night, into a
distant ringing hum, as if the city were a vast glass, vibrating.

what's that? who fired a gun or pistol? where was it?

the few foot-passengers start, stop, and stare about them. some
windows and doors are opened, and people come out to look. it was a
loud report and ech
 
 ___________________________
 
ogs in the
neighbourhood, who bark vehemently. terrified cats scamper across the
road. while the dogs are yet barking and howling--there is one dog
howling like a demon--the church-clocks, as if they were startled
too, begin to strike. the hum from the streets, likewise, seems to
swell into a shout. but it is soon over. before the last clock begins
to strike ten, there is a lull. when it has ceased, the fine night,
the bright large moon, and multitudes of stars, are left at peace
again.

has mr. tulkinghorn been disturbed? his windows are dark and quiet,
and his door is shut. it must be something unusual indeed to bring
him out of his shell. nothing is heard of him, nothing is seen of
him. what power of cannon might it take to shake that rusty old man
out of his immovable composure?

for many years the persistent roman has been pointing, with no
particular meaning, from that ceiling. it is not likely that he has
any new meaning in him to-night. once pointing, always pointing--like
any roman, or ev
 
 ___________________________
 
omes into the darkened room and looks at
these things looks up at the roman and that he is invested in all
eyes with mystery and awe, as if he were a paralysed dumb witness.

so it shall happen surely, through many years to come, that ghostly
stories shall be told of the stain upon the floor, so easy to be
covered, so hard to be got out, and that the roman, pointing from the
ceiling shall point, so long as dust and damp and spiders spare him,
with far greater significance than he ever had in mr. tulkinghorn's
time, and with a deadly meaning. for mr. tulkinghorn's time is over
for evermore, and the roman pointed at the murderous hand uplifted
against his life, and pointed helplessly at him, from night to
morning, lying face downward on the floor, shot through the heart.




chapter xlix

dutiful friendship


a great annual occasion has come round in the establishment of mr.
matthew bagnet, otherwise lignum vitae, ex-artilleryman and present
bassoon-player. an occasion of feasting and festival. the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ave heard of a murder?"

"murder!"

"now, george," says mr. bucket, keeping his forefinger in an
impressive state of action, "bear in mind what i've said to you. i
ask you nothing. you've been in low spirits this afternoon. i say,
you don't happen to have heard of a murder?"

"no. where has there been a murder?"

"now, george," says mr. bucket, "don't you go and commit yourself.
i'm a-going to tell you what i want you for. there has been a murder
in lincoln's inn fields--gentleman of the name of tulkinghorn. he was
shot last night. i want you for that."

the trooper sinks upon a seat behind him, and great drops start out
upon his forehead, and a deadly pallor overspreads his face.

"bucket! it's not possible that mr. tulkinghorn has been killed and
that you suspect me?"

"george," returns mr. bucket, keeping his forefinger going, "it is
certainly possible, because it's the case. this deed was done last
night at ten o'clock. now, you know where you were last night at ten
o'clock, and you'll be able
 
 ___________________________
 
ur health, my dear!"

not another word does mr. bucket say, but sits with most attentive
eyes until the sacked depository of noble secrets is brought
down--where are all those secrets now? does he keep them yet? did
they fly with him on that sudden journey?--and until the procession
moves, and mr. bucket's view is changed. after which he composes
himself for an easy ride and takes note of the fittings of the
carriage in case he should ever find such knowledge useful.

contrast enough between mr. tulkinghorn shut up in his dark carriage
and mr. bucket shut up in his. between the immeasurable track of
space beyond the little wound that has thrown the one into the fixed
sleep which jolts so heavily over the stones of the streets, and the
narrow track of blood which keeps the other in the watchful state
expressed in every hair of his head! but it is all one to both;
neither is troubled about that.

mr. bucket sits out the procession in his own easy manner and glides
from the carriage when the opportun
 
 ___________________________
 
your responsibility. my lady's name is not a name for common persons
to trifle with!"

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i say what i must say, and no more."

"i hope it may prove so. very well. go on. go on, sir!" glancing at
the angry eyes which now avoid him and at the angry figure trembling
from head to foot, yet striving to be still, mr. bucket feels his way
with his forefinger and in a low voice proceeds.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, it becomes my duty to tell you that
the deceased mr. tulkinghorn long entertained mistrusts and
suspicions of lady dedlock."

"if he had dared to breathe them to me, sir--which he never did--i
would have killed him myself!" exclaims sir leicester, striking his
hand upon the table. but in the very heat and fury of the act he
stops, fixed by the knowing eyes of mr. bucket, whose forefinger is
slowly going and who, with mingled confidence and patience, shakes
his head.

"sir leicester dedlock, the deceased mr. tulkinghorn was deep and
close, and what he fully h
 
 ___________________________
 
who had been her lover before you courted her and
who ought to have been her husband." mr. bucket stops and
deliberately repeats, "ought to have been her husband, not a doubt
about it. i know from his lips that when that person soon afterwards
died, he suspected lady dedlock of visiting his wretched lodging and
his wretched grave, alone and in secret. i know from my own inquiries
and through my eyes and ears that lady dedlock did make such visit in
the dress of her own maid, for the deceased mr. tulkinghorn employed
me to reckon up her ladyship--if you'll excuse my making use of the
term we commonly employ--and i reckoned her up, so far, completely. i
confronted the maid in the chambers in lincoln's inn fields with a
witness who had been lady dedlock's guide, and there couldn't be the
shadow of a doubt that she had worn the young woman's dress, unknown
to her. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i did endeavour to pave the
way a little towards these unpleasant disclosures yesterday by saying
that very
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his face than in his white hair,
that mr. bucket is a little awed by him. something frozen and fixed
is upon his manner, over and above its usual shell of haughtiness,
and mr. bucket soon detects an unusual slowness in his speech, with
now and then a curious trouble in beginning, which occasions him to
utter inarticulate sounds. with such sounds he now breaks silence,
soon, however, controlling himself to say that he does not comprehend
why a gentleman so faithful and zealous as the late mr. tulkinghorn
should have communicated to him nothing of this painful, this
distressing, this unlooked-for, this overwhelming, this incredible
intelligence.

"again, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," returns mr. bucket, "put it
to her ladyship to clear that up. put it to her ladyship, if you
think it right, from inspector bucket of the detective. you'll find,
or i'm much mistaken, that the deceased mr. tulkinghorn had the
intention of communicating the whole to you as soon as he considered
it ripe, and furthe
 
 ___________________________
 
you might
wonder why i hadn't done it, don't you see?"

true. sir leicester, avoiding, with some trouble those obtrusive
sounds, says, "true." at this juncture a considerable noise of voices
is heard in the hall. mr. bucket, after listening, goes to the
library-door, softly unlocks and opens it, and listens again. then he
draws in his head and whispers hurriedly but composedly, "sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, this unfortunate family affair has taken
air, as i expected it might, the deceased mr. tulkinghorn being cut
down so sudden. the chance to hush it is to let in these people now
in a wrangle with your footmen. would you mind sitting quiet--on the
family account--while i reckon 'em up? and would you just throw in a
nod when i seem to ask you for it?"

sir leicester indistinctly answers, "officer. the best you can, the
best you can!" and mr. bucket, with a nod and a sagacious crook of
the forefinger, slips down into the hall, where the voices quickly
die away. he is not long in returning; a few
 
 ___________________________
 
ve we come upon?" mr. smallweed asks, a
little dashed by the suddenness of this turn.

"ah! you know what i mean. let us hear what it's all about in
presence of sir leicester dedlock, baronet. come."

mr. smallweed, beckoning mr. chadband, takes a moment's counsel with
him in a whisper. mr. chadband, expressing a considerable amount of
oil from the pores of his forehead and the palms of his hands, says
aloud, "yes. you first!" and retires to his former place.

"i was the client and friend of mr. tulkinghorn," pipes grandfather
smallweed then; "i did business with him. i was useful to him, and he
was useful to me. krook, dead and gone, was my brother-in-law. he was
own brother to a brimstone magpie--leastways mrs. smallweed. i come
into krook's property. i examined all his papers and all his effects.
they was all dug out under my eyes. there was a bundle of letters
belonging to a dead and gone lodger as was hid away at the back of a
shelf in the side of lady jane's bed--his cat's bed. he hid all
ma
 
 ___________________________
 
nner of things away, everywheres. mr. tulkinghorn wanted 'em and
got 'em, but i looked 'em over first. i'm a man of business, and i
took a squint at 'em. they was letters from the lodger's sweetheart,
and she signed honoria. dear me, that's not a common name, honoria,
is it? there's no lady in this house that signs honoria is there? oh,
no, i don't think so! oh, no, i don't think so! and not in the same
hand, perhaps? oh, no, i don't think so!"

here mr. smallweed, seized with a fit of coughing in the midst of his
triumph, breaks off to ejacul
 
 ___________________________
 
ncerns sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, here the gentleman sits, you know."

"haven't i come to it, mr. bucket?" cries grandfather smallweed.
"isn't the gentleman concerned yet? not with captain hawdon, and his
ever affectionate honoria, and their child into the bargain? come,
then, i want to know where those letters are. that concerns me, if it
don't concern sir leicester dedlock. i will know where they are. i
won't have 'em disappear so quietly. i handed 'em over to my friend
and solicitor, mr. tulkinghorn, not to anybody else."

"why, he paid you for them, you know, and handsome too," says mr.
bucket.

"i don't care for that. i want to know who's got 'em. and i tell you
what we want--what we all here want, mr. bucket. we want more
painstaking and search-making into this murder. we know where the
interest and the motive was, and you have not done enough. if george
the vagabond dragoon had any hand in it, he was only an accomplice,
and was set on. you know what i mean as well as any man."

"now i 
 
 ___________________________
 
tioner's good lady, over there," says mr.
bucket, luring mrs. snagsby forward with the finger. "what may your
game be, ma'am?"

mrs. snagsby is at first prevented, by tears and lamentations, from
stating the nature of her game, but by degrees it confusedly comes to
light that she is a woman overwhelmed with injuries and wrongs, whom
mr. snagsby has habitually deceived, abandoned, and sought to keep in
darkness, and whose chief comfort, under her afflictions, has been
the sympathy of the late mr. tulkinghorn, who showed so much
commiseration for her on one occasion of his calling in cook's court
in the absence of her perjured husband that she has of late
habitually carried to him all her woes. everybody it appears, the
present company excepted, has plotted against mrs. snagsby's peace.
there is mr. guppy, clerk to kenge and carboy, who was at first as
open as the sun at noon, but who suddenly shut up as close as
midnight, under the influence--no doubt--of mr. snagsby's suborning
and tampering. ther
 
 ___________________________
 
ollowed mr.
snagsby when he went on his last visit to the boy, and if he was not
his son why did he go? the one occupation of her life has been, for
some time back, to follow mr. snagsby to and fro, and up and down,
and to piece suspicious circumstances together--and every
circumstance that has happened has been most suspicious; and in this
way she has pursued her object of detecting and confounding her false
husband, night and day. thus did it come to pass that she brought the
chadbands and mr. tulkinghorn together, and conferred with mr.
tulkinghorn on the change in mr. guppy, and helped to turn up the
circumstances in which the present company are interested, casually,
by the wayside, being still and ever on the great high road that is
to terminate in mr. snagsby's full exposure and a matrimonial
separation. all this, mrs. snagsby, as an injured woman, and the
friend of mrs. chadband, and the follower of mr. chadband, and the
mourner of the late mr. tulkinghorn, is here to certify under the
sea
 
 ___________________________
 
 as they came up. mr. bucket follows them to the
door, and returning, says with an air of serious business, "sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, it's for you to consider whether or not
to buy this up. i should recommend, on the whole, it's being bought
up myself; and i think it may be bought pretty cheap. you see, that
little pickled cowcumber of a mrs. snagsby has been used by all sides
of the speculation and has done a deal more harm in bringing odds and
ends together than if she had meant it. mr. tulkinghorn, deceased, he
held all these horses in his hand and could have drove 'em his own
way, i haven't a doubt; but he was fetched off the box head-foremost,
and now they have got their legs over the traces, and are all
dragging and pulling their own ways. so it is, and such is life. the
cat's away, and the mice they play; the frost breaks up, and the
water runs. now, with regard to the party to be apprehended."

sir leicester seems to wake, though his eyes have been wide open, and
he looks intently a
 
 ___________________________
 

the french were a polite nation, i did, really. yet to hear a female
going on like that before sir leicester dedlock, baronet!"

"he is a poor abused!" cries mademoiselle. "i spit upon his house,
upon his name, upon his imbecility," all of which she makes the
carpet represent. "oh, that he is a great man! oh, yes, superb! oh,
heaven! bah!"

"well, sir leicester dedlock," proceeds mr. bucket, "this intemperate
foreigner also angrily took it into her head that she had established
a claim upon mr. tulkinghorn, deceased, by attending on the occasion
i told you of at his chambers, though she was liberally paid for her
time and trouble."

"lie!" cries mademoiselle. "i ref-use his money all togezzer."

"if you will parlay, you know," says mr. bucket parenthetically, "you
must take the consequences. now, whether she became my lodger, sir
leicester dedlock, with any deliberate intention then of doing this
deed and blinding me, i give no opinion on; but she lived in my house
in that capacity at the time th
 
 ___________________________
 
at she was hovering about the chambers
of the deceased mr. tulkinghorn with a view to a wrangle, and
likewise persecuting and half frightening the life out of an
unfortunate stationer."

"lie!" cries mademoiselle. "all lie!"

"the murder was committed, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and you
know under what circumstances. now, i beg of you to follow me close
with your attention for a minute or two. i was sent for, and the case
was entrusted to me. i examined the place, and the body, and the
papers, and everything. from information i received (from a clerk in
the s
 
 ___________________________
 
mademoiselle hortense fixes her black eyes
upon him with a dark frown and sets her dry lips closely and firmly
together.

"i went home, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, at night and found this
young woman having supper with my wife, mrs. bucket. she had made a
mighty show of being fond of mrs. bucket from her first offering
herself as our lodger, but that night she made more than ever--in
fact, overdid it. likewise she overdid her respect, and all that, for
the lamented memory of the deceased mr. tulkinghorn. by the living
lord it flashed upon me, as i sat opposite to her at the table and
saw her with a knife in her hand, that she had done it!"

mademoiselle is hardly audible in straining through her teeth and
lips the words, "you are a devil."

"now where," pursues mr. bucket, "had she been on the night of the
murder? she had been to the theayter. (she really was there, i have
since found, both before the deed and after it.) i knew i had an
artful customer to deal with and that proof would be very
 
 ___________________________
 
lady, as her lady has often thought, why
does she falter in this manner and look at her with such strange
mistrust?

"what is the matter? sit down and take your breath."

"oh, my lady, my lady. i have found my son--my youngest, who went
away for a soldier so long ago. and he is in prison."

"for debt?"

"oh, no, my lady; i would have paid any debt, and joyful."

"for what is he in prison then?"

"charged with a murder, my lady, of which he is as innocent as--as i
am. accused of the murder of mr. tulkinghorn."

what does she mean by this look and this imploring gesture? why does
she come so close? what is the letter that she holds?

"lady dedlock, my dear lady, my good lady, my kind lady! you must
have a heart to feel for me, you must have a heart to forgive me. i
was in this family before you were born. i am devoted to it. but
think of my dear son wrongfully accused."

"i do not accuse him."

"no, my lady, no. but others do, and he is in prison and in danger.
oh, lady dedlock, if you can say but a
 
 ___________________________
 
 company he
was in and was coming among the brick-fields to look for him when i
observed you bringing him home here."

"had he committed any crime?" i asked.

"none was charged against him," said mr. bucket, coolly lifting off
his hat, "but i suppose he wasn't over-particular. no. what i wanted
him for was in connexion with keeping this very matter of lady
dedlock quiet. he had been making his tongue more free than welcome
as to a small accidental service he had been paid for by the deceased
mr. tulkinghorn; and it wouldn't do, at any sort of price, to have
him playing those games. so having warned him out of london, i made
an afternoon of it to warn him to keep out of it now he was away, and
go farther from it, and maintain a bright look-out that i didn't
catch him coming back again."

"poor creature!" said i.

"poor enough," assented mr. bucket, "and trouble enough, and well
enough away from london, or anywhere else. i was regularly turned on
my back when i found him taken up by your establishme
 
 ___________________________
 
know me, and you recollect
where you saw me last, and what was talked of in that circle. don't
you? yes! very well. this young lady is that young lady."

mrs. snagsby appeared to understand the reference better than i did
at the time.

"and toughey--him as you call jo--was mixed up in the same business,
and no other; and the law-writer that you know of was mixed up in the
same business, and no other; and your husband, with no more knowledge
of it than your great grandfather, was mixed up (by mr. tulkinghorn,
deceased, his best customer) in the same business, and no other; and
the whole bileing of people was mixed up in the same business, and no
other. and yet a married woman, possessing your attractions, shuts
her eyes (and sparklers too), and goes and runs her delicate-formed
head against a wall. why, i am ashamed of you! (i expected mr.
woodcourt might have got it by this time.)"

mrs. snagsby shook her head and put her handkerchief to her eyes.

"is that all?" said mr. bucket excitedly. "no. se