 stairs." and
she handed me the key across the counter.

i glanced at the key and glanced at her, but she took it for granted
that i knew what to do with it. as it could only be intended for the
children's door, i came out without asking any more questions and led
the way up the dark stairs. we went as quietly as we could, but four
of us made some noise on the aged boards, and when we came to the
second story we found we had disturbed a man who was standing there
looking out of his room.

"is it gridley that's wanted?" he said, fixing his eyes on me with an
angry stare.

"no, sir," said i; "i am going higher up."

he looked at ada, and at mr. jarndyce, and at mr. skimpole, fixing
the same angry stare on each in succession as they passed and
followed me. mr. jarndyce gave him good day. "good day!" he said
abruptly and fiercely. he was a tall, sallow man with a careworn head
on which but little hair remained, a deeply lined face, and prominent
eyes. he had a combative look and a chafing, irritab
 
 ___________________________
 
good a
mother to her as i could. and so i tried. and so i worked at home and
did cleaning and nursing and washing for a long time before i began
to go out. and that's how i know how; don't you see, sir?"

"and do you often go out?"

"as often as i can," said charley, opening her eyes and smiling,
"because of earning sixpences and shillings!"

"and do you always lock the babies up when you go out?"

"to keep 'em safe, sir, don't you see?" said charley. "mrs. blinder
comes up now and then, and mr. gridley comes up sometimes, and
perhaps i can run in sometimes, and they can play you know, and tom
an't afraid of being locked up, are you, tom?"

"no-o!" said tom stoutly.

"when it comes on dark, the lamps are lighted down in the court, and
they show up here quite bright--almost quite bright. don't they,
tom?"

"yes, charley," said tom, "almost quite bright."

"then he's as good as gold," said the little creature--oh, in such a
motherly, womanly way! "and when emma's tired, he puts her to bed.
and w
 
 ___________________________
 
ay have been, i see a angel sitting in
this room last night along with my child, and i trust her to our
father!'"

"he had no other calling?" said my guardian.

"no, sir," returned mrs. blinder, "he was nothing but a follerers.
when he first came to lodge here, i didn't know what he was, and i
confess that when i found out i gave him notice. it wasn't liked in
the yard. it wasn't approved by the other lodgers. it is not a
genteel calling," said mrs. blinder, "and most people do object to
it. mr. gridley objected to it very strong, and he is a good lodger,
though his temper has been hard tried."

"so you gave him notice?" said my guardian.

"so i gave him notice," said mrs. blinder. "but really when the time
came, and i knew no other ill of him, i was in doubts. he was
punctual and diligent; he did what he had to do, sir," said mrs.
blinder, unconsciously fixing mr. skimpole with her eye, "and it's
something in this world even to do that."

"so you kept him after all?"

"why, i said that if he 
 
 ___________________________
 
could arrange with mr. gridley, i could
arrange it with the other lodgers and should not so much mind its
being liked or disliked in the yard. mr. gridley gave his consent
gruff--but gave it. he was always gruff with him, but he has been
kind to the children since. a person is never known till a person is
proved."

"have many people been kind to the children?" asked mr. jarndyce.

"upon the whole, not so bad, sir," said mrs. blinder; "but certainly
not so many as would have been if their father's calling had been
different. mr. coavins gave a guinea, and the follerers made up a
little purse. some neighbours in the yard that had always joked and
t
 
 ___________________________
 
ss and put upon her more. but she's patienter than
others would be, and is clever too, and always willing, up to the
full mark of her strength and over. so i should say, in general, not
so bad, sir, but might be better."

mrs. blinder sat down to give herself a more favourable opportunity
of recovering her breath, exhausted anew by so much talking before it
was fully restored. mr. jarndyce was turning to speak to us when his
attention was attracted by the abrupt entrance into the room of the
mr. gridley who had been mentioned and whom we had seen on our way
up.

"i don't know what you may be doing here, ladies and gentlemen," he
said, as if he resented our presence, "but you'll excuse my coming
in. i don't come in to stare about me. well, charley! well, tom!
well, little one! how is it with us all to-day?"

he bent over the group in a caressing way and clearly was regarded as
a friend by the children, though his face retained its stern
character and his manner to us was as rude as it could be.
 
 ___________________________
 
e about him," he said mildly.

"may be so, sir, may be so," returned the other, taking tom upon his
knee and waving him off impatiently. "i don't want to argue with
ladies and gentlemen. i have had enough of arguing to last one man
his life."

"you have sufficient reason, i dare say," said mr. jarndyce, "for
being chafed and irritated--"

"there again!" exclaimed the man, becoming violently angry. "i am of
a quarrelsome temper. i am irascible. i am not polite!"

"not very, i think."

"sir," said gridley, putting down the child and going up to him as if
he meant to strike him, "do you know anything of courts of equity?"

"perhaps i do, to my sorrow."

"to your sorrow?" said the man, pausing in his wrath, "if so, i beg
your pardon. i am not polite, i know. i beg your pardon! sir," with
renewed violence, "i have been dragged for five and twenty years over
burning iron, and i have lost the habit of treading upon velvet. go
into the court of chancery yonder and ask what is one of the standing
jokes
 
 ___________________________
 
 that brighten up their business sometimes, and they will tell
you that the best joke they have is the man from shropshire. i," he
said, beating one hand on the other passionately, "am the man from
shropshire."

"i believe i and my family have also had the honour of furnishing
some entertainment in the same grave place," said my guardian
composedly. "you may have heard my name--jarndyce."

"mr. jarndyce," said gridley with a rough sort of salutation, "you
bear your wrongs more quietly than i can bear mine. more than that, i
tell you--and i tell this gentleman, and these young ladies, if they
are friends of yours--that if i took my wrongs in any other way, i
should be driven mad! it is only by resenting them, and by revenging
them in my mind, and by angrily demanding the justice i never get,
that i am able to keep my wits together. it is only that!" he said,
speaking in a homely, rustic way and with great veh
 
 ___________________________
 
n
into rack, and ruin, and despair, with everything else--and here i
stand, this day! now, mr. jarndyce, in your suit there are thousands
and thousands involved, where in mine there are hundreds. is mine
less hard to bear or is it harder to bear, when my whole living was
in it and has been thus shamefully sucked away?"

mr. jarndyce said that he condoled with him with all his heart and
that he set up no monopoly himself in being unjustly treated by this
monstrous system.

"there again!" said mr. gridley with no diminution of his rage. "the
system! i am told on all hands, it's the system. i mustn't look to
individuals. it's the system. i mustn't go into court and say, 'my
lord, i beg to know this from you--is this right or wrong? have you
the face to tell me i have received justice and therefore am
dismissed?' my lord knows nothing of it. he sits there to administer
the system. i mustn't go to mr. tulkinghorn, the solicitor in
lincoln's inn fields, and say to him when he makes me furious by
bei
 
 ___________________________
 
d amusing them, though they have found it amusing,
too, to see me committed into custody and brought up in custody and
all that. it would be better for me, they tell me, if i restrained
myself. i tell them that if i did restrain myself i should become
imbecile. i was a good-enough-tempered man once, i believe. people in
my part of the country say they remember me so, but now i must have
this vent under my sense of injury or nothing could hold my wits
together. it would be far better for you, mr. gridley,' the lord
chancellor told me last week, 'not to waste your time here, and to
stay, usefully employed, down in shropshire.' 'my lord, my lord, i
know it would,' said i to him, 'and it would have been far better for
me never to have heard the name of your high office, but unhappily
for me, i can't undo the past, and the past drives me here!'
besides," he added, breaking fiercely out, "i'll shame them. to the
last, i'll show myself in that court to its shame. if i knew when i
was going to die, an
 
 ___________________________
 
lling enough to be carried. "i shouldn't wonder if we found a
ginger-bread soldier downstairs. let's go and look for him!"

he made his former rough salutation, which was not deficient in a
certain respect, to mr. jarndyce, and bowing slightly to us, went
downstairs to his room.

upon that, mr. skimpole began to talk, for the first time since our
arrival, in his usual gay strain. he said, well, it was really very
pleasant to see how things lazily adapted themselves to purposes.
here was this mr. gridley, a man of a robust will and surprising
energy--intellectually speaking, a sort of inharmonious
blacksmith--and he could easily imagine that there gridley was, years
ago, wandering about in life for something to expend his superfluous
combativeness upon--a sort of young love among the thorns--when the
court of chancery came in his way and accommodated him with the exact
thing he wanted. there they were, matched, ever afterwards! otherwise
he might have been a great general, blowing up all sorts 
 
 ___________________________
 
of towns, or
he might have been a great politician, dealing in all sorts of
parliamentary rhetoric; but as it was, he and the court of chancery
had fallen upon each other in the pleasantest way, and nobody was
much the worse, and gridley was, so to speak, from that hour provided
for. then look at coavinses! how delightfully poor coavinses (father
of these charming children) illustrated the same principle! he, mr.
skimpole, himself, had sometimes repined at the existence of
coavinses. he had found coavinses in his way. he could had dispensed
with coavinses. there had been times when, if he had been a sultan,
and his grand vizier had said one morning, "what does the commander
of the faithful require at the hands of his slave?" he
 
 ___________________________
 
y and becomes dark and drizzly.
jo fights it out at his crossing among the mud and wheels, the
horses, whips, and umbrellas, and gets but a scanty sum to pay for
the unsavoury shelter of tom-all-alone's. twilight comes on; gas
begins to start up in the shops; the lamplighter, with his ladder,
runs along the margin of the pavement. a wretched evening is
beginning to close in.

in his chambers mr. tulkinghorn sits meditating an application to the
nearest magistrate to-morrow morning for a warrant. gridley, a
disappointed suitor, has been here to-day and has been alarming. we
are not to be put in bodily fear, and that ill-conditioned fellow
shall be held to bail again. from the ceiling, foreshortened
allegory, in the person of one impossible roman upside down, points
with the arm of samson (out of joint, and an odd one) obtrusively
toward the window. why should mr. tulkinghorn, for such no reason,
look out of window? is the hand not always pointing there? so he does
not look out of window.

and i
 
 ___________________________
 
de, well and good; but i don't
altogether like your being so bent upon it in your present state of
mind; i'd rather you took to something else.' i was on my guard for a
blow, he was that passionate; but he received it in very good part
and left off directly. we shook hands and struck up a sort of
friendship."

"what was that man?" asked my guardian in a new tone of interest.

"why, he began by being a small shropshire farmer before they made a
baited bull of him," said mr. george.

"was his name gridley?"

"it was, sir."

mr. george directed another succession of quick bright glances at me
as my guardian and i exchanged a word or two of surprise at the
coincidence, and i therefore explained to him how we knew the name.
he made me another of his soldierly bows in acknowledgment of what he
called my condescension.

"i don't know," he said as he looked at me, "what it is that sets me
off again--but--bosh! what's my head running against!" he passed one
of his heavy hands over his crisp dark hair a
 
 ___________________________
 
s if to sweep the broken
thoughts out of his mind and sat a little forward, with one arm
akimbo and the other resting on his leg, looking in a brown study at
the ground.

"i am sorry to learn that the same state of mind has got this gridley
into new troubles and that he is in hiding," said my guardian.

"so i am told, sir," returned mr. george, still musing and looking on
the ground. "so i am told."

"you don't know where?"

"no, sir," returned the trooper, lifting up his eyes and coming out
of his reverie. "i can't say anything about him. he will be worn out
soon, i expect. you may file a strong man's heart away for a good
many years, but it will tell all of a sudden at last."

richard's entrance stopped the conversation. mr. geo
 
 ___________________________
 
when we
were out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain.

"there's a little cracked old woman," he began, "that--"

i put up my finger, for miss flite was close by me, having kept
beside me all the time and having called the attention of several of
her legal acquaintance to me (as i had overheard to my confusion) by
whispering in their ears, "hush! fitz jarndyce on my left!"

"hem!" said mr. george. "you remember, miss, that we passed some
conversation on a certain man this morning? gridley," in a low
whisper behind his hand.

"yes," said i.

"he is hiding at my place. i couldn't mention it. hadn't his
authority. he is on his last march, miss, and has a whim to see her.
he says they can feel for one another, and she has been almost as
good as a friend to him here. i came down to look for her, for when i
sat by gridley this afternoon, i seemed to hear the roll of the
muffled drums."

"shall i tell her?" said i.

"would you be so good?" he returned with a glance of something like
ap
 
 ___________________________
 
ns, and swords, and other things of that kind. when we had all
arrived here, the physician stopped, and taking off his hat, appeared
to vanish by magic and to leave another and quite a different man in
his place.

"now lookee here, george," said the man, turning quickly round upon
him and tapping him on the breast with a large forefinger. "you know
me, and i know you. you're a man of the world, and i'm a man of the
world. my name's bucket, as you are aware, and i have got a
peace-warrant against gridley. you have kept him out of the way a
long time, and you have been artful in it, and it does you credit."

mr. george, looking hard at him, bit his lip and shook his head.

"now, george," said the other, keeping close to him, "you're a
sensible man and a well-conducted man; that's what you are, beyond a
doubt. and mind you, i don't talk to you as a common character,
because you have served your country and you know that when duty
calls we must obey. consequently you're very far from wanting to gi
 
 ___________________________
 
wed us to the further end of the gallery, and
richard and i were going quietly away when mr. george came after us.
he said that if we had no objection to see his comrade, he would take
a visit from us very kindly. the words had hardly passed his lips
when the bell was rung and my guardian appeared, "on the chance," he
slightly observed, "of being able to do any little thing for a poor
fellow involved in the same misfortune as himself." we all four went
back together and went into the place where gridley was.

it was a bare room, partitioned off from the gallery with unpainted
wood. as the screening was not more than eight or ten feet high and
only enclosed the sides, not the top, the rafters of the high gallery
roof were overhead, and the skylight through which mr. bucket had
looked down. the sun was low--near setting--and its light came redly
in above, without descending to the ground. upon a plain
canvas-covered sofa lay the man from shropshire, dressed much as we
had seen him last, but so c
 
 ___________________________
 
m
and colour is such a picture of it as he was of the man from
shropshire whom we had spoken with before.

he inclined his head to richard and me and spoke to my guardian.

"mr. jarndyce, it is very kind of you to come to see me. i am not
long to be seen, i think. i am very glad to take your hand, sir. you
are a good man, superior to injustice, and god knows i honour you."

they shook hands earnestly, and my guardian said some words of
comfort to him.

"it may seem strange to you, sir," returned gridley; "i should not
have liked to see you if this had been the first time of our meeting.
but you know i made a fight for it, you know i stood up with my
single hand against them all, you know i told them the truth to the
last, and told them what they were, and what they had done to me; so
i don't mind your seeing me, this wreck."

"you have been courageous with them many and many a time," returned
my guardian.

"sir, i have been," with a faint smile. "i told you what would come
of it when i ceased 
 
 ___________________________
 
to be so, and see here! look at us--look at us!"
he drew the hand miss flite held through her arm and brought her
something nearer to him.

"this ends it. of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits and
hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul alone
comes natural to me, and i am fit for. there is a tie of many
suffering years between us two, and it is the only tie i ever had on
earth that chancery has not broken."

"accept my blessing, gridley," said miss flite in tears. "accept my
blessing!"

"i thought, boastfully, that they never could break my heart, mr.
jarndyce. i was resolved that they should not. i did believe that i
could, and would, charge them with being the mockery they were until
i died of some bodily disorder. but i am worn out. how long i have
been wearing out, i don't know; i seemed to break down in an hour. i
hope they may never come to hear of it. i hope everybody here will
lead them to believe that i died defying t
 
 ___________________________
 
 mr. bucket. "nod it; that's what i want
to see you do. why, lord bless your soul, what times we have had
together! haven't i seen you in the fleet over and over again for
contempt? haven't i come into court, twenty afternoons for no other
purpose than to see you pin the chancellor like a bull-dog? don't you
remember when you first began to threaten the lawyers, and the peace
was sworn against you two or three times a week? ask the little old
lady there; she has been always present. hold up, mr. gridley, hold
up, sir!"

"what are you going to do about him?" asked george in a low voice.

"i don't know yet," said bucket in the same tone. then resuming his
encouragement, he pursued aloud: "worn out, mr. gridley? after
dodging me for all these weeks and forcing me to climb the roof here
like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor? that ain't like
being worn out. i should think not! now i tell you what you want. you
want excitement, you know, to keep you up; that's what you want.
you're used 
 
 ___________________________
 
his warrant got by mr. tulkinghorn of
lincoln's inn fields, and backed into half-a-dozen counties since.
what do you say to coming along with me, upon this warrant, and
having a good angry argument before the magistrates? it'll do you
good; it'll freshen you up and get you into training for another turn
at the chancellor. give in? why, i am surprised to hear a man of your
energy talk of giving in. you mustn't do that. you're half the fun of
the fair in the court of chancery. george, you lend mr. gridley a
hand, and let's see now whether he won't be better up than down."

"he is very weak," said the trooper in a low voice.

"is he?" returned bucket anxiously. "i only want to rouse him. i
don't like to see an old acquaintance giving in like this. it would
cheer him up more than anything if i could make him a little waxy
with me. he's welcome to drop into me, right and left, if he likes. i
shall never take advantage of it."

the roof rang with a scream from miss flite, which still rings in my
ear
 
 ___________________________
 
s.

"oh, no, gridley!" she cried as he fell heavily and calmly back from
before her. "not without my blessing. after so many years!"

the sun was down, the light had gradually stolen from the roof, and
the shadow had crept upward. but to me the shadow of that pair, one
living and one dead, fell heavier on richard's departure than the
darkness of the darkest night. and through richard's farewell words i
heard it echoed: "of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits
and hopes, of all the living and the dead wor
 
 ___________________________
 
ad with two
hard brushes at once, to that unmerciful degree that phil,
shouldering his way round the gallery in the act of sweeping it,
winks with sympathy. this chafing over, the ornamental part of mr.
george's toilet is soon performed. he fills his pipe, lights it, and
marches up and down smoking, as his custom is, while phil, raising a
powerful odour of hot rolls and coffee, prepares breakfast. he smokes
gravely and marches in slow time. perhaps this morning's pipe is
devoted to the memory of gridley in his grave.

"and so, phil," says george of the shooting gallery after several
turns in silence, "you were dreaming of the country last night?"

phil, by the by, said as much in a tone of surprise as he scrambled
out of bed.

"yes, guv'ner."

"what was it like?"

"i hardly know what it was like, guv'ner," said phil, considering.

"how did you know it was the country?"

"on account of the grass, i think. and the swans upon it," says phil
after further consideration.

"what were the swans doing
 
 ___________________________
 
 ask your pardon, sir. it's george. the sergeant."

"and couldn't george, the sergeant, see that my door was locked?"

"why, no, sir, i couldn't. at any rate, i didn't," says the trooper,
rather nettled.

"have you changed your mind? or are you in the same mind?" mr.
tulkinghorn demands. but he knows well enough at a glance.

"in the same mind, sir."

"i thought so. that's sufficient. you can go. so you are the man,"
says mr. tulkinghorn, opening his door with the key, "in whose
hiding-place mr. gridley was found?"

"yes, i am the man," says the trooper, stopping two or three stairs
down. "what then, sir?"

"what then? i don't like your associates. you should not have seen
the inside of my door this morning if i had thought of your being
that man. gridley? a threatening, murderous, dangerous fellow."

with these words, spoken in an unusually high tone for him, the
lawyer goes into his rooms and shuts the door with a thundering
noise.

mr. george takes his dismissal in great dudgeon, the greate
 
 ___________________________
 
e and seal
in these many years. as my father's came there. as my brother's. as
my sister's. as my own. i hear conversation kenge and the rest of
them say to the new faces, 'here's little miss flite. oh, you are new
here; and you must come and be presented to little miss flite!' ve-ry
good. proud i am sure to have the honour! and we all laugh. but, fitz
jarndyce, i know what will happen. i know, far better than they do,
when the attraction has begun. i know the signs, my dear. i saw them
begin in gridley. and i saw them end. fitz jarndyce, my love,"
speaking low again, "i saw them beginning in our friend the ward in
jarndyce. let some one hold him back. or he'll be drawn to ruin."

she looked at me in silence for some moments, with her face gradually
softening into a smile. seeming to fear that she had been too gloomy,
and seeming also to lose the connexion in her mind, she said politely
as she sipped her glass of wine, "yes, my dear, as i was saying, i
expect a judgment shortly. then i shall r
 
 ___________________________
 
elf can be--more so
than it often is. allan, very patient with her, waits until she has
no more raptures to express, then points out jo, trembling in a
doorway, and tells her how he comes there.

"where can i lodge him hereabouts for the present? now, you have a
fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise me."

miss flite, mighty proud of the compliment, sets herself to consider;
but it is long before a bright thought occurs to her. mrs. blinder is
entirely let, and she herself occupies poor gridley's room.
"gridley!" exclaims miss flite, clapping her hands after a twentieth
repetition of this remark. "gridley! to be sure! of course! my dear
physician! general george will help us out."

it is hopeless to ask for any information about general george, and
would be, though miss flite had not already run upstairs to put on
her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself with
her reticule of documents. but as she informs her physician in her
disjointed manner on coming down in f
 
 ___________________________
 
e him dying as he did, and not be able to help him."

"what do you mean, george? you did help him. you took him under your
roof."

"i helped him so far, but that's little. i mean, mrs. bagnet, there
he was, dying without ever having been taught much more than to know
his right hand from his left. and he was too far gone to be helped
out of that."

"ah, poor creetur!" says mrs. bagnet.

"then," says the trooper, not yet lighting his pipe, and passing his
heavy hand over his hair, "that brought up gridley in a man's mind.
his was a bad case too, in a different way. then the two got mixed up
in a man's mind with a flinty old rascal who had to do with both. and
to think of that rusty carbine, stock and barrel, standing up on end
in his corner, hard, indifferent, taking everything so evenly--it
made flesh and blood tingle, i do assure you."

"my advice to you," returns mrs. bagnet, "is to light your pipe and
tingle that way. it's wholesomer and comfortabler, and better for the
health altogether."


 
 ___________________________
 
ere the
snow lies thin--for something may present itself to assist him,
anywhere--he dashes to his destination at such a speed that when he
stops the horse half smothers him in a cloud of steam.

"unbear him half a moment to freshen him up, and i'll be back."

he runs up the long wooden entry and finds the trooper smoking his
pipe.

"i thought i should, george, after what you have gone through, my
lad. i haven't a word to spare. now, honour! all to save a woman.
miss summerson that was here when gridley died--that was the name, i
know--all right--where does she live?"

the trooper has just come from there and gives him the address, near
oxford street.

"you won't repent it, george. good night!"

he is off again, with an impression of having seen phil sitting by
the frosty fire staring at him open-mouthed, and gallops away again,
and gets out in a cloud of steam again.

mr. jarndyce, the only person up in the house, is just going to bed,
rises from his book on hearing the rapid ringing at the b
 
 ___________________________
 
ade him my executor. nominated, constituted,
and appointed him. in my will. ye-es."

"indeed?" said i.

"ye-es," repeated miss flite in her most genteel accents, "my
executor, administrator, and assign. (our chancery phrases, my love.)
i have reflected that if i should wear out, he will be able to watch
that judgment. being so very regular in his attendance."

it made me sigh to think of him.

"i did at one time mean," said miss flite, echoing the sigh, "to
nominate, constitute, and appoint poor gridley. also very regular, my
charming girl. i assure you, most exemplary! but he wore out, poor
man, so i have appointed his successor. don't mention it. this is in
confidence."

she carefully opened her reticule a little way and showed me a folded
piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she spoke.

"another secret, my dear. i have added to my collection of birds."

"really, miss flite?" said i, knowing how it pleased her to have her
confidence received with an appearance of interest.

she 