 never been so exceedingly foolish
and attend to messrs. kenge and carboy's business."

"half a minute, miss!" cried mr. guppy, checking me as i was about to
ring. "this has been without prejudice?"

"i will never mention it," said i, "unless you should give me future
occasion to do so."

"a quarter of a minute, miss! in case you should think better at any
time, however distant--that's no consequence, for my feelings can
never alter--of anything i have said, particularly what might i not
do, mr. william guppy, eighty-seven, penton place, or if removed, or
dead (of blighted hopes or anything of that sort), care of mrs.
guppy, three hundred and two, old street road, will be sufficient."

i rang the bell, the servant came, and mr. guppy, laying his written
card upon the table and making a dejected bow, departed. raising my
eyes as he went out, i once more saw him looking at me after he had
passed the door.

i sat there for another hour or more, finishing my books and payments
and getting through plenty
 
 ___________________________
 
 and look at one another.

"if i had the energy i once possessed, tony!" says mr. guppy with a
sigh. "but there are chords in the human mind--"

expressing the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum-and-water,
mr. guppy concludes by resigning the adventure to tony jobling and
informing him that during the vacation and while things are slack,
his purse, "as far as three or four or even five pound goes," will be
at his disposal. "for never shall it be said," mr. guppy adds with
emphasis, "that william guppy turned his back upon his friend!"

the latter part of the proposal is so directly to the purpose that
mr. jobling says with emotion, "guppy, my trump, your fist!" mr.
guppy presents it, saying, "jobling, my boy, there it is!" mr.
jobling returns, "guppy, we have been pals now for some years!" mr.
guppy replies, "jobling, we have."

they then shake hands, and mr. jobling adds in a feeling manner,
"thank you, guppy, i don't know but what i will take another glass
for old acquaintance sake."

"kro
 
 ___________________________
 
tes with him.

"tony," says he, "i can make allowances for lowness of spirits, for
no man knows what it is when it does come upon a man better than i
do, and no man perhaps has a better right to know it than a man who
has an unrequited image imprinted on his 'eart. but there are bounds
to these things when an unoffending party is in question, and i will
acknowledge to you, tony, that i don't think your manner on the
present occasion is hospitable or quite gentlemanly."

"this is strong language, william guppy," returns mr. weevle.

"sir, it may be," retorts mr. william guppy, "but i feel strongly
when i use it."

mr. weevle admits that he has been wrong and begs mr. william guppy
to think no more about it. mr. william guppy, however, having got the
advantage, cannot quite release it without a little more injured
remonstrance.

"no! dash it, tony," says that gentleman, "you really ought to be
careful how you wound the feelings of a man who has an unrequited
image imprinted on his 'eart and who is not
 
 ___________________________
 
ind (which i should wish
to set at rest) if you was to repeat those admissions."

"well, caddy," said i, turning to her, "perhaps you will not be
surprised when i tell you, my dear, that there never has been any
engagement--"

"no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," suggested mr. guppy.

"no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," said i, "between
this gentleman--"

"william guppy, of penton place, pentonville, in the county of
middlesex," he murmured.

"between this gentleman, mr. william guppy, of penton place,
pentonville, in the county of middlesex, and myself."

"thank you, miss," said mr. guppy. "very full--er--excuse me--lady's
name, christian and surname both?"

i gave them.

"married woman, i believe?" said mr. guppy. "married woman. thank
you. formerly caroline jellyby, spinster, then of thavies inn, within
the city of london, but extra-parochial; now of newman street, oxford
street. much obliged."

he ran home and came running back again.

"touching that matter, you know, i 