pproach until, lifting up herself and her tub together when
she has poured the water off into the gutter, she finds him standing
near her. her reception of him is not flattering.

"george, i never see you but i wish you was a hundred mile away!"

the trooper, without remarking on this welcome, follows into the
musical-instrument shop, where the lady places her tub of greens upon
the counter, and having shaken hands with him, rests her arms upon
it.

"i never," she says, "george, consider matthew bagnet safe a minute
when you're near him. you are that restless and that roving--"

"yes! i know i am, mrs. bagnet. i know i am."

"you know you are!" says mrs. bagnet. "what's the use of that? why
are you?"

"the nature of the animal, i suppose," returns the trooper
good-humouredly.

"ah!" cries mrs. bagnet, something shrilly. "but what satisfaction
will the nature of the animal be to me when the animal shall have
tempted my mat away from the musical business to new zealand or
australey?"

mrs. bagn
 
 ___________________________
 
 the grain, and freckled by the sun and wind which
have tanned her hair upon the forehead, but healthy, wholesome, and
bright-eyed. a strong, busy, active, honest-faced woman of from
forty-five to fifty. clean, hardy, and so economically dressed
(though substantially) that the only article of ornament of which she
stands possessed appear's to be her wedding-ring, around which her
finger has grown to be so large since it was put on that it will
never come off again until it shall mingle with mrs. bagnet's dust.

"mrs. bagnet," says the trooper, "i am on my parole with you. mat
will get no harm from me. you may trust me so far."

"well, i think i may. but the very looks of you are unsettling," mrs.
bagnet rejoins. "ah, george, george! if you had only settled down and
married joe pouch's widow when he died in north america, she'd have
combed your hair for you."

"it was a chance for me, certainly," returns the trooper half
laughingly, half seriously, "but i shall never settle down into a
respect
 
 ___________________________
 
able man now. joe pouch's widow might have done me good--there
was something in her, and something of her--but i couldn't make up my
mind to it. if i had had the luck to meet with such a wife as mat
found!"

mrs. bagnet, who seems in a virtuous way to be under little reserve
with a good sort of fellow, but to be another good sort of fellow
herself for that matter, receives this compliment by flicking mr.
george in the face with a head of greens and taking her tub into the
little room behind the shop.

"why, quebec, my poppet," says george, following, on invitation, into
that department. "and little malta, too! come and kiss your bluffy!"

these young ladies--not supposed to have been actually christened by
the
 
 ___________________________
 
 though always so called in the family from
the places of their birth in barracks--are respectively employed on
three-legged stools, the younger (some five or six years old) in
learning her letters out of a penny primer, the elder (eight or nine
perhaps) in teaching her and sewing with great assiduity. both hail
mr. george with acclamations as an old friend and after some kissing
and romping plant their stools beside him.

"and how's young woolwich?" says mr. george.

"ah! there now!" cries mrs. bagnet, turning about from her saucepans
(for she is cooking dinner) with a bright flush on her face. "would
you believe it? got an engagement at the theayter, with his father,
to play the fife in a military piece."

"well done, my godson!" cries mr. george, slapping his thigh.

"i believe you!" says mrs. bagnet. "he's a briton. that's what
woolwich is. a briton!"

"and mat blows away at his bassoon, and you're respectable civilians
one and all," says mr. george. "family people. children growing up.
m
 
 ___________________________
 
nd--well, well! to be sure,
i don't know why i shouldn't be wished a hundred mile away, for i
have not much to do with all this!"

mr. george is becoming thoughtful, sitting before the fire in the
whitewashed room, which has a sanded floor and a barrack smell and
contains nothing superfluous and has not a visible speck of dirt or
dust in it, from the faces of quebec and malta to the bright tin pots
and pannikins upon the dresser shelves--mr. george is becoming
thoughtful, sitting here while mrs. bagnet is busy, when mr. bagnet
and young woolwich opportunely come home. mr. bagnet is an
ex-artilleryman, tall and upright, with shaggy eyebrows and whiskers
like the fibres of a coco-nut, not a hair upon his head, and a torrid
complexion. his voice, short, deep, and resonant, is not at all
unlike the tones of the instrument to which he is devoted. indeed
there may be generally observed in him an unbending, unyielding,
brass-bound air, as if he were himself the bassoon of the human
orchestra. young 
 
 ___________________________
 
woolwich is the type and model of a young drummer.

both father and son salute the trooper heartily. he saying, in due
season, that he has come to advise with mr. bagnet, mr. bagnet
hospitably declares that he will hear of no business until after
dinner and that his friend shall not partake of his counsel without
first partaking of boiled pork and greens. the trooper yielding to
this invitation, he and mr. bagnet, not to embarrass the domestic
preparations, go forth to take a turn up and down the little street,
which they promenade with measured tread and folded arms, as if it
were a rampart.

"george," says mr. bagnet. "you know me. it's my old girl that
advises. she has the head. but i never own to it before her.
discipline must be maintained. wait till the greens is off her mind.
then we'll consult. whatever the old girl says, do--do it!"

"i intend to, mat," replies the other. "i would sooner take h
 
 ___________________________
 
er
opinion than that of a college."

"college," returns mr. bagnet in short sentences, bassoon-like. "what
college could you leave--in another quarter of the world--with
nothing but a grey cloak and an umbrella--to make its way home to
europe? the old girl would do it to-morrow. did it once!"

"you are right," says mr. george.

"what college," pursues bagnet, "could you set up in life--with two
penn'orth of white lime--a penn'orth of fuller's earth--a ha'porth of
sand--and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money? that's
what the old girl started on. in the present business."

"i am rejoiced to hear it's thriving, mat."

"the old girl," says mr. bagnet, acquiescing, "saves. has a stocking
somewhere. with money in it. i never saw it. but i know she's got it.
wait till the greens is off her mind. then she'll set you up."

"she is a treasure!" 
 
 ___________________________
 
 girl that brought out my musical
abilities. i should have been in the artillery now but for the old
girl. six years i hammered at the fiddle. ten at the flute. the old
girl said it wouldn't do; intention good, but want of flexibility;
try the bassoon. the old girl borrowed a bassoon from the bandmaster
of the rifle regiment. i practised in the trenches. got on, got
another, get a living by it!"

george remarks that she looks as fresh as a rose and as sound as an
apple.

"the old girl," says mr. bagnet in reply, "is a thoroughly fine
woman. consequently she is like a thoroughly fine day. gets finer as
she gets on. i never saw the old girl's equal. but i never own to it
before her. discipline must be maintained!"

proceeding to converse on indifferent matters, they walk up and down
the little street, keeping step and time, until summoned by quebec
and malta to do justice to the pork and greens, over which mrs.
bagnet, like a military chaplain, says a short grace. in the
distribution of these c
 
 ___________________________
 
omestibles, as in every other household duty,
mrs. bagnet developes an exact system, sitting with every dish before
her, allotting to every portion of pork its own portion of
pot-liquor, greens, potatoes, and even mustard, and serving it out
complete. having likewise served out the beer from a can and thus
supplied the mess with all things necessary, mrs. bagnet proceeds to
satisfy her own hunger, which is in a healthy state. the kit of the
mess, if the table furniture may be so denominated, is chiefly
composed of utensils of horn and tin that have done duty in several
parts of the world. young woolwich's knife, in particular, which is
of the oyster kind, with the additional feature of a strong
shutting-up movement which frequently balks the appetite of that
young musician, is mentioned as having gone in various hands the
complete round of foreign serv
 
 ___________________________
 
ice.

the dinner done, mrs. bagnet, assisted by the younger branches (who
polish their own cups and platters, knives and forks), makes all the
dinner garniture shine as brightly as before and puts it all away,
first sweeping the hearth, to the end that mr. bagnet and the visitor
may not be retarded in the smoking of their pipes. these household
cares involve much pattening and counter-pattening in the backyard
and considerable use of a pail, which is finally so happy as to
assist in the ablutions of mrs. bagnet herself. that old girl
reappearing by and by, quite fresh, and sitting down to her
needlework, then and only then--the greens being only then to be
considered as entirely off her mind--mr. bagnet requests the trooper
to state his case.

this mr. 
 
 ___________________________
 
george does with great discretion, appearing to address
himself to mr. bagnet, but having an eye solely on the old girl all
the time, as bagnet has himself. she, equally discreet, busies
herself with her needlework. the case fully stated, mr. bagnet
resorts to his standard artifice for the maintenance of discipline.

"that's the whole of it, is it, george?" says he.

"that's the whole of it."

"you act according to my opinion?"

"i shall be guided," replies george, "entirely by it."

"old girl," says mr. bagnet, "give him my opinion. you know it. tell
him what it is."

it is that he cannot have too little to do with people who are too
deep for him and cannot be too careful of interference with matters
he does not understand--that the plain
 
 ___________________________
 
 rule is to do nothing in the
dark, to be a party to nothing underhanded or mysterious, and never
to put his foot where he cannot see the ground. this, in effect, is
mr. bagnet's opinion, as delivered through the old girl, and it so
relieves mr. george's mind by confirming his own opinion and
banishing his doubts that he composes himself to smoke another pipe
on that exceptional occasion and to have a talk over old times with
the whole bagnet family, according to their various ranges of
experience.

through these means it comes to pass that mr. george does not again
rise to his full height in that parlour until the time is drawing on
when the bassoon and fife are expected by a british public at the
theatre; and as it takes time even then for mr. george, in his
domestic character of bluffy, to take leave of quebec and malta and
insinuate a sponsorial shilling into the pocket of his godson with
felicitations on his success in life, it
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his usual way, sidling off at first as if he were
going anywhere else and then bearing down upon his commander like a
bayonet-charge. certain splashes of white show in high relief upon
his dirty face, and he scrapes his one eyebrow with the handle of the
brush.

"attention, phil! listen to this."

"steady, commander, steady."

"'sir. allow me to remind you (though there is no legal necessity for
my doing so, as you are aware) that the bill at two months' date
drawn on yourself by mr. matthew bagnet, and by you accepted, for the
sum of ninety-seven pounds four shillings and ninepence, will become
due to-morrow, when you will please be prepared to take up the same
on presentation. yours, joshua smallweed.' what do you make of that,
phil?"

"mischief, guv'ner."

"why?"

"i think," replies phil after pensively tracing out a cross-wrinkle
in his forehead with the brush-handle, "that mischeevious
consequences is always meant when money's asked for."

"lookye, phil," says the trooper, sitting on
 
 ___________________________
 
s.

"a pretty way that would be! do you know what would become of the
bagnets in that case? do you know they would be ruined to pay off my
old scores? you're a moral character," says the trooper, eyeing him
in his large way with no small indignation; "upon my life you are,
phil!"

phil, on one knee at the target, is in course of protesting
earnestly, though not without many allegorical scoops of his brush
and smoothings of the white surface round the rim with his thumb,
that he had forgotten the bagnet responsibility and would not so much
as injure a hair of the head of any member of that worthy family when
steps are audible in the long passage without, and a cheerful voice
is heard to wonder whether george is at home. phil, with a look at
his master, hobbles up, saying, "here's the guv'ner, mrs. bagnet!
here he is!" and the old girl herself, accompanied by mr. bagnet,
appears.

the old girl never appears in walking trim, in any season of the
year, without a grey cloth cloak, coarse and much 
 
 ___________________________
 
worn but very
clean, which is, undoubtedly, the identical garment rendered so
interesting to mr. bagnet by having made its way home to europe from
another quarter of the globe in company with mrs. bagnet and an
umbrella. the latter faithful appendage is also invariably a part of
the old girl's presence out of doors. it is of no colour known in
this life and has a corrugated wooden crook for a handle, with a
metallic object let into its prow, or beak, resembling a little model
of a fanlight over a street door or one of the oval glasses out of a
pair of spectacles, which ornamental object has not that tenacious
capacity of sticking to its post that might be desired in an article
long associated w
 
 ___________________________
 
or to arrest the attention of
tradesmen by a friendly poke. without her market-basket, which is a
sort of wicker well with two flapping lids, she never stirs abroad.
attended by these her trusty companions, therefore, her honest
sunburnt face looking cheerily out of a rough straw bonnet, mrs.
bagnet now arrives, fresh-coloured and bright, in george's shooting
gallery.

"well, george, old fellow," says she, "and how do you do, this
sunshiny morning?"

giving him a friendly shake of the hand, mrs. bagnet draws a long
breath after her walk and sits down to enjoy a rest. having a
faculty, matured on the tops of baggage-waggons and in other such
positions, of resting easily anywhere, she perches on a rough bench,
unties her bonnet-strings, pushes back her bonnet, crosses her arms,
and looks perfectly comfortable.

mr. bagnet in the meantime has shaken hands with his old comrade and
with phil, on whom mrs. bagnet likewise bestows a good-humoured nod
and smile.

"now, george," said mrs. bagnet brisk
 
 ___________________________
 
have, to make it all correct as usual about that
security. give him the new bill to sign, george, and he'll sign it
like a man."

"i was coming to you this morning," observes the trooper reluctantly.

"yes, we thought you'd come to us this morning, but we turned out
early and left woolwich, the best of boys, to mind his sisters and
came to you instead--as you see! for lignum, he's tied so close now,
and gets so little exercise, that a walk does him good. but what's
the matter, george?" asks mrs. bagnet, stopping in her cheerful talk.
"you don't look yourself."

"i am not quite myself," returns the trooper; "i have been a little
put out, mrs. bagnet."

her bright quick eye catches the truth directly. "george!" holding up
her forefinger. "don't tell me there's anything wrong about that
security of lignum's! don't do it, george, on account of the
children!"

the trooper looks at her with a troubled visage.

"george," says mrs. bagnet, using both her arms for emphasis and
occasionally bringing do
 
 ___________________________
 
wn her open hands upon her knees. "if you
have allowed anything wrong to come to that security of lignum's, and
if you have let him in for it, and if you have put us in danger of
being sold up--and i see sold up in your face, george, as plain as
print--you have done a shameful action and have deceived us cruelly.
i tell you, cruelly, george. there!"

mr. bagnet, otherwise as immovable as a pump or a lamp-post, puts his
large right hand on the top of his bald head as if to defend it from
a shower-bath and looks with great uneasiness at mrs. bagnet.

"george," says that old girl, "i wonder at you! george, i am ashamed
of you! george, i couldn't have believed you would have done it! i
always knew you to be a rolling stone that gathered no moss, but i
never thought you would have taken away what little moss there was
for bagnet and the children to lie upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n. you know what a
hard-working, steady-going chap he is. you know what quebec and malta
and woolwich are, and i never did think you would, or could, have had
the heart to serve us so. oh, george!" mrs. bagnet gathers up her
cloak to wipe her eyes on in a very genuine manner, "how could you do
it?"

mrs. bagnet ceasing, mr. bagnet removes his hand from his head as if
the shower-bath were over and looks disconsolately at mr. george, who
has turned quite white and looks distressfully at the grey cloak and
straw bonnet.

"mat," says the trooper in a subdued voice, addressing him but still
looking at his wife, "i am sorry you take it so much to heart,
because i do hope it's not so bad as that comes to. i certainly have,
this morning, received this letter"--which he reads aloud--"but i
hope it may be set right yet. as to a ro
 
 ___________________________
 
lling stone, why, what you
say is true. i am a rolling stone, and i never rolled in anybody's
way, i fully believe, that i rolled the least good to. but it's
impossible for an old vagabond comrade to like your wife and family
better than i like 'em, mat, and i trust you'll look upon me as
forgivingly as you can. don't think i've kept anything from you. i
haven't had the letter more than a quarter of an hour."

"old girl," murmurs mr. bagnet after a short silence, "will you tell
him my opinion?"

"oh! why didn't he marry," mrs. bagnet answers, half laughing and
half crying, "joe pouch's widder in north america? then he wouldn't
have got himself into these troubles."

"the old girl," says mr. bagnet, "puts it correct--why didn't you?"

"well, she has a better husband by this time, i hope," returns the
trooper. "anyhow, here i stand, this present day, not married to joe
pouch's widder. what shall i do? you see all i have got about me
 
 ___________________________
 
.
it's not mine; it's yours. give the word, and i'll sell off every
morsel. if i could have hoped it would have brought in nearly the sum
wanted, i'd have sold all long ago. don't believe that i'll leave you
or yours in the lurch, mat. i'd sell myself first. i only wish," says
the trooper, giving himself a disparaging blow in the chest, "that i
knew of any one who'd buy such a second-hand piece of old stores."

"old girl," murmurs mr. bagnet, "give him another bit of my mind."

"george," says the old girl, "you are not so much to be blamed, on
full consideration, except for ever taking this business without the
means."

"and that was like me!" observes the penitent trooper, shaking his
head. "like me, i know."

"silence! the old girl," says mr. bagnet, "is correct--in her way of
giving my opinions--hear me out!"

"that was when you never ought to have asked for the security,
george, and when you never ought to have got it, all thin
 
 ___________________________
 
gs
considered. but what's done can't be undone. you are always an
honourable and straightforward fellow, as far as lays in your power,
though a little flighty. on the other hand, you can't admit but what
it's natural in us to be anxious with such a thing hanging over our
heads. so forget and forgive all round, george. come! forget and
forgive all round!"

mrs. bagnet, giving him one of her honest hands and giving her
husband the other, mr. george gives each of them one of his and holds
them while he speaks.

"i do assure you both, there's nothing i wouldn't do to discharge
this obligation. but whatever i have been able to scrape together has
gone every two months in keeping it up. we have lived plainly enough
here, phil and i. but the gallery don't quite do what was expected of
it, and it's not--in short, it's not the mint. it was wrong in me to
take it? we
 
 ___________________________
 
that step,
and i thought it might steady me, and set me up, and you'll try to
overlook my having such expectations, and upon my soul, i am very
much obliged to you, and very much ashamed of myself." with these
concluding words, mr. george gives a shake to each of the hands he
holds, and relinquishing them, backs a pace or two in a
broad-chested, upright attitude, as if he had made a final confession
and were immediately going to be shot with all military honours.

"george, hear me out!" says mr. bagnet, glancing at his wife. "old
girl, go on!"

mr. bagnet, being in this singular manner heard out, has merely to
observe that the letter must be attended to without any delay, that
it is advisable that george and he should immediately wait on mr.
smallweed in person, and that the primary object is to save and hold
harmless mr. bagnet, who had none of the money. mr. george, entirely
assenting, puts on his hat and prepares to march with mr. bagnet to
the enemy's camp.

"don't you mind a woman's hast
 
 ___________________________
 
y word, george," says mrs. bagnet,
patting him on the shoulder. "i trust my old lignum to you, and i am
sure you'll bring him through it."

the trooper returns that this is kindly said and that he will bring
lignum through it somehow. upon which mrs. bagnet, with her cloak,
basket, and umbrella, goes home, bright-eyed again, to the rest of
her family, and the comrades sally forth on the hopeful errand of
mollifying mr. smallweed.

whether there are two people in england less likely to come
satisfactorily out of any negotiation with mr. smallweed than mr.
george and mr. matthew bagnet may be very reasonably questioned.
also, notwithstanding their martial appearance, broad square
shoulders, and heavy tread, whether there are within the same limits
t
 
 ___________________________
 
wo more simple and unaccustomed children in all the smallweedy
affairs of life. as they proceed with great gravity through the
streets towards the region of mount pleasant, mr. bagnet, observing
his companion to be thoughtful, considers it a friendly part to refer
to mrs. bagnet's late sally.

"george, you know the old girl--she's as sweet and as mild as milk.
but touch her on the children--or myself--and she's off like
gunpowder."

"it does her credit, mat!"

"george," says mr. bagnet, looking straight before him, "the old
girl--can't do anything--that don't do her credit. more or less. i
never say so. discipline must be maintained."

"she's worth her weight in gold," says the trooper.

"in gold?" says mr. bagnet. "i'll tell you what. the old girl's
weight--is twelve stone six. would i take that weight--in any
metal--for the old girl? no. why not? because the old girl's metal is
far more precious--than the preciousest metal. and she's all metal!"

"you are right, mat!"

"whe
 
 ___________________________
 
n she took me--and accepted of the ring--she 'listed under me and
the children--heart and head, for life. she's that earnest," says mr.
bagnet, "and true to her colours--that, touch us with a finger--and
she turns out--and stands to her arms. if the old girl fires
wide--once in a way--at the call of duty--look over it, george. for
she's loyal!"

"why, bless her, mat," returns the trooper, "i think the higher of
her for it!"

"you are right!" says mr. bagnet with the warmest enthusiasm, though
without relaxing the rigidity of a single muscle. "think as high of
the old girl--as the rock of gibraltar--and still you'll be thinking
low--of such merits. but i never own to it before her. discipline
must be maintained."

these encomiums bring them to mount pleasant and to grandfather
smallweed's house. the door is opened by the perennial judy, who,
having surveyed them from top to toe with no particular favour, but
indeed with a malignant sneer, leaves th
 
 ___________________________
 
ips that they can come in if they want to it. thus
privileged, they come in and find mr. smallweed with his feet in the
drawer of his chair as if it were a paper foot-bath and mrs.
smallweed obscured with the cushion like a bird that is not to sing.

"my dear friend," says grandfather smallweed with those two lean
affectionate arms of his stretched forth. "how de do? how de do? who
is our friend, my dear friend?"

"why this," returns george, not able to be very conciliatory at
first, "is matthew bagnet, who has obliged me in that matter of ours,
you know."

"oh! mr. bagnet? surely!" the old man looks at him under his hand.

"hope you're well, mr. bagnet? fine man, mr. george! military air,
sir!"

no chairs being offered, mr. george brings one forward for bagnet and
one for himself. they sit down, mr. bagnet as if he had no power of
bending himself, except at the hips, for that purpose.

"judy," says mr. smallweed, "bring the pipe."

"why, i don't know," mr. george interposes, "that the young 
 
 ___________________________
 
ially as he
can, holding the open letter in one hand and resting the broad
knuckles of the other on his thigh, "a good lot of money has passed
between us, and we are face to face at the present moment, and are
both well aware of the understanding there has always been. i am
prepared to do the usual thing which i have done regularly and to
keep this matter going. i never got a letter like this from you
before, and i have been a little put about by it this morning,
because here's my friend matthew bagnet, who, you know, had none of
the money--"

"i don't know it, you know," says the old man quietly.

"why, con-found you--it, i mean--i tell you so, don't i?"

"oh, yes, you tell me so," returns grandfather smallweed. "but i
don't know it."

"well!" says the trooper, swallowing his fire. "i know it."

mr. smallweed replies with excellent temper, "ah! that's quite
another thing!" and adds, "but it don't matter. mr. bagnet's
situation is all one, whether or no."

the unfortunate george makes a great
 
 ___________________________
 
 liable to be fixed whether or no. now, you see, that makes his
good lady very uneasy in her mind, and me too, for whereas i'm a
harum-scarum sort of a good-for-nought that more kicks than halfpence
come natural to, why he's a steady family man, don't you see? now,
mr. smallweed," says the trooper, gaining confidence as he proceeds
in his soldierly mode of doing business, "although you and i are good
friends enough in a certain sort of a way, i am well aware that i
can't ask you to let my friend bagnet off entirely."

"oh, dear, you are too modest. you can ask me anything, mr. george."
(there is an ogreish kind of jocularity in grandfather smallweed
to-day.)

"and you can refuse, you mean, eh? or not you so much, perhaps, as
your friend in the city? ha ha ha!"

"ha ha ha!" echoes grandfather smallweed. in such a very hard manner
and with eyes so particularly green that mr. bagnet's natural gravity
is much deepened by the contemplation of that venerable man.

"come!" says the sanguine george. 
 
 ___________________________
 
and, is the speaker now--"i think you
asked me, what did the letter mean?"

"why, yes, i did," returns the trooper in his off-hand way, "but i
don't care to know particularly, if it's all correct and pleasant."

mr. smallweed, purposely balking himself in an aim at the trooper's
head, throws the pipe on the ground and breaks it to pieces.

"that's what it means, my dear friend. i'll smash you. i'll crumble
you. i'll powder you. go to the devil!"

the two friends rise and look at one another. mr. bagnet's gravity
has now attained its profoundest point.

"go to the devil!" repeats the old man. "i'll have no more of your
pipe-smokings and swaggerings. what? you're an independent dragoon,
too! go to my lawyer (you remember where; you have been there before)
and show your independence now, will you? come, my dear friend,
there's a chance for you. open the street door, judy; put these
blusterers out! call in help if they don't go. put 'em out!"

he vociferates this so loudly that mr. bagnet, laying
 
 ___________________________
 
 his hands on
the shoulders of his comrade before the latter can recover from his
amazement, gets him on the outside of the street door, which is
instantly slammed by the triumphant judy. utterly confounded, mr.
george awhile stands looking at the knocker. mr. bagnet, in a perfect
abyss of gravity, walks up and down before the little parlour window
like a sentry and looks in every time he passes, apparently revolving
something in his mind.

"come, mat," says mr. george when he has recovered himself, "we must
try the lawyer. now, what do you think of this rascal?"

mr. bagnet, stopping to take a farewell look into the parlour,
replies with one shake of his head directed at the interior, "if my
old girl had been here--i'd have told him!" having so discharged

 
 ___________________________
 
 the sanctuary with a
fair old-fashioned curtsy and softly shuts the door. she is treated
with some distinction there, for the clerk steps out of his pew to
show her through the outer office and to let her out. the old lady is
thanking him for his attention when she observes the comrades in
waiting.

"i beg your pardon, sir, but i think those gentlemen are military?"

the clerk referring the question to them with his eye, and mr. george
not turning round from the almanac over the fire-place. mr. bagnet
takes upon himself to reply, "yes, ma'am. formerly."

"i thought so. i was sure of it. my heart warms, gentlemen, at the
sight of you. it always does at the sight of such. god bless you,
gentlemen! you'll excuse an old woman, but i had a son once who went
for a soldier. a fine handsome youth he was, and good in his bold
way, though some people did disparage him to his poor mother. i ask
your pardon for troubling you, sir. god bless you, gentlemen!"

"same to you, ma'am!" returns mr. bagnet with
 
 ___________________________
 
 right good will.

there is something very touching in the earnestness of the old lady's
voice and in the tremble that goes through her quaint old figure. but
mr. george is so occupied with the almanac over the fire-place
(calculating the coming months by it perhaps) that he does not look
round until she has gone away and the door is closed upon her.

"george," mr. bagnet gruffly whispers when he does turn from the
almanac at last. "don't be cast down! 'why, soldiers, why--should we
be melancholy, boys?' cheer up, my hearty!"

the clerk having now again gone in to say that they are still there
and mr. tulkinghorn being heard to return with some irascibility,
"let 'em come in then!" they pass into the great room with the
painted ceiling and find him standing before the fire.

"now, you men, what do you want? sergeant, i told you the last time i
saw you that i don
 
 ___________________________
 
s it.

"well, sir," says mr. george, "this man with me is the other party
implicated in this unfortunate affair--nominally, only nominally--and
my sole object is to prevent his getting into trouble on my account.
he is a most respectable man with a wife and family, formerly in the
royal artillery--"

"my friend, i don't care a pinch of snuff for the whole royal
artillery establishment--officers, men, tumbrils, waggons, horses,
guns, and ammunition."

"'tis likely, sir. but i care a good deal for bagnet and his wife and
family being injured on my account. and if i could bring them through
this matter, i should have no help for it but to give up without any
other consideration what you wanted of me the other day."

"have you got it here?"

"i have got it here, sir."

"sergeant," the lawyer proceeds in his dry passionless manner, far
more hopeless in the dealing with than any amount of vehemence, "make
up your mind while i speak to you, for this is final. after i have
finished speaking i have cl
 
 ___________________________
 
osed the subject, and i won't re-open it.
understand that. you can leave here, for a few days, what you say you
have brought here if you choose; you can take it away at once if you
choose. in case you choose to leave it here, i can do this for you--i
can replace this matter on its old footing, and i can go so far
besides as to give you a written undertaking that this man bagnet
shall never be troubled in any way until you have been proceeded
against to the utmost, that your means shall be exhausted before the
creditor looks to his. this is in fact all but freeing him. have you
decided?"

the trooper puts his hand into his breast and answers with a long
breath, "i must do it, sir."

so mr. tulkinghorn, putting on his spectacles, sits down and writes
the undertaking, which he slowly reads and explains to bagnet, who
has all this time been staring at the ceiling and who 
 
 ___________________________
 
structions, sir. the last i ever had from
him."

look at a millstone, mr. george, for some change in its expression,
and you will find it quite as soon as in the face of mr. tulkinghorn
when he opens and reads the letter! he refolds it and lays it in his
desk with a countenance as unperturbable as death.

nor has he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same
frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly, "you can go. show
these men out, there!" being shown out, they repair to mr. bagnet's
residence to dine.

boiled beef and greens constitute the day's variety on the former
repast of boiled pork and greens, and mrs. bagnet serves out the meal
in the same way and seasons it with the best of temper, being that
rare sort of old girl that she receives good to her arms without a
hint that it might be better and catches light from any little spot
of darkness near her. the spot on this occasion is the darkened brow
of mr. george; he is unusually thoughtful and depressed. at first
mrs.
 
 ___________________________
 
 bagnet trusts to the combined endearments of quebec and malta to
restore him, but finding those young ladies sensible that their
existing bluffy is not the bluffy of their usual frolicsome
acquaintance, she winks off the light infantry and leaves him to
deploy at leisure on the open ground of the domestic hearth.

but he does not. he remains in close order, clouded and depressed.
during the lengthy cleaning up and pattening process, when he and mr.
bagnet are supplied with their pipes, he is no better
 
 ___________________________
 
 than he was at
dinner. he forgets to smoke, looks at the fire and ponders, lets his
pipe out, fills the breast of mr. bagnet with perturbation and dismay
by showing that he has no enjoyment of tobacco.

therefore when mrs. bagnet at last appears, rosy from the
invigorating pail, and sits down to her work, mr. bagnet growls, "old
girl!" and winks monitions to her to find out what's the matter.

"why, george!" says mrs. bagnet, quietly threading her needle. "how
low you are!"

"am i? not good company? well, i am afraid i am not."

"he ain't at all like bluffy, mother!" cries little malta.

"because he ain't well, i think, mother," adds quebec.

"sure that's a bad sign not to be like bluffy, too!" returns the
trooper, kissing the young damsels. "but it's true," with a sigh,
"true, i am afraid. these little ones are always right!"

"george," says mrs. bagnet, working busily, "if i thought you cross
enough to think of a
 
 ___________________________
 
ier's wife--who
could have bitten her tongue off afterwards and ought to have done it
almost--said this morning, i don't know what i shouldn't say to you
now."

"my kind soul of a darling," returns the trooper. "not a morsel of
it."

"because really and truly, george, what i said and meant to say was
that i trusted lignum to you and was sure you'd bring him through it.
and you have brought him through it, noble!"

"thankee, my dear!" says george. "i am glad of your good opinion."

in giving mrs. bagnet's hand, with her work in it, a friendly
shake--for she took her seat beside him--the trooper's attention is
attracted to her face. after looking at it for a little while as she
plies her needle, he looks to young woolwich, sitting on his stool in
the corner, and beckons that fifer to him.

"see there, my boy," says george, very gently smoothing the mother's
hair with his hand, "there's a good loving forehead for you! all
bright with love of you, my boy. a little touched by the sun and the
weath
 
 ___________________________
 
er through following your father about and taking care of you,
but as fresh and wholesome as a ripe apple on a tree."

mr. bagnet's face expresses, so far as in its wooden material lies,
the highest approbation and acquiescence.

"the time will come, my boy," pursues the trooper, "when this hair of
your mother's will be grey, and this forehead all crossed and
re-crossed with wrinkles, and a fine old lady she'll be then. take
care, while you are young, that you can think in those days, 'i never
whitened a hair of her dear head--i never marked a sorrowful line in
her face!' for of all the many things that you can think of w
 
 ___________________________
 
oint, so long as dust and damp and spiders spare him,
with far greater significance than he ever had in mr. tulkinghorn's
time, and with a deadly meaning. for mr. tulkinghorn's time is over
for evermore, and the roman pointed at the murderous hand uplifted
against his life, and pointed helplessly at him, from night to
morning, lying face downward on the floor, shot through the heart.




chapter xlix

dutiful friendship


a great annual occasion has come round in the establishment of mr.
matthew bagnet, otherwise lignum vitae, ex-artilleryman and present
bassoon-player. an occasion of feasting and festival. the celebration
of a birthday in the family.

it is not mr. bagnet's birthday. mr. bagnet merely distinguishes that
epoch in the musical instrument business by kissing the children with
an extra smack before breakfast, smoking an additional pipe after
dinner, and wondering towards evening what his poor old mother is
thinking about it--a subject of infinite speculation, and rendered so
by h
 
 ___________________________
 
is mother having departed this life twenty years. some men rarely
revert to their father, but seem, in the bank-books of their
remembrance, to have transferred all the stock of filial affection
into their mother's name. mr. bagnet is one of these. perhaps his
exalted appreciation of the merits of the old girl causes him usually
to make the noun-substantive "goodness" of the feminine gender.

it is not the birthday of one of the three children. those occasions
are kept with some marks of distinction, but they rarely overleap the
bounds of happy returns and a pudding. on young woolwich's last
birthday, mr. bagnet certainly did, after observing on his growth and
general advancement, proceed, in a moment of profound reflecti
 
 ___________________________
 
two,
"what is your name?" and "who gave you that name?" but there failing
in the exact precision of his memory and substituting for number
three the question "and how do you like that name?" which he
propounded with a sense of its importance, in itself so edifying and
improving as to give it quite an orthodox air. this, however, was a
speciality on that particular birthday, and not a general solemnity.

it is the old girl's birthday, and that is the greatest holiday and
reddest-letter day in mr. bagnet's calendar. the auspicious event is
always commemorated according to certain forms settled and prescribed
by mr. bagnet some years since. mr. bagnet, being deeply convinced
that to have a pair of fowls for dinner is to attain the highest
pitch of imperial luxury, invariably goes forth himself very early in
the morning of this day to buy a pair; he is, as invariably, taken in
by the vendor and installed in the possession of the oldest
inhabitants of any coop in europe. returning with these trium
 
 ___________________________
 
to fail, replying fowls, mr.
bagnet instantly produces his bundle from a place of concealment
amidst general amazement and rejoicing. he further requires that the
old girl shall do nothing all day long but sit in her very best gown
and be served by himself and the young people. as he is not
illustrious for his cookery, this may be supposed to be a matter of
state rather than enjoyment on the old girl's part, but she keeps her
state with all imaginable cheerfulness.

on this present birthday, mr. bagnet has accomplished the usual
preliminaries. he has bought two specimens of poultry, which, if
there be any truth in adages, were certainly not caught with chaff,
to be prepared for the spit; he has amazed and rejoiced the family by
their unlooked-for production; he is himself directing the roasting
of the poultry; and mrs. bagnet, with her wholesome brown fingers
itching to prevent what she sees going wrong, sits in her gown of
ceremony, an honoured guest.

quebec and malta lay the cloth for dinn
 
 ___________________________
 
er, while woolwich, serving,
as beseems him, under his father, keeps the fowls revolving. to these
young scullions mrs. bagnet occasionally imparts a wink, or a shake
of the head, or a crooked face, as they made mistakes.

"at half after one." says mr. bagnet. "to the minute. they'll be
done."

mrs. bagnet, with anguish, beholds one of them at a standstill before
the fire and beginning to burn.

"you shall have a dinner, old girl," says mr. bagnet. "fit for a
queen."

mrs. bagnet shows her white teeth cheerfully, but to the perception
of her son, betrays so much uneasiness of spirit that he is impelled
by the dictates of affection to ask her, with his eyes, what is the
matter, thus standing, with his eyes wide open, more oblivious of the
fowls than before, and not affording the least hope of a return to
consciousness. fortunately his elder sister perceives the cause of
the agitation in mrs. bagnet's breast and with an admonitory poke
recalls him. the stopped fowls going
 
 ___________________________
 
 round again, mrs. bagnet closes
her eyes in the intensity of her relief.

"george will look us up," says mr. bagnet. "at half after four. to
the moment. how many years, old girl. has george looked us up. this
afternoon?"

"ah, lignum, lignum, as many as make an old woman of a young one, i
begin to think. just about that, and no less," returns mrs. bagnet,
laughing and shaking her head.

"old girl," says mr. bagnet, "never mind. you'd be as young as ever
you was. if you wasn't younger. which you are. as everybody knows."

quebec and malta here exclaim, with clapping of hands, that bluffy is
sure to bring mother something, and begin to speculate on what it
will be.

"do you know, lignum," says mrs. bagnet, casting a glance on the
table-cloth, and winking "salt!" at malta with her right eye, and
shaking the pepper away from quebec with her head, "i begin to think
george is in the roving way again.

"george,
 
 ___________________________
 
" returns mr. bagnet, "will never desert. and leave his old
comrade. in the lurch. don't be afraid of it."

"no, lignum. no. i don't say he will. i don't think he will. but if
he could get over this money trouble of his, i believe he would be
off."

mr. bagnet asks why.

"well," returns his wife, considering, "george seems to me to be
getting not a little impatient and restless. i don't say but what
he's as free as ever. of course he must be free or he wouldn't be
george, but he smarts and seems put out."

"he's extra-drilled," says mr. bagnet. "by a lawyer. who would put
the devil out."

"there's something in that," his wife assents; "but so it is,
lignum."

further conversation is prevented, for the time, by the necessity
under which mr. bagnet fin
 
 ___________________________
 
er, which is a little endangered by the dry
humour of the fowls in not yielding any gravy, and also by the made
gravy acquiring no flavour and turning out of a flaxen complexion.
with a similar perverseness, the potatoes crumble off forks in the
process of peeling, upheaving from their centres in every direction,
as if they were subject to earthquakes. the legs of the fowls, too,
are longer than could be desired, and extremely scaly. overcoming
these disadvantages to the best of his ability, mr. bagnet at last
dishes and they sit down at table, mrs. bagnet occupying the guest's
place at his right hand.

it is well for the old girl that she has but one birthday in a year,
for two such indulgences in poultry might be injurious. every kind of
finer tendon and ligament that is in the nature of poultry to possess
is developed in these specimens in the singular form of
guitar-strings. their limbs appear to have struck roots into their
breasts and bodies, as aged trees strike roots into the earth. t
 
 ___________________________
 
heir
legs are so hard as to encourage the idea that they must have devoted
the greater part of their long and arduous lives to pedestrian
exercises and the walking of matches. but mr. bagnet, unconscious of
these little defects, sets his heart on mrs. bagnet eating a most
severe quantity of the delicacies before her; and as that good old
girl would not cause him a moment's disappointment on any day, least
of all on such a day, for any consideration, she imperils her
digestion fearfully. how young woolwich cleans the drum-sticks
without being of ostrich descent, his anxious mother is at a loss to
understand.

the old girl has another trial to undergo after the conclusion of the
repast in sitting in state to see the room cleared, the hearth swept,
an
 
 ___________________________
 
penditure of water, all in excess, while the saturation of the
young ladies themselves is almost too moving a spectacle for mrs.
bagnet to look upon with the calmness proper to her position. at last
the various cleansing processes are triumphantly completed; quebec
and malta appear in fresh attire, smiling and dry; pipes, tobacco,
and something to drink are placed upon the table; and the old girl
enjoys the first peace of mind she ever knows on the day of this
delightful entertainment.

when mr. bagnet takes his usual seat, the hands of the clock are very
near to half-past four; as they mark it accurately, mr. bagnet
announces, "george! military time."

it is george, and he has hearty congratulations for the old girl
(whom he kisses on the great occasion), and for the children, and for
mr. bagnet. "happy returns to all!" says mr. george.

"but, george, old man!" cries mrs. bagnet, looking at him curiously.
"what's come to you?"

"come to me?"

"ah! you are so white, george--for you--and look 
 
 ___________________________
 
so shocked. now
don't he, lignum?"

"george," says mr. bagnet, "tell the old girl. what's the matter."

"i didn't know i looked white," says the trooper, passing his hand
over his brow, "and i didn't know i looked shocked, and i'm sorry i
do. but the truth is, that boy who was taken in at my place died
yesterday afternoon, and it has rather knocked me over."

"poor creetur!" says mrs. bagnet with a mother's pity. "is he gone?
dear, dear!"

"i didn't mean to say anything about it, for it's not birthday talk,
but you have got it out of me, you see, before i sit down. i should
have roused up in a minute," says the trooper, making himself speak
more gaily, "but you're so quick, mrs. bagnet."

"you're right. the old girl," says mr. bagnet. "is as quick. as
powder."

"and what's more, she's the subject of the day, and we'll stick to
her," cries mr. george. "see here, i have brought a lit
 
 ___________________________
 
tle brooch
along with me. it's a poor thing, you know, but it's a keepsake.
that's all the good it is, mrs. bagnet."

mr. george produces his present, which is greeted with admiring
leapings and clappings by the young family, and with a species of
reverential admiration by mr. bagnet. "old girl," says mr. bagnet.
"tell him my opinion of it."

"why, it's a wonder, george!" mrs. bagnet exclaims. "it's the
beautifullest thing that ever was seen!"

"good!" says mr. bagnet. "my opinion."

"it's so pretty, george," cries mrs. bagnet, turning it on all sides
and holding it out at arm's length, "that it seems too choice for
me."

"bad!" says mr. bagnet. "not my opinion."

"but whatever it is, a hundred thousand thanks, old fellow," says
mrs. bagnet, her eyes sparkling with pleasure and her hand stretched
out to him; "and though i have been a crossgrained soldier's wife to
you sometimes, george, we are as strong friends, i am sure, in
reality, as ever can be. now you
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall fasten it on yourself, for
good luck, if you will, george."

the children close up to see it done, and mr. bagnet looks over young
woolwich's head to see it done with an interest so maturely wooden,
yet pleasantly childish, that mrs. bagnet cannot help laughing in her
airy way and saying, "oh, lignum, lignum, what a precious old chap
you are!" but the trooper fails to fasten the brooch. his hand
shakes, he is nervous, and it falls off. "would any one believe
this?" says he, catching it as it drops and looking round. "i am so
out of sorts that i bungle at an easy job like this!"

mrs. bagnet concludes that for such a case there is no remedy like a
pipe, and fastening the brooch herself in a twinkling, causes the
trooper to be induc
 
 ___________________________
 
ted into his usual snug place and the pipes to be
got into action. "if that don't bring you round, george," says she,
"just throw your eye across here at your present now and then, and
the two together must do it."

"you ought to do it of yourself," george answers; "i know that very
well, mrs. bagnet. i'll tell you how, one way and another, the blues
have got to be too many for me. here was this poor lad. 'twas dull
work to see him dying as he did, and not be able to help him."

"what do you mean, george? you did help him. you took him under your
roof."

"i helped him so far, but that's little. i mean, mrs. bagnet, there
he was, dying without ever having been taught much more than to know
his right hand from his left. and he was too far gone to be helped
out of that."

"ah, poor creetur!" s
 
 ___________________________
 
ays mrs. bagnet.

"then," says the trooper, not yet lighting his pipe, and passing his
heavy hand over his hair, "that brought up gridley in a man's mind.
his was a bad case too, in a different way. then the two got mixed up
in a man's mind with a flinty old rascal who had to do with both. and
to think of that rusty carbine, stock and barrel, standing up on end
in his corner, hard, indifferent, taking everything so evenly--it
made flesh and blood tingle, i do assure you."

"my advice to you," returns mrs. bagn
 
 ___________________________
 
et, "is to light your pipe and
tingle that way. it's wholesomer and comfortabler, and better for the
health altogether."

"you're right," says the trooper, "and i'll do it."

so he does it, though still with an indignant gravity that impresses
the young bagnets, and even causes mr. bagnet to defer the ceremony
of drinking mrs. bagnet's health, always given by himself on these
occasions in a speech of exemplary terseness. but the young ladies
having composed what mr. bagnet is in the habit of calling "the
mixtur," and george's pipe being now in a glow, mr. bagnet considers
it his duty to proceed to the toast of the evening. he addresses the
assembled company in the following terms.

"george. woolwich. quebec. malta. this is her birthday. take a day's
march. and you won't find such another. here's towards her!"

the toast having been drunk with enthusiasm, mrs. bagnet returns
thanks in a neat address of corresponding brevity. this model
composition is limited to th
 
 ___________________________
 
e us a kiss, my pets. no occasion to inquire who your
father and mother is. never saw such a likeness in my life!"

mr. bucket, not unwelcome, has sat himself down next to mr. george
and taken quebec and malta on his knees. "you pretty dears," says mr.
bucket, "give us another kiss; it's the only thing i'm greedy in.
lord bless you, how healthy you look! and what may be the ages of
these two, ma'am? i should put 'em down at the figures of about eight
and ten."

"you're very near, sir," says mrs. bagnet.

"i generally am near," returns mr. bucket, "being so fond of
children. a friend of mine has had nineteen of 'em, ma'am, all by one
mother, and she's still as fresh and rosy as the morning. not so much
so as yourself, but, upon my soul, she comes near you! and what do
you call these, my darling?" pursues mr. bucket, pinching malta's
cheeks. "these are peaches, these are. bless your heart! and what do
you think about father? do you think father could recommend a
second-hand wiolinceller of a go
 
 ___________________________
 
od tone for mr. bucket's friend, my
dear? my name's bucket. ain't that a funny name?"

these blandishments have entirely won the family heart. mrs. bagnet
forgets the day to the extent of filling a pipe and a glass for mr.
bucket and waiting upon him hospitably. she would be glad to receive
so pleasant a character under any circumstances, but she tells him
that as a friend of george's she is particularly glad to see him this
evening, for george has not been in his usual spirits.

"not in his usual spirits?" exclaims mr. bucket. "why, i never heard
of such a thing! what's the matter, george? you don't intend to tell
me you've been out of spirits. 
 
 ___________________________
 
what should you be out of spirits for?
you haven't got anything on your mind, you know."

"nothing particular," returns the trooper.

"i should think not," rejoins mr. bucket. "what could you have on
your mind, you know! and have these pets got anything on their minds,
eh? not they, but they'll be upon the minds of some of the young
fellows, some of these days, and make 'em precious low-spirited. i
ain't much of a prophet, but i can tell you that, ma'am."

mrs. bagnet, quite charmed, hopes mr. bucket has a family of his own.

"there, ma'am!" says mr. bucket. "would you believe it? no, i
haven't. my wife and a lodger constitute my family. mrs. bucket is as
fond of children as myself and as wishful to have 'em, but no. so it
is. worldly goods are divided unequally, and man must not repine.
what a very nice backyard, ma'am! any way out of that yard, now?"

there is no way out of that yard.

"ain't there really?" says mr. bucket. "i should have thought there
mig
 
 ___________________________
 
 twice or thrice repeats it
to the pipe he lights, and with a listening face that is particularly
his own. but the sun of his sociality soon recovers from this brief
eclipse and shines again.

"and this is brother, is it, my dears?" says mr. bucket, referring to
quebec and malta for information on the subject of young woolwich.
"and a nice brother he is--half-brother i mean to say. for he's too
old to be your boy, ma'am."

"i can certify at all events that he is not anybody else's," returns
mrs. bagnet, laughing.

"well, you do surprise me! yet he's like you, there's no denying.
lord, he's wonderfully like you! but about what you may call the
brow, you know, there his father comes out!" mr. bucket compares the
faces with one eye shut up, while mr. bagnet smokes in stolid
satisfaction.

this is an opportunity for mrs. bagnet to inform him that the boy is
george's godson.

"george's godson, is he?" rejoins mr. bucket with extreme cordiality.
"i must shake hands over again with george's godson. 
 
 ___________________________
 
godfather and
godson do credit to one another. and what do you intend to make of
him, ma'am? does he show any turn for any musical instrument?"

mr. bagnet suddenly interposes, "plays the fife. beautiful."

"would you believe it, governor," says mr. bucket, struck by the
coincidence, "that when i was a boy i played the fife myself? not in
a scientific way, as i expect he does, but by ear. lord bless you!
'british grenadiers'--there's a tune to warm an englishman up! could
you give us 'british grenadiers,' my fine fellow?"

nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this call
upon young woolwich, who immediately fetches his fife and
 
 ___________________________
 
 performs
the stirring melody, during which performance mr. bucket, much
enlivened, beats time and never fails to come in sharp with the
burden, "british gra-a-anadeers!" in short, he shows so much musical
taste that mr. bagnet actually takes his pipe from his lips to
express his conviction that he is a singer. mr. bucket receives the
harmonious impeachment so modestly, confessing how that he did once
chaunt a little, for the expression of the feelings of his own bosom,
and with no presumptuous idea of entertaining his friends, that he is
asked to sing. not to be behindhand in the sociality of the evening,
he complies and gives them "believe me, if all those endearing young
charms." this ballad, he informs mrs. bagnet
 
 ___________________________
 
s
acquaintance that he solicits the honour of his company on the old
girl's next birthday. if anything can more closely cement and
consolidate the esteem which mr. bucket has formed for the family, it
is the discovery of the nature of the occasion. he drinks to mrs.
bagnet with a warmth approaching to rapture, engages himself for that
day twelvemonth more than thankfully, makes a memorandum of the day
in a large black pocket-book with a girdle to it, and breathes a hope
that mrs. bucket and mrs. bagnet may before then become, in a manner,
sisters. as he says himself, what is public life without private
ties? he is in his humble way a public man, but it is not in that
sphere that he finds happiness. no, it must be sought within the
confines of domestic bliss.

it is natural, under these circumstances, that he, in his turn,
should remember the friend to whom he is indebted for so promising an
acquaintance. and he does. he keeps very close to him. whatever the
subject of the conversation, he kee
 
 ___________________________
 
ts
to walk home with him. he is interested in his very boots and
observes even them attentively as mr. george sits smoking
cross-legged in the chimney-corner.

at length mr. george rises to depart. at the same moment mr. bucket,
with the secret sympathy of friendship, also rises. he dotes upon the
children to the last and remembers the commission he has undertaken
for an absent friend.

"respecting that second-hand wiolinceller, governor--could you
recommend me such a thing?"

"scores," says mr. bagnet.

"i am obliged to you," returns mr. bucket, squeezing his hand.
"you're a friend in need. a good tone, mind you! my friend is a
regular dab at it. ecod, he saws away at mozart and handel and the
rest of the big-wigs like a thorough workman. and you needn't," says
mr. bucket in a considerate and private voice, "you needn't commit
yourself to too low a figure, governor. i don't want to pay too large
a price for my friend, but i want you to have your proper percentage
and be remunerated for your 
 
 ___________________________
 
loss of time. that is but fair. every man
must live, and ought to it."

mr. bagnet shakes his head at the old girl to the effect that they
have found a jewel of price.

"suppose i was to give you a look in, say, at half arter ten
to-morrow morning. perhaps you could name the figures of a few
wiolincellers of a good tone?" says mr. bucket.

nothing easier. mr. and mrs. bagnet both engage to have the requisite
information ready and even hint to each other at the practicability
of having a small stock collected there for approval.

"thank you," says mr. bucket, "thank you. good night, ma'am. good
night, governor. good night, darlings. i am much obliged to you for
one of the pleasantest evenings i ever spent in my life."

they, on the contrary, are much obliged to him for the pleasure he
has given them in his company; and so they part with many expressions
of goodwill 
 
 ___________________________
 
on both sides. "now george, old boy," says mr. bucket,
taking his arm at the shop-door, "come along!" as they go down the
little street and the bagnets pause for a minute looking after them,
mrs. bagnet remarks to the worthy lignum that mr. bucket "almost
clings to george like, and seems to be really fond of him."

the neighbouring streets being narrow and ill-paved, it is a little
inconvenient to walk there two abreast and arm in arm. mr. george
therefore soon proposes to walk singly. but mr. bucket, who cannot
make up his mind to relinquish his friendly hold, replies, "wait half
a minute, george. i should wish to speak to you first." immediately
afterwards, he twists him into a public-house 
 
 ___________________________
 
opened to admit another soldier-looking man of less
prepossessing appearance at first sight and a weather-tanned,
bright-eyed wholesome woman with a basket, who, from her entrance,
had been exceedingly attentive to all mr. george had said. mr. george
had received them with a familiar nod and a friendly look, but
without any more particular greeting in the midst of his address. he
now shook them cordially by the hand and said, "miss summerson and
gentlemen, this is an old comrade of mine, matthew bagnet. and this
is his wife, mrs. bagnet."

mr. bagnet made us a stiff military bow, and mrs. bagnet dropped us a
curtsy.

"real good friends of mine, they are," sald mr. george. "it was at
their house i was taken."

"with a second-hand wiolinceller," mr. bagnet put in, twitching his
head angrily. "of a good tone. for a friend. that money was no object
to."

"mat," said mr. george, "you have heard pretty well all i have been
saying to this lady and these two gentlemen. i know it meets your
approval?"
 
 ___________________________
 


mr. bagnet, after considering, referred the point to his wife. "old
girl," said he. "tell him. whether or not. it meets my approval."

"why, george," exclaimed mrs. bagnet, who had been unpacking her
basket, in which there was a piece of cold pickled pork, a little tea
and sugar, and a brown loaf, "you ought to know it don't. you ought
to know it's enough to drive a person wild to hear you. you won't be
got off this way, and you won't be got off that way--what do you mean
by such picking and choosing? it's stuff and nonsense, george."

"don't be severe upon me in my misfortunes, mrs. bagnet," said the
trooper lightly.

"oh! bother your misfortunes," cried mrs. ba
 
 ___________________________
 
gnet, "if they don't make
you more reasonable than that comes to. i never was so ashamed in my
life to hear a man talk folly as i have been to hear you talk this
day to the present company. lawyers? why, what but too many cooks
should hinder you from having a dozen lawyers if the gentleman
recommended them to you."

"this is a very sensible woman," said my guardian. "i hope you will
persuade him, mrs. bagnet."

"persuade him, sir?" she returned. "lord bless you, no. you don't
know george. now, there!" mrs. bagnet left her basket to point him
out with both her bare brown hands. "there he stands! as self-willed
and as determined a man, in the wrong way, as ever put a human
creature under heaven out of patience! you could as soon take up and
shoulder an eight and forty pounder by your own strength as turn that
man when he has got a thing into his head and fixed it there. why,
don't i know him!" cried 
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. bagnet. "don't i know you, george! you
don't mean to set up for a new character with me after all these
years, i hope?"

her friendly indignation had an exemplary effect upon her husband,
who shook his head at the trooper several times as a silent
recommendation to him to yield. between whiles, mrs. bagnet looked at
me; and i understood from the play of her eyes that she wished me to
do something, though i did not comprehend what.

"but i have given up talking to you, old fellow, years and years,"
said mrs. bagnet as she blew a little dust off the pickled pork,
looking at me again; "and when ladies and gentlemen know you as well
as i do, they'll give up talking to you too. if you are not too
headstrong to accept of a bit of dinner, here it is."

"i accept it with many thanks," returned the troope
 
 ___________________________
 
r.

"do you though, indeed?" said mrs. bagnet, continuing to grumble on
good-humouredly. "i'm sure i'm surprised at that. i wonder you don't
starve in your own way also. it would only be like you. perhaps
you'll set your mind upon that next." here she again looked at me,
and i now perceived from her glances at the door and at me, by turns,
that she wished us to retire and to await her following us outside
the prison. communicating this by similar means to my guardian and
mr. woodcourt, i rose.

"we hope you will think better of it, mr. geo
 
 ___________________________
 
e and define the feelings that arose in me after
this; it is enough that the vague duty and obligation i had felt upon
me from the first of following the investigation was, without my
distinctly daring to ask myself any question, increased, and that i
was indignantly sure of there being no possibility of a reason for my
being afraid.

we three went out of the prison and walked up and down at some short
distance from the gate, which was in a retired place. we had not
waited long when mr. and mrs. bagnet came out too and quickly joined
us.

there was a tear in each of mrs. bagnet's eyes, and her face was
flushed and hurried. "i didn't let george see what i thought about
it, you know, miss," was her first remark when she came up, "but he's
in a bad way, poor old fellow!"

"not with care and prudence and good help," said my guardian.

"a gentleman like you ought to know best, sir," returned mrs. bagnet,
hurriedly drying her eyes on the hem of her grey cloak, "but i am
uneasy for him. he has been 
 
 ___________________________
 
so careless and said so much that he
never meant. the gentlemen of the juries might not understand him as
lignum and me do. and then such a number of circumstances have
happened bad for him, and such a number of people will be brought
forward to speak against him, and bucket is so deep."

"with a second-hand wiolinceller. and said he played the fife. when a
boy," mr. bagnet added with great solemnity.

"now, i tell you, miss," said mrs. bagnet; "and when i say miss, i
mean all! just come into the corner of the wall and i'll tell you!"

mrs. bagnet hurried us into a more secluded place and was at first
too breathless to proceed, occasioning mr. bagnet to say, "old girl!
tell 'em!"

"why, then, miss," the old girl proceeded, untying the strings of her
bonnet for more air, "you could as soon move dover castle as move
george on this point unless you had got a new power to move him with.
and i have got it!"

"you are a jewel of a woman," 
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, i tell you, miss," she proceeded, clapping her hands in her
hurry and agitation a dozen times in every sentence, "that what he
says concerning no relations is all bosh. they don't know of him, but
he does know of them. he has said more to me at odd times than to
anybody else, and it warn't for nothing that he once spoke to my
woolwich about whitening and wrinkling mothers' heads. for fifty
pounds he had seen his mother that day. she's alive and must be
brought here straight!"

instantly mrs. bagnet put some pins into her mouth and began pinning
up her skirts all round a little higher than the level of her grey
cloak, which she accomplished with surpassing dispatch and dexterity.

"lignum," said mrs. bagnet, "you take care of the children, old man,
and give me the umbrella! i'm away to lincolnshire to bring that old
lady here."

"but, bless the woman," cried my guardian with his hand in his
pocket, "how is she going? what money has she got?"

mrs. bagnet made another application to her ski
 
 ___________________________
 
stily counted over a few shillings
and which she then shut up with perfect satisfaction.

"never you mind for me, miss. i'm a soldier's wife and accustomed to
travel my own way. lignum, old boy," kissing him, "one for yourself,
three for the children. now i'm away into lincolnshire after george's
mother!"

and she actually set off while we three stood looking at one another
lost in amazement. she actually trudged away in her grey cloak at a
sturdy pace, and turned the corner, and was gone.

"mr. bagnet," said my guardian. "do you mean to let her go in that
way?"

"can't help it," he returned. "made her way home once from another
quarter of the world. with the same grey cloak. and same umbrella.
whatever the old girl says, do. do it! whenever the old girl says,
i'll do it. she does it."

"then she is as honest and genuine as she looks," rejoined my
guardian, "and it is impossible to say more for her."

"she's colour-sergeant of the nonpareil battalion," said mr. bagnet,
looking at us over his 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to their union; fragments of embankments are thrown up
and left as precipices with torrents of rusty carts and barrows
tumbling over them; tripods of tall poles appear on hilltops, where
there are rumours of tunnels; everything looks chaotic and abandoned
in full hopelessness. along the freezing roads, and through the
night, the post-chaise makes its way without a railroad on its mind.

mrs. rouncewell, so many years housekeeper at chesney wold, sits
within the chaise; and by her side sits mrs. bagnet with her grey
cloak and umbrella. the old girl would prefer the bar in front, as
being exposed to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in
accordance with her usual course of travelling, but mrs. rouncewell
is too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of her proposing it. the
old lady cannot make enough of the old girl. she sits, in her stately
manner, holding her hand, and regardless of its roughness, puts it
often to her lips. "you are a mother, my dear soul," says she many
times, "and 
 
 ___________________________
 
you found out my george's mother!"

"why, george," returns mrs. bagnet, "was always free with me, ma'am,
and when he said at our house to my woolwich that of all the things
my woolwich could have to think of when he grew to be a man, the
comfortablest would be that he had never brought a sorrowful line
into his mother's face or turned a hair of her head grey, then i felt
sure, from his way, that something fresh had brought his own mother
into his mind. i had often known him say to me, in past times, that
he had behaved bad to her."

"never, my dear!" returns mrs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
n a tremble, what a likely lad, what a fine lad, what a gay
good-humoured clever lad he was; how they all took to him down at
chesney wold; how sir leicester took to him when he was a young
gentleman; how the dogs took to him; how even the people who had been
angry with him forgave him the moment he was gone, poor boy. and now
to see him after all, and in a prison too! and the broad stomacher
heaves, and the quaint upright old-fashioned figure bends under its
load of affectionate distress.

mrs. bagnet, with the instinctive skill of a good warm heart, leaves
the old housekeeper to her emotions for a little while--not without
passing the back of her hand across her own motherly eyes--and
presently chirps up in her cheery manner, "so i says to george when i
goes to call him in to tea (he pretended to be smoking his pipe
outside), 'what ails you this afternoon, george, for gracious sake? i
have seen all sorts, and i have seen you pretty often in season and
out of season, abroad and at home, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
i never see you so melancholy
penitent.' 'why, mrs. bagnet,' says george, 'it's because i am
melancholy and penitent both, this afternoon, that you see me so.'
'what have you done, old fellow?' i says. 'why, mrs. bagnet,' says
george, shaking his head, 'what i have done has been done this many a
long year, and is best not tried to be undone now. if i ever get to
heaven it won't be for being a good son to a widowed mother; i say no
more.' now, ma'am, when george says to me that it's best not tried to
be undone now, i have my thoughts as i have often had before, and i
draw it out of george how he comes to have such things on him that
afternoon. then george tells me that he has seen by chance, at the
lawyer's off
 
 ___________________________
 
d lady till he quite forgets
himself and paints her picture to me as she used to be, years upon
years back. so i says to george when he has done, who is this old
lady he has seen? and george tells me it's mrs. rouncewell,
housekeeper for more than half a century to the dedlock family down
at chesney wold in lincolnshire. george has frequently told me before
that he's a lincolnshire man, and i says to my old lignum that night,
'lignum, that's his mother for five and for-ty pound!'"

all this mrs. bagnet now relates for the twentieth time at least
within the last four hours. trilling it out like a kind of bird, with
a pretty high note, that it may be audible to the old lady above the
hum of the wheels.

"bless you, and thank you," says mrs. rouncewell. "bless you, and
thank you, my worthy soul!"

"dear heart!" cries mrs. bagnet in the most natural manner. "no
thanks to me, i am sure. thanks to yourself, ma'am, for being so
ready to pay 'em! and mind once more, ma'am, what you had best do
on fin
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. rouncewell, "all the help that can be got
for him in the world, my dear. i will spend all i have, and
thankfully, to procure it. sir leicester will do his best, the whole
family will do their best. i--i know something, my dear; and will
make my own appeal, as his mother parted from him all these years,
and finding him in a jail at last."

the extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper's manner in saying
this, her broken words, and her wringing of her hands make a powerful
impression on mrs. bagnet and would astonish her but that she refers
them all to her sorrow for her son's condition. and yet mrs. bagnet
wonders too why mrs. rouncewell should murmur so distractedly, "my
lady, my lady, my lady!" over and over again.

the frosty night wears away, and the dawn breaks, and the post-chaise
comes rolling on through the early mist like the ghost of a chaise
departed. it has plenty of spectral company in ghosts of trees and
hedges, slowly vanishing and giving place to the realities of day.
lon
 
 ___________________________
 
don reached, the travellers alight, the old housekeeper in great
tribulation and confusion, mrs. bagnet quite fresh and collected--as
she would be if her next point, with no new equipage and outfit, were
the cape of good hope, the island of ascension, hong kong, or any
other military station.

but when they set out for the prison where the trooper is
confined, the old lady has managed to draw about her, with her
lavender-coloured dress, much of the staid calmness which is its
usual accompaniment. a wonderfully grave, precise, and handsome piece
of old china she looks, though her heart beats fast 
 
 ___________________________
 
brance of this wayward son has
ruffled it these many years.

approaching the cell, they find the door opening and a warder in the
act of coming out. the old girl promptly makes a sign of entreaty to
him to say nothing; assenting with a nod, he suffers them to enter as
he shuts the door.

so george, who is writing at his table, supposing himself to be
alone, does not raise his eyes, but remains absorbed. the old
housekeeper looks at him, and those wandering hands of hers are quite
enough for mrs. bagnet's confirmation, even if she could see the
mother and the son together, knowing what she knows, and doubt their
relationship.

not a rustle of the housekeeper's dress, not a gesture, not a word
betrays her. she stands looking at him as he writes on, all
unconscious, and only her fluttering hands give utterance to her
emotions. but they are very eloquent, very, very eloquent. mrs.
bagnet understands them. they speak of gratitude, of joy, of grief,
of hope; of inextinguishable affection, cherished
 
 ___________________________
 
 with no return
since this stalwart man was a stripling; of a better son loved less,
and this son loved so fondly and so proudly; and they speak in such
touching language that mrs. bagnet's eyes brim up with tears and they
run glistening down her sun-brown face.

"george rouncewell! oh, my dear child, turn and look at me!"

the trooper starts up, clasps his mother round the neck, and falls
down on his knees before her. whether in a late repentance, whether
in the first association that comes back upon him, he puts his hands
together as a child does when it says its prayers, and raising them
towards her breast, bows down his head, and cries.

"my george, my dearest son! always my
 
 ___________________________
 
er
failing, after the administration of each of these remonstrances, to
resort to the whitened wall and the grey cloak again.

"this was the way i brought myself to think, mother, that my best
amends was to lie upon that bed i had made, and die upon it. and i
should have done it (though i have been to see you more than once
down at chesney wold, when you little thought of me) but for my old
comrade's wife here, who i find has been too many for me. but i thank
her for it. i thank you for it, mrs. bagnet, with all my heart and
might."

to which mrs. bagnet responds with two pokes.

and now the old lady impresses upon her son george, her own dear
recovered boy, her joy and pride, the light of her eyes, the happy
close of her life, and every fond name she can think of, that he must
be governed by the best advice obtainable by money and influence,
that he must yield up his case to the greatest lawyers that can be
got, that he must act in this serious plight as he shall be advised
to act and must n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot be self-willed, however right, but must promise
to think only of his poor old mother's anxiety and suffering until he
is released, or he will break her heart.

"mother, 'tis little enough to consent to," returns the trooper,
stopping her with a kiss; "tell me what i shall do, and i'll make a
late beginning and do it. mrs. bagnet, you'll take care of my mother,
i know?"

a very hard poke from the old girl's umbrella.

"if you'll bring her acquainted with mr. jarndyce and miss summerson,
she will find them of her way of thinking, and they will give her the
best advice and assistance."

"and, george," says the old lady, "we must send with all haste for
your brother. he is a sensible sound man as they tell me--out in the
world beyond chesney wold, my dear, though i don't know much of it
myself--and will be of great service
 
 ___________________________
 
 of all men."

"but not always, dear george?"

"why, mother, perhaps not for good and all--though i may come to ask
that too--but keep it now, i do entreat you. if it's ever broke to
him that his rip of a brother has turned up, i could wish," says the
trooper, shaking his head very doubtfully, "to break it myself and be
governed as to advancing or retreating by the way in which he seems
to take it."

as he evidently has a rooted feeling on this point, and as the depth
of it is recognized in mrs. bagnet's face, his mother yields her
implicit assent to what he asks. for this he thanks her kindly.

"in all other respects, my dear mother, i'll be as tractable and
obedient as you can wish; on this one alone, i stand out. so now i am
ready even for the lawyers. i have been drawing up," he glances at
his writing on the table, "an exact account of what i knew of the
deceased and how i came to be involved in this unfortunate affair.
it's entered, plain and regular, like an orderly-book; not a word in

 
 ___________________________
 
it but what's wanted for the facts. i did intend to read it, straight
on end, whensoever i was called upon to say anything in my defence. i
hope i may be let to do it still; but i have no longer a will of my
own in this case, and whatever is said or done, i give my promise not
to have any."

matters being brought to this so far satisfactory pass, and time
being on the wane, mrs. bagnet proposes a departure. again and again
the old lady hangs upon her son's neck, and again and again the
trooper holds her to his broad chest.

"where are you going to take my mother, mrs. bagnet?"

"i am going to the town house, my dear, the family house. i have some
business there that must be looked to directly," mrs. rouncewell
answers.

"will you see my mother safe there in a coach, mrs. bagnet? but of
course i know you will. why should i ask it!"

why indeed, mrs. bagnet expresses with the u
 
 ___________________________
 
mbrella.

"take her, my old friend, and take my gratitude along with you.
kisses to quebec and malta, love to my godson, a hearty shake of the
hand to lignum, and this for yourself, and i wish it was ten thousand
pound in gold, my dear!" so saying, the trooper puts his lips to the
old girl's tanned forehead, and the door shuts upon him in his cell.

no entreaties on the part of the good old housekeeper will induce
mrs. bagnet to retain the coach for her own conveyance home. jumping
out cheerfully at the door of the dedlock mansion and handing mrs.
rouncewell up the steps, the old girl shakes hands and trudges off,
arriving soon afterwards in the bosom of the bagnet family and
falling to washing the greens as if nothing had happened.

my lady is in that room in which she held her last conference with
the murdered man, and is sitting where she sat that night, and is
looking at the spot where he stood upon the hearth s