oldier who had gone over to the enemy.

"he is quite happy?" says she.

"quite."

"i am thankful! so he has brought you up to follow in his ways and
has sent you into foreign countries and the like? well, he knows
best. there may be a world beyond chesney wold that i don't
understand. though i am not young, either. and i have seen a quantity
of good company too!"

"grandmother," says the young man, changing the subject, "what a very
pretty girl that was i found with you just now. you called her rosa?"

"yes, child. she is daughter of a widow in the village. maids are so
hard to teach, now-a-days, that i have put her about me young. she's
an apt scholar and will do well. she shows the house already, very
pretty. she lives with me at my table here."

"i hope i have not driven her away?"

"she supposes we have family affairs to speak about, i dare say. she
is very modest. it is a fine quality in a young woman. and scarcer,"
says mrs. rouncewell, expanding her stomacher to its utmost limits,
"
 
 ___________________________
 
ad in acknowledgment of the precepts of
experience. mrs. rouncewell listens.

"wheels!" says she. they have long been audible to the younger ears
of her companion. "what wheels on such a day as this, for gracious
sake?"

after a short interval, a tap at the door. "come in!" a dark-eyed,
dark-haired, shy, village beauty comes in--so fresh in her rosy and
yet delicate bloom that the drops of rain which have beaten on her
hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gathered.

"what company is this, rosa?" says mrs. rouncewell.

"it's two young men in a gig, ma'am, who want to see the house--yes,
and if you please, i told them so!" in quick reply to a gesture of
dissent from the housekeeper. "i went to the hall-door and told them
it was the wrong day and the wrong hour, but the young man who was
driving took off his hat in the wet and begged me to bring this card
to you."

"read it, my dear watt," says the housekeeper.

rosa is so shy as she gives it to him that they drop it between them
and al
 
 ___________________________
 
most knock their foreheads together as they pick it up. rosa is
shyer than before.

"mr. guppy" is all the information the card yields.

"guppy!" repeats mrs. rouncewell, "mr. guppy! nonsense, i never heard
of him!"

"if you please, he told me that!" says rosa. "but he said that he and
the other young gentleman came from london only last night by the
mail, on business at the magistrates' meeting, ten miles off, this
morning, and that as their business was soon over, and they had heard
a great deal said of chesney wold, and really didn't know what to do
with themselves, they had come through the wet to see it. they are
lawyers. he says he is not in mr. tulkinghorn's office, but he is
sure he may make use of mr. tulkinghorn's name if necessary."
findin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, now she leaves off, that she has been making quite a long
speech, rosa is shyer than ever.

now, mr. tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place,
and besides, is supposed to have made mrs. rouncewell's will. the old
lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,
and dismisses rosa. the grandson, however, being smitten by a sudden
wish to see the house himself, proposes to join the party. the
grandmother, who is pleased that he should have that interest,
accompanies him--though to do him justice, he is exceedingly
unwilling to trouble her.

"much obliged to you, ma'am!" says mr. guppy, divesting himself of
his wet dreadnought in the hall. "us london lawyers don't often get
an out, and when we do, we like to make the most of it, you know."

the old housekeeper, with a grac
 
 ___________________________
 
ious severity of deportment, waves
her hand towards the great staircase. mr. guppy and his friend follow
rosa; mrs. rouncewell and her grandson follow them; a young gardener
goes before to open the shutters.

as is usually the case with people who go over houses, mr. guppy and
his friend are dead beat before they have well begun. they straggle
about in wrong places, look at wrong things, don't care for the right
things, gape when more rooms are opened, exhibit profound depression
of spirits, and are clearly knocked up. in each successive chamber
that they enter, mrs. rouncewell, who is as upright as th
 
 ___________________________
 
e house
itself, rests apart in a window-seat or other such nook and listens
with stately approval to rosa's exposition. her grandson is so
attentive to it that rosa is shyer than ever--and prettier. thus they
pass on from room to room, raising the pictured dedlocks for a few
brief minutes as the young gardener admits the light, and
reconsigning them to their graves as he shuts it out again. it
appears to the afflicted mr. guppy and his inconsolable friend that
there is no end to the dedlocks, whose family greatness seems to
consist in their never having done anything to distinguish themselves
for seven hundred years.

even the long drawing-room of chesney 
 
 ___________________________
 
wold cannot revive mr. guppy's
spirits. he is so low that he droops on the threshold and has hardly
strength of mind to enter. but a portrait over the chimney-piece,
painted by the fashionable artist of the day, acts upon him like a
charm. he recovers in a moment. he stares at it with uncommon
interest; he seems to be fixed and fascinated by it.

"dear me!" says mr. guppy. "who's that?"

"the picture over the fire-place," says rosa, "is the portrait of the
present lady dedlock. it is considered a perfect likeness, and the
best work of the master."

"blest," says mr. guppy, staring in a kind of dismay at his friend,
"if i can ever have seen her. yet i know her! has the picture been
engraved, miss?"

"the picture has never been engraved. sir leicester has always
refused permission."

"well!" says mr. guppy in a low voice. "i'll be shot if it ain't very
curious how well i know that picture! so that's lady dedlock, is it!"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
even houses that people take infinite pains
to see and are tired of before they begin to see them. he has come to
the end of the sight, and the fresh village beauty to the end of her
description; which is always this: "the terrace below is much
admired. it is called, from an old story in the family, the ghost's
walk."

"no?" says mr. guppy, greedily curious. "what's the story, miss? is
it anything about a picture?"

"pray tell us the story," says watt in a half whisper.

"i don't know it, sir." rosa is shyer than ever.

"it is not related to visitors; it is almost forgotten," says the
housekeeper, advancing. "it has never been more than a family
anecdote."

"you'll excuse my asking again if it has anything to do with a
picture, ma'am," observes mr. guppy, "because i do assure you that
the more i think of that picture the better i know it, without
knowing how i know it!"

the story has nothing to do with a picture; the housekeeper can
guarantee that. mr. guppy is obliged to her for the info
 
 ___________________________
 
 martyr. but it is supposed that
his lady, who had none of the family blood in her veins, favoured the
bad cause. it is said that she had relations among king charles's
enemies, that she was in correspondence with them, and that she gave
them information. when any of the country gentlemen who followed his
majesty's cause met here, it is said that my lady was always nearer
to the door of their council-room than they supposed. do you hear a
sound like a footstep passing along the terrace, watt?"

rosa draws nearer to the housekeeper.

"i hear the rain-drip on the stones," replies the young man, "and i
hear a curious echo--i suppose an echo--which is very like a halting
step."

the housekeeper gravely nods and continues: "partly on account of
this division between them, and partly on other accounts, sir morbury
and his lady led a troubled life. she was a lady of a haughty temper.
they were not well suited to each other in age or character, and they
had no children to moderate between them. af
 
 ___________________________
 
ad never, on any persuasion, opened her lips since that night),
standing at the great south window, saw her drop upon the pavement.
he hastened down to raise her, but she repulsed him as he bent over
her, and looking at him fixedly and coldly, said, 'i will die here
where i have walked. and i will walk here, though i am in my grave. i
will walk here until the pride of this house is humbled. and when
calamity or when disgrace is coming to it, let the dedlocks listen
for my step!'"

watt looks at rosa. rosa in the deepening gloom looks down upon the
ground, half frightened and half shy.

"there and then she died. and from those days," says mrs. rouncewell,
"the name has come down--the ghost's walk. if the tread is an echo,
it is an echo that is only heard after dark, and is often unheard for
a long while together. but it comes back from time to time; and so
sure as there is sickness or death in the family, it will be heard
then."

"and disgrace, grandmother--" says watt.

"disgrace never com
 
 ___________________________
 
l soon do that.

mrs. rouncewell is in attendance and receives sir leicester's
customary shake of the hand with a profound curtsy.

"how do you do, mrs. rouncewell? i am glad to see you."

"i hope i have the honour of welcoming you in good health, sir
leicester?"

"in excellent health, mrs. rouncewell."

"my lady is looking charmingly well," says mrs. rouncewell with
another curtsy.

my lady signifies, without profuse expenditure of words, that she is
as wearily well as she can hope to be.

but rosa is in the distance, behind the housekeeper; and my lady, who
has not subdued the quickness of her observation, whatever else she
may have conquered, asks, "who is that girl?"

"a young scholar of mine, my lady. rosa."

"come here, rosa!" lady dedlock beckons her, with even an appearance
of interest. "why, do you know how pretty you are, child?" she says,
touching her shoulder with her two forefingers.

rosa, very much abashed, says, "no, if you please, my lady!" and
glances up, and glances down
 
 ___________________________
 
" repeats my lady thoughtfully. "take care they don't spoil
you by flattery."

"yes, my lady."

my lady taps her dimpled cheek with the same delicate gloved fingers
and goes on to the foot of the oak staircase, where sir leicester
pauses for her as her knightly escort. a staring old dedlock in a
panel, as large as life and as dull, looks as if he didn't know what
to make of it, which was probably his general state of mind in the
days of queen elizabeth.

that evening, in the housekeeper's room, rosa can do nothing but
murmur lady dedlock's praises. she is so affable, so graceful, so
beautiful, so elegant; has such a sweet voice and such a thrilling
touch that rosa can feel it yet! mrs. rouncewell confirms all this,
not without personal pride, reserving only the one point of
affability. mrs. rouncewell is not quite sure as to that. heaven
forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of
that excellent family, above all, of my lady, whom the whole world
admires; but if my 
 
 ___________________________
 
 not fit subjects for
joking."

"sir leicester is no joke by any means," says watt, "and i humbly ask
his pardon. i suppose, grandmother, that even with the family and
their guests down here, there is no objection to my prolonging my
stay at the dedlock arms for a day or two, as any other traveller
might?"

"surely, none in the world, child."

"i am glad of that," says watt, "because i have an inexpressible
desire to extend my knowledge of this beautiful neighbourhood."

he happens to glance at rosa, who looks down and is very shy indeed.
but according to the old superstition, it should be rosa's ears that
burn, and not her fresh bright cheeks, for my lady's maid is holding
forth about her at this moment with surpassing energy.

my lady's maid is a frenchwoman of two and thirty, from somewhere in
the southern country about avignon and marseilles, a large-eyed brown
woman with black hair who would be handsome but for a certain feline
mouth and general uncomfortable tightness of face, render
 
 ___________________________
 
es without turning her head which could
be pleasantly dispensed with, especially when she is in an ill humour
and near knives. through all the good taste of her dress and little
adornments, these objections so express themselves that she seems to
go about like a very neat she-wolf imperfectly tamed. besides being
accomplished in all the knowledge appertaining to her post, she is
almost an englishwoman in her acquaintance with the language;
consequently, she is in no want of words to shower upon rosa for
having attracted my lady's attention, and she pours them out with
such grim ridicule as she sits at dinner that her companion, the
affectionate man, is rather relieved when she arrives at the spoon
stage of that performance.

ha, ha, ha! she, hortense, been in my lady's service since five years
and always kept at the distance, and this doll, this puppet,
caressed--absolutely caressed--by my lady on the moment of her
arriving at the house! ha, ha, ha! "and do you know how pretty you
are, chi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng genuine.

the mercury in powder is in no want of society to-night, for my lady
goes to a grand dinner and three or four balls. sir leicester is
fidgety down at chesney wold, with no better company than the gout;
he complains to mrs. rouncewell that the rain makes such a monotonous
pattering on the terrace that he can't read the paper even by the
fireside in his own snug dressing-room.

"sir leicester would have done better to try the other side of the
house, my dear," says mrs. rouncewell to rosa. "his dressing-room is
on my lady's side. and in all these years i never heard the step upon
the ghost's walk more distinct than it is to-night!"




chapter xvii

esther's narrative


richard very often came to see us while we remained in london (though
he soon failed in his letter-writing), and with his quick abilities,
his good spirits, his good temper, his gaiety and freshness, was
always delightful. but though i liked him more and more the better i
knew him, i still felt more and more how 
 
 ___________________________
 
spanish language, she retired to bath, where she lives slenderly on
an annual present from sir leicester and whence she makes occasional
resurrections in the country houses of her cousins. she has an
extensive acquaintance at bath among appalling old gentlemen with
thin legs and nankeen trousers, and is of high standing in that
dreary city. but she is a little dreaded elsewhere in consequence of
an indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in an
obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird's-eggs.

in any country in a wholesome state, volumnia would be a clear case
for the pension list. efforts have been made to get her on it, and
when william buffy came in, it was fully expected that her name would
be put down for a couple of hundred a year. but william buffy somehow
discovered, contrary to all expectation, that these were not the
times when it could be done, and this was the first clear indication
sir leicester dedlock had conveyed to him that the country was g
 
 ___________________________
 
 protegee of my lady's," observes sir leicester.

"i thought so. i felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked
that girl out. she really is a marvel. a dolly sort of beauty
perhaps," says miss volumnia, reserving her own sort, "but in its
way, perfect; such bloom i never saw!"

sir leicester, with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the
rouge, appears to say so too.

"indeed," remarks my lady languidly, "if there is any uncommon eye in
the case, it is mrs. rouncewell's, and not mine. rosa is her
discovery."

"your maid, i suppose?"

"no. my anything; pet--secretary--messenger--i don't know what."

"you like to have her about you, as you would like to have a flower,
or a bird, or a picture, or a poodle--no, not a poodle, though--or
anything else that was equally pretty?" says volumnia, sympathizing.
"yes, how charming now! and how well that delightful old soul mrs.
rouncewell is looking. she must be an immense age, and yet she is as
active and handsome! she is the dearest friend 
 
 ___________________________
 
ep in the
fern and leaves of a hundred years; and where the sun-dial on the
terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time which was as much
the property of every dedlock--while he lasted--as the house and
lands. sir leicester sits down in an easy-chair, opposing his repose
and that of chesney wold to the restless flights of ironmasters.

"lady dedlock has been so kind," proceeds mr. rouncewell with a
respectful glance and a bow that way, "as to place near her a young
beauty of the name of rosa. now, my son has fallen in love with rosa
and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and to
their becoming engaged if she will take him--which i suppose she
will. i have never seen rosa until to-day, but i have some confidence
in my son's good sense--even in love. i find her what he represents
her, to the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks of her with
great commendation."

"she in all respects deserves it," says my lady.

"i am happy, lady dedlock, that you say so, and i n
 
 ___________________________
 
eed not comment on
the value to me of your kind opinion of her."

"that," observes sir leicester with unspeakable grandeur, for he
thinks the ironmaster a little too glib, "must be quite unnecessary."

"quite unnecessary, sir leicester. now, my son is a very young man,
and rosa is a very young woman. as i made my way, so my son must make
his; and his being married at present is out of the question. but
supposing i gave my consent to his engaging himself to this pretty
girl, if this pretty girl will engage herself to him, i think it a
piece of candour to say at once--i am sure, sir leicester and lady
dedlock, you will understand and excuse me--i should make it a
condition that she did not remain at chesney wold. therefore, before
communicating further with my son, i ta
 
 ___________________________
 
self to offer you the hospitality of chesney wold, for to-night at
least."

"i hope so," adds my lady.

"i am much obliged to you, but i have to travel all night in order to
reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed time
in the morning."

therewith the ironmaster takes his departure, sir leicester ringing
the bell and my lady rising as he leaves the room.

when my lady goes to her boudoir, she sits down thoughtfully by the
fire, and inattentive to the ghost's walk, looks at rosa, writing in
an inner room. presently my lady calls her.

"come to me, child. tell me the truth. are you in love?"

"oh! my lady!"

my lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling,
"who is it? is it mrs. rouncewell's grandson?"

"yes, if you please, my lady. but i don't know that i am in love with
him--yet."

"yet, you silly little thing! do you know that he loves you, yet?"

"i think he likes me a little, my lady." and rosa bursts into tears.

is this lady dedlock standing besi
 
 ___________________________
 
de the village beauty, smoothing
her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so
full of musing interest? aye, indeed it is!

"listen to me, child. you are young and true, and i believe you are
attached to me."

"indeed i am, my lady. indeed there is nothing in the world i
wouldn't do to show how much."

"and i don't think you would wish to leave me just yet, rosa, even
for a lover?"

"no, my lady! oh, no!" rosa looks up for the first time, quite
frightened at the thought.

"confide in me, my child. don't fear me. i wish you to be happy, and
will make you so--if i can make anybody happy on this earth."

rosa, with fresh tears, kneels at her feet and kisses her hand. my
lady takes the hand with which she has caught it, and standing with
her eyes fixed on the fire, puts it about and about between her own
two hands, and gradually lets it fall. seeing her so absorbed, rosa
softly withdraws; but still my la
 
 ___________________________
 
nd note in every pocket--ruled account-book in his
hand--say, upon the whole, resembling a tax-gatherer. our dear
richard, sanguine, ardent, overleaping obstacles, bursting with
poetry like a young bud, says to this highly respectable companion,
'i see a golden prospect before me; it's very bright, it's very
beautiful, it's very joyous; here i go, bounding over the landscape
to come at it!' the respectable companion instantly knocks him down
with the ruled account-book; tells him in a literal, prosaic way that
he sees no such thing; shows him it's nothing but fees, fraud,
horsehair wigs, and black gowns. now you know that's a painful
change--sensible in the last degree, i have no doubt, but
disagreeable. i can't do it. i haven't got the ruled account-book, i
have none of the tax-gathering elements in my composition, i am not
at all respectable, and i don't want to be. odd perhaps, but so it
is!"

it was idle to say more, so i proposed that we should join ada and
richard, who were a little 
 
 ___________________________
 
reat world, afternoon according to the little
sun. the mercuries, exhausted by looking out of window, are reposing
in the hall and hang their heavy heads, the gorgeous creatures, like
overblown sunflowers. like them, too, they seem to run to a deal of
seed in their tags and trimmings. sir leicester, in the library, has
fallen asleep for the good of the country over the report of a
parliamentary committee. my lady sits in the room in which she gave
audience to the young man of the name of guppy. rosa is with her and
has been writing for her and reading to her. rosa is now at work upon
embroidery or some such pretty thing, and as she bends her head over
it, my lady watches her in silence. not for the first time to-day.

"rosa."

the pretty village face looks brightly up. then, seeing how serious
my lady is, looks puzzled and surprised.

"see to the door. is it shut?"

yes. she goes to it and returns, and looks yet more surprised.

"i am about to place confidence in you, child, for i know i m
 
 ___________________________
 
ay trust
your attachment, if not your judgment. in what i am going to do, i
will not disguise myself to you at least. but i confide in you. say
nothing to any one of what passes between us."

the timid little beauty promises in all earnestness to be
trustworthy.

"do you know," lady dedlock asks her, signing to her to bring her
chair nearer, "do you know, rosa, that i am different to you from
what i am to any one?"

"yes, my lady. much kinder. but then i often think i know you as you
really are."

"you often think you know me as i really am? poor child, poor child!"

she says it with a kind of scorn--though not of rosa--and sits
brooding, looking dreamily at her.

"do you think, rosa, you are any relief or comfort to me? do you
suppose your being young and natural, and fond of me and grateful to
me, makes it any pleasure to me to have you near me?"


 
 ___________________________
 
"i don't know, my lady; i can scarcely hope so. but with all my
heart, i wish it was so."

"it is so, little one."

the pretty face is checked in its flush of pleasure by the dark
expression on the handsome face before it. it looks timidly for an
explanation.

"and if i were to say to-day, 'go! leave me!' i should say what would
give me great pain and disquiet, child, and what would leave me very
solitary."

"my lady! have i offended you?"

"in nothing. come here."

rosa bends down on the footstool at my lady's feet. my lady, with
that motherly touch of the famous ironmaster night, lays her hand
upon her dark hair and gently keeps it there.

"i told you, rosa, that i wished you to be happy and that i would
make you so if i could make anybody happy on this earth. i cannot.
there are reasons now known to me, reasons in which you have no part,
rendering it far better for you that you should not remain here. you
must not remain here. i have determined that you shal
 
 ___________________________
 
he
do, what shall she do, when they are separated! her mistress kisses
her on the cheek and makes no other answer.

"now, be happy, child, under better circumstances. be beloved and
happy!"

"ah, my lady, i have sometimes thought--forgive my being so
free--that you are not happy."

"i!"

"will you be more so when you have sent me away? pray, pray, think
again. let me stay a little while!"

"i have said, my child, that what i do, i do for your sake, not my
own. it is done. what i am towards you, rosa, is what i am now--not
what i shall be a little while hence. remember this, and keep my
confidence. do so much for my sake, and thus all ends between us!"

she detaches herself from her simple-hearted companion and leaves the
room. late in the afternoon, when she next appears upon the
staircase, she is in her haughtiest and coldest state. as indifferent
as if all passion, feeling, and interest had been worn out in the
earlier ages of the world and had perished from its surface with its
other de
 
 ___________________________
 
position."

"and to speak as plainly," she returns with the same studied
carelessness, "so should i. do i understand that you will take her
with you?"

the iron gentleman makes an iron bow.

"sir leicester, will you ring?" mr. tulkinghorn steps forward from
his window and pulls the bell. "i had forgotten you. thank you." he
makes his usual bow and goes quietly back again. mercury,
swift-responsive, appears, receives instructions whom to produce,
skims away, produces the aforesaid, and departs.

rosa has been crying and is yet in distress. on her coming in, the
ironmaster leaves his chair, takes her arm in his, and remains with
her near the door ready to depart.

"you are taken charge of, you see," says my lady in her weary manner,
"and are going away well protected. i have mentioned that you are a
very good girl, and you have nothing to cry for."

"she seems after all," observes mr. tulkinghorn, loitering a little
forward with his hands behind him, "as if she were crying at going
away."

"
 
 ___________________________
 
why, she is not well-bred, you see," returns mr. rouncewell with
some quickness in his manner, as if he were glad to have the lawyer
to retort upon, "and she is an inexperienced little thing and knows
no better. if she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, no
doubt."

"no doubt," is mr. tulkinghorn's composed reply.

rosa sobs out that she is very sorry to leave my lady, and that she
was happy at chesney wold, and has been happy with my lady, and that
she thanks my lady over and over again. "out, you silly little puss!"
says the ironmaster, checking her in a low voice, though not angrily.
"have a spirit, if you're fond of watt!" my lady merely waves her off
with indifference, saying, "there, there, child! you are a good girl.
go away!" sir leicester has magnificently disengaged himself from the
subject and retir
 
 ___________________________
 
ing to awaken such feelings--though of course lady dedlock, by
her heartfelt interest and her genial condescension, has done much
more."

if he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks. he points
it, however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner of
speech, though in saying it he turns towards that part of the dim
room where my lady sits. sir leicester stands to return his parting
salutation, mr. tulkinghorn again rings, mercury takes another
flight, and mr. rouncewell and rosa leave the house.

then lights are brought in, discovering mr. tulkinghorn still
standing in his window with his hands behind him and my lady still
sitting with his figure before her, closing up her view of the night
as well as of the day. she is very pale. mr. tulkinghorn, observing
it as she rises to retire, thinks, "well she may be! the power of
this woman is astonishing. she has been acting a part the whole
time." but he can act a part too--his one unchanging character--and
as he holds the d
 
 ___________________________
 
ew--concerning whom he renews his
protestations that he never could have thought they would have been
half so glad to see him--he is taken home to an elegant house in all
the arrangements of which there is to be observed a pleasant mixture
of the originally simple habits of the father and mother with such as
are suited to their altered station and the higher fortunes of their
children. here mr. george is much dismayed by the graces and
accomplishments of his nieces that are and by the beauty of rosa, his
niece that is to be, and by the affectionate salutations of these
young ladies, which he receives in a sort of dream. he is sorely
taken aback, too, by the dutiful behaviour of his nephew and has a
woeful consciousness upon him of being a scapegrace. however, there
is great rejoicing and a very hearty company and infinite enjoyment,
and mr. george comes bluff and martial through it all, and his pledge
to be present at the marriage and give away the bride is received
with universal favour. 