 in this way, when one morning at breakfast mr.
jarndyce received a letter, and looking at the superscription, said,
"from boythorn? aye, aye!" and opened and read it with evident
pleasure, announcing to us in a parenthesis when he was about
half-way through, that boythorn was "coming down" on a visit. now who
was boythorn, we all thought. and i dare say we all thought too--i am
sure i did, for one--would boythorn at all interfere with what was
going forward?

"i went to school with this fellow, lawrence boythorn," said mr.
jarndyce, tapping the letter as he laid it on the table, "more than
five and forty years ago. he was then the most impetuous boy in the
world, and he is now the most impetuous man. he was then the loudest
boy in the world, and he is now the loudest man. he was then the
heartiest and sturdiest boy in the world, and he is now the heartiest
and sturdiest man. he is a tremendous fellow."

"in stature, sir?" asked richard.

"pretty well, rick, in that respect," said mr. jarndyce; "being s
 
 ___________________________
 
 that fellow shot
without the least remorse!"

"did he do it on purpose?" mr. jarndyce inquired.

"i have not the slightest doubt that the scoundrel has passed his
whole existence in misdirecting travellers!" returned the other. "by
my soul, i thought him the worst-looking dog i had ever beheld when
he was telling me to take the turning to the right. and yet i stood
before that fellow face to face and didn't knock his brains out!"

"teeth, you mean?" said mr. jarndyce.

"ha, ha, ha!" laughed mr. lawrence boythorn, really making the whole
house vibrate. "what, you have not forgotten it yet! ha, ha, ha! and
that was another most consummate vagabond! by my soul, the
countenance of that fellow when he was a boy was the blackest image
of perfidy, cowardice, and cruelty ever set up as a scarecrow in a
field of scoundrels. if i were to meet that most unparalleled despot
in the streets to-morrow, i would fell him like a rotten tree!"

"i have no doubt of it," said mr. jarndyce. "now, will you come
upstairs?"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
 by
some inexplicable mistake of nature, born in any station of life but
a walking-stick's! the whole of that family are the most solemnly
conceited and consummate blockheads! but it's no matter; he should
not shut up my path if he were fifty baronets melted into one and
living in a hundred chesney wolds, one within another, like the ivory
balls in a chinese carving. the fellow, by his agent, or secretary,
or somebody, writes to me 'sir leicester dedlock, baronet, presents
his compliments to mr. lawrence boythorn, and has to call his
attention to the fact that the green pathway by the old
parsonage-house, now the property of mr. lawrence boythorn, is sir
leicester's right of way, being in fact a portion of the park of
chesney wold, and that sir leicester finds it convenient to close up
the same.' i write to the fellow, 'mr. lawrence boythorn presents his
compliments to sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and has to call his
attention to the fact that he totally denies the whole of sir
leicester dedlock's po
 
 ___________________________
 
d to be, in cases of aggression, immediately to ring a large
bell hung up there for the purpose, to unchain a great bull-dog
established in a kennel as his ally, and generally to deal
destruction on the enemy. not content with these precautions, mr.
boythorn had himself composed and posted there, on painted boards to
which his name was attached in large letters, the following solemn
warnings: "beware of the bull-dog. he is most ferocious. lawrence
boythorn." "the blunderbus is loaded with slugs. lawrence boythorn."
"man-traps and spring-guns are set here at all times of the day and
night. lawrence boythorn." "take notice. that any person or persons
audaciously presuming to trespass on this property will be punished
with the utmost severity of private chastisement and prosecuted with
the utmost rigour of the law. lawrence boythorn." these he showed us
from the drawing-room window, while his bird was hopping about his
head, and he laughed, "ha ha ha ha! ha ha ha ha!" to that extent as
he pointed them out 