leisure for musing in staple inn
and in the rolls yard during the long vacation than at other seasons,
and he says to the two 'prentices, what a thing it is in such hot
weather to think that you live in an island with the sea a-rolling
and a-bowling right round you.

guster is busy in the little drawing-room on this present afternoon
in the long vacation, when mr. and mrs. snagsby have it in
contemplation to receive company. the expected guests are rather
select than numerous, being mr. and mrs. chadband and no more. from
mr. chadband's being much given to describe himself, both verbally
and in writing, as a vessel, he is occasionally mistaken by strangers
for a gentleman connected with navigation, but he is, as he expresses
it, "in the ministry." mr. chadband is attached to no particular
denomination and is considered by his persecutors to have nothing so
very remarkable to say on the greatest of subjects as to render his
volunteering, on his own account, at all incumbent on his conscience;
bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t he has his followers, and mrs. snagsby is of the number. mrs.
snagsby has but recently taken a passage upward by the vessel,
chadband; and her attention was attracted to that bark a 1, when she
was something flushed by the hot weather.

"my little woman," says mr. snagsby to the sparrows in staple inn,
"likes to have her religion rather sharp, you see!"

so guster, much impressed by regarding herself for the time as the
handmaid of chadband, whom she knows to be endowed with the gift of
holding forth for four hours at a stretch, prepares the little
drawing-room for tea. all the furniture is shaken and dusted, the
portraits of mr. and mrs. snagsby are touched up with a wet cloth,
the best tea-service is set forth, and there is excellent provision
made of dainty new bread, crusty twists, cool fresh butter, thin
slices of ham, tongue, and german sausage, and delicate little rows
of anchovies nestling in parsley, not to mention new-la
 
 ___________________________
 
id eggs, to be
brought up warm in a napkin, and hot buttered toast. for chadband is
rather a consuming vessel--the persecutors say a gorging vessel--and
can wield such weapons of the flesh as a knife and fork remarkably
well.

mr. snagsby in his best coat, looking at all the preparations when
they are completed and coughing his cough of deference behind his
hand, says to mrs. snagsby, "at what time did you expect mr. and mrs.
chadband, my love?"

"at six," says mrs. snagsby.

mr. snagsby observes in a mild and casual way that "it's gone that."

"perhaps you'd like to begin 
 
 ___________________________
 
eproachful remark.

mr. snagsby does look as if he would like it very much, but he says,
with his cough of mildness, "no, my dear, no. i merely named the
time."

"what's time," says mrs. snagsby, "to eternity?"

"very true, my dear," says mr. snagsby. "only when a person lays in
victuals for tea, a person does it with a view--perhaps--more to
time. and when a time is named for having tea, it's better to come up
to it."

"to come up to it!" mrs. snagsby repeats with severity. "up to it! as
if mr. chadband was a fighter!"

"not at all, my dear," says mr. snagsby.

here, guster, who had been looking out of the bedroom window, comes
rustling and scratching down the little staircase like a popular
ghost, and falling flushed into the drawing-room, announces that mr.
and mrs. chadband have appeared in the court. the bell at the inner
door in the passage immediately thereafter tinkling, she is
admonished by mrs. snagsby, on pain of instant reconsignment to her
patron saint, not to omit the ceremony of 
 
 ___________________________
 
announcement. much
discomposed in her nerves (which were previously in the best order)
by this threat, she so fearfully mutilates that point of state as to
announce "mr. and mrs. cheeseming, least which, imeantersay,
whatsername!" and retires conscience-stricken from the presence.

mr. chadband is a large yellow man with a fat smile and a general
appearance of having a good deal of train oil in his system. mrs.
chadband is a stern, severe-looking, silent woman. mr. chadband moves
softly and cumbrously, not unlike a bear who has been taught to walk
upright. he is very much embarrassed about the arms, as if they were
inconvenient to him and he wanted to grovel, is very much in a
perspiration about the head, and never speaks without first putting
up his great hand, as delivering a token to his hearers that he is
going to edify them.

"my friends," says mr. chadband, "peace be on this house! on the
master thereof, on the mistress thereof, on the young maidens, and on

 
 ___________________________
 
the young men! my friends, why do i wish for peace? what is peace? is
it war? no. is it strife? no. is it lovely, and gentle, and
beautiful, and pleasant, and serene, and joyful? oh, yes! therefore,
my friends, i wish for peace, upon you and upon yours."

in consequence of mrs. snagsby looking deeply edified, mr. snagsby
thinks it expedient on the whole to say amen, which is well received.

"now, my friends," proceeds mr. chadband, "since i am upon this
theme--"

guster presents herself. mrs. snagsby, in a spectral bass voice and
without removing her eyes from chadband, says with dreadful
distinctness, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says chadband, "since i am upon this theme, and in
my lowly path improving it--"

guster is heard unaccountably to murmur "one thousing seven hundred
and eighty-two." the spectral voice repeats more solemnly, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says mr. chadband, "we will inquire in a spirit of
lo
 
 ___________________________
 
ve--"

still guster reiterates "one thousing seven hundred and eighty-two."

mr. chadband, pausing with the resignation of a man accustomed to be
persecuted and languidly folding up his chin into his fat smile,
says, "let us hear the maiden! speak, maiden!"

"one thousing seven hundred and eighty-two, if you please, sir. which
he wish to know what the shilling ware for," says guster, breathless.

"for?" returns mrs. chadband. "for his fare!"

guster replied that "he insistes on one and eightpence or on
summonsizzing the party." mrs. snagsby and mrs. chadband are
proceeding to grow shrill in indignation when mr. chadband quiets the
tumult by lifting up his hand.

"my friends," says he, "i remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday. it
is right that i should be chastened in some penalty. i ought not to
murmur. rachael, pay the eightpence!"

while mrs. snagsby, drawing her breath, looks hard at mr. snagsby, as
who should s
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, "you hear this apostle!" and while mr. chadband glows
with humility and train oil, mrs. chadband pays the money. it is mr.
chadband's habit--it is the head and front of his pretensions
indeed--to keep this sort of debtor and creditor account in the
smallest items and to post it publicly on the most trivial occasions.

"my friends," says chadband, "eightpence is not much; it might justly
have been one and fourpence; it might justly have been half a crown.
o let us be joyful, joyful! o let us be joyful!"

with which remark, which appears from its sound to be an extract in
verse, mr. chadband stalks to the table, and before taking a chair,
lifts up his admonitory hand.

"my friends," says he, "what is this which we now behold as being
spread before us? refreshment. do we need refreshment then, my
friends? we do. and why do we need refresh
 
 ___________________________
 
ment, my friends? because
we are but mortal, because we are but sinful, because we are but of
the earth, because we are not of the air. can we fly, my friends? we
cannot. why can we not fly, my friends?"

mr. snagsby, presuming on the success of his last point, ventures to
observe in a cheerful and rather knowing tone, "no wings." but is
immediately frowned down by mrs. snagsby.

"i say, my friends," pursues mr. chadband, utterly rejecting and
obliterating mr. snagsby's suggestion, "why can we not fly? is it
because we are calculated to walk? it is. could we walk, my friends,
without strength? we could not. what should we do without strength,
my friends? our legs would refuse to bear us, our knees would double
up, our ankles would turn over, and we should come to the ground.
then from whence, my friends, in a human point of view, do we derive
the strength that is necessary to our limbs? is it," says chadband,
g
 
 ___________________________
 
 the milk which is yielded unto us by the cow,
from the eggs which are laid by the fowl, from ham, from tongue, from
sausage, and from such like? it is. then let us partake of the good
things which are set before us!"

the persecutors denied that there was any particular gift in mr.
chadband's piling verbose flights of stairs, one upon another, after
this fashion. but this can only be received as a proof of their
determination to persecute, since it must be within everybody's
experience that the chadband style of oratory is widely received and
much admired.

mr. chadband, however, having concluded for the present, sits down at
mr. snagsby's table and lays about him prodigiously. the conversion
of nutriment of any sort into oil of the quality already mentioned
appears to be a process so inseparable from the constitution of this
exemplary vessel that in beginning to eat and drink, he may be
described as always becoming a kind of considerable oil mills or
other large factory for the production of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a wholesale
scale. on the present evening of the long vacation, in cook's court,
cursitor street, he does such a powerful stroke of business that the
warehouse appears to be quite full when the works cease.

at this period of the entertainment, guster, who has never recovered
her first failure, but has neglected no possible or impossible means
of bringing the establishment and herself into contempt--among which
may be briefly enumerated her unexpectedly performing clashing
military music on mr. chadband's head with plates, and afterwards
crowning that gentleman with muffins--at which period of the
entertainment, guster whispers mr. snagsby that he is wanted.

"and being wanted in the--not to put too fine a point upon it--in the
shop," says mr. snagsby, rising, "perhaps this good company will
excuse me for half a minute."

mr. snagsby descends and finds the two 'prentices intently
contemplating a police constable, who holds a ragged boy by the arm.

"why, bless my heart," says mr. snagsby, "wha
 
 ___________________________
 
for some few years
in this business to set you the example of moving on. the one grand
recipe remains for you--the profound philosophical prescription--the
be-all and the end-all of your strange existence upon earth. move on!
you are by no means to move off, jo, for the great lights can't at
all agree about that. move on!

mr. snagsby says nothing to this effect, says nothing at all indeed,
but coughs his forlornest cough, expressive of no thoroughfare in any
direction. by this time mr. and mrs. chadband and mrs. snagsby,
hearing the altercation, have appeared upon the stairs. guster having
never left the end of the passage, the whole household are assembled.

"the simple question is, sir," says the constable, "whether you know
this boy. he says you do."

mrs. snagsby, from her elevation, instantly cries out, "no he don't!"

"my lit-tle woman!" says mr. snagsby, looking up the staircase. "my
love, permit me! pray have a moment's patience, my dear. i do know
something of this lad, and in what i 
 
 ___________________________
 
is shape, that shape, and the other shape
like a butterman dealing with so much butter, and worrying him
according to the best models. nor is the examination unlike many such
model displays, both in respect of its eliciting nothing and of its
being lengthy, for mr. guppy is sensible of his talent, and mrs.
snagsby feels not only that it gratifies her inquisitive disposition,
but that it lifts her husband's establishment higher up in the law.
during the progress of this keen encounter, the vessel chadband,
being merely engaged in the oil trade, gets aground and waits to be
floated off.

"well!" says mr. guppy. "either this boy sticks to it like
cobbler's-wax or there is something out of the common here that beats
anything that ever came into my way at kenge and carboy's."

mrs. chadband whispers mrs. snagsby, who exclaims, "you don't say
so!"

"for years!" replied mrs. chadband.

"has known kenge and carboy's office for years," mrs. snagsby
triumphantly explains to mr. guppy. "mrs. chadband--thi
 
 ___________________________
 
s gentleman's
wife--reverend mr. chadband."

"oh, indeed!" says mr. guppy.

"before i married my present husband," says mrs. chadband.

"was you a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy, transferring
his cross-examination.

"no."

"not a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy.

mrs. chadband shakes her head.

"perhaps you were acquainted with somebody who was a party in
something, ma'am?" says mr. guppy, who likes nothing better than to
model his conversation on forensic principles.

"not exactly that, either," replies mrs. chadband, humouring the joke
with a hard-favoured smile.

"not exactly that, either!" repeats mr. guppy. "very good. pray,
ma'am, was it a lady of your acquaintance who had some transactions
(we will not at present say what transactions) with kenge and
carboy's 
 
 ___________________________
 
office, or was it a gentleman of your acquaintance? take
time, ma'am. we shall come to it presently. man or woman, ma'am?"

"neither," says mrs. chadband as before.

"oh! a child!" says mr. guppy, throwing on the admiring mrs. snagsby
the regular acute professional eye which is thrown on british
jurymen. "now, ma'am, perhaps you'll have the kindness to tell us
what child."

"you have got it at last, sir," says mrs. chadband with another
hard-favoured smile. "well, sir, it was before your time, most
likely, judging from your appearance. i was left in charge of a child
named esther summerson, who was put out in life by messrs. kenge and
carboy."

"miss summerson, ma'am!" cries mr. guppy, excited.

"i call her esther summerson," says mrs. chadband with austerity.
"there was no miss-ing of the girl in my time. it was esther.
'esther, do this! esther, do that!' and she was made to do it."

"my dear ma'am," returns mr. 
 
 ___________________________
 
guppy, moving across the small
apartment, "the humble individual who now addresses you received that
young lady in london when she first came here from the establishment
to which you have alluded. allow me to have the pleasure of taking
you by the hand."

mr. chadband, at last seeing his opportunity, makes his accustomed
signal and rises with a smoking head, which he dabs with his
pocket-handkerchief. mrs. snagsby whispers "hush!"

"my friends," says chadband, "we have partaken in moderation" (which
was certainly not the case so far as he was concerned) "of the
comforts which have been provided for us. may this house live upon
the fatness of the land; may corn and wine be plentiful therein; may
it grow, may it thrive, may it prosper, may it advance, may it
proceed, may it press forward! but, my friends, have we partaken of
anything else? we have. my friends, of what else have we partaken? of
spiritual profit? yes. from whence have we derived that sp
 
 ___________________________
 
iritual
profit? my young friend, stand forth!"

jo, thus apostrophized, gives a slouch backward, and another slouch
forward, and another slouch to each side, and confronts the eloquent
chadband with evident doubts of his intentions.

"my young friend," says chadband, "you are to us a pearl, you are to
us a diamond, you are to us a gem, you are to us a jewel. and why, my
young friend?"

"i don't know," replies jo. "i don't know nothink."

"my young friend," says chadband, "it is because you know nothing
that you are to us a gem and jewel. for what are you, my young
friend? are you a beast of the field? no. a bird of the air? no. a
fish of the sea or river? no. you are a human boy, my young friend. a
human boy. o glorious to be a human boy! and why glorious, my young
friend? because you are capable of receiving the lessons of wisdom,
because you are capable of profiting by this discourse which i now
deliver for your good, because you are not a stick, or a staff,
 
 ___________________________
 
you are in a
state of darkness, because you are in a state of obscurity, because
you are in a state of sinfulness, because you are in a state of
bondage. my young friend, what is bondage? let us, in a spirit of
love, inquire."

at this threatening stage of the discourse, jo, who seems to have
been gradually going out of his mind, smears his right arm over his
face and gives a terrible yawn. mrs. snagsby indignantly expresses
her belief that he is a limb of the arch-fiend.

"my friends," says mr. chadband with his persecuted chin folding
itself into its fat smile again as he looks round, "it is right that
i should be humbled, it is right that i should be tried, it is right
that i should be mortified, it is right that i should be corrected. i
stumbled, on sabbath last, when i thought with pride of my three
hours' improving. the account is now favourably balanced: my creditor
has accepted a composition. o let us be joyful, joyful! o let us be
joyful!"

great sensation on the part of mrs. snagsby.

 
 ___________________________
 

"my friends," says chadband, looking round him in conclusion, "i will
not proceed with my young friend now. will you come to-morrow, my
young friend, and inquire of this good lady where i am to be found to
deliver a discourse unto you, and will you come like the thirsty
swallow upon the next day, and upon the day after that, and upon the
day after that, and upon many pleasant days, to hear discourses?"
(this with a cow-like lightness.)

jo, whose immediate object seems to be to get away on any terms,
gives a shuffling nod
 
 ___________________________
 
. mr. guppy then throws him a penny, and mrs.
snagsby calls to guster to see him safely out of the house. but
before he goes downstairs, mr. snagsby loads him with some broken
meats from the table, which he carries away, hugging in his arms.

so, mr. chadband--of whom the persecutors say that it is no wonder he
should go on for any length of time uttering such abominable
nonsense, but that the wonder rather is that he should ever leave
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life
until he invests a little capital of supper in the oil-trade. jo
moves on, through the long vacation, down to blackfriars bridge,
where he finds a baking stony corner wherein to settle to his repast.

and there he sits, munching and gnawing, and looking
 
 ___________________________
 
 my little woman has a very
active mind, sir."

mr. snagsby drinks and murmurs with an admiring cough behind his
hand, "dear me, very fine wine indeed!"

"therefore you kept your visit to yourself last night?" says mr.
tulkinghorn. "and to-night too?"

"yes, sir, and to-night, too. my little woman is at present in--not
to put too fine a point on it--in a pious state, or in what she
considers such, and attends the evening exertions (which is the name
they go by) of a reverend party of the name of chadband. he has a
great deal of eloquence at his command, undoubtedly, but i am not
quite favourable to his style myself. that's neither here nor there.
my little woman being engaged in that way made it easier for me to
step round in a quiet manner."

mr. tulkinghorn assents. "fill your glass, snagsby."

"thank you, sir, i am sure," returns the stationer with his cough of
deference. "this is wonderfully fine wine, sir!"

"it is a rare wine now," says mr. tulkinghorn. "it is fifty years
old."

"is it in
 
 ___________________________
 
of my godmother's house.

"how do you do, esther?" said she. "do you recollect me?"

i gave her my hand and told her yes and that she was very little
altered.

"i wonder you remember those times, esther," she returned with her
old asperity. "they are changed now. well! i am glad to see you, and
glad you are not too proud to know me." but indeed she seemed
disappointed that i was not.

"proud, mrs. rachael!" i remonstrated.

"i am married, esther," she returned, coldly correcting me, "and am
mrs. chadband. well! i wish you good day, and i hope you'll do well."

mr. guppy, who had been attentive to this short dialogue, heaved a
sigh in my ear and elbowed his own and mrs. rachael's way through the
confused little crowd of people coming in and going out, which we
were in the midst of and which the change in the business had brought
together. richard and i were making our way through it, and i was yet
in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition when i saw,
coming towards us, but not seeing
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"who was nimrod?" mrs. snagsby repeatedly inquires of herself. "who
was that lady--that creature? and who is that boy?" now, nimrod being
as dead as the mighty hunter whose name mrs. snagsby has
appropriated, and the lady being unproducible, she directs her mental
eye, for the present, with redoubled vigilance to the boy. "and who,"
quoth mrs. snagsby for the thousand and first time, "is that boy? who
is that--!" and there mrs. snagsby is seized with an inspiration.

he has no respect for mr. chadband. no, to be sure, and he wouldn't
have, of course. naturally he wouldn't, under those contagious
circumstances. he was invited and appointed by mr. chadband--why,
mrs. snagsby heard it herself with her own ears!--to come back, and
be told where he was to go, to be addressed by mr. chadband; and he
never came! why did he never come? because he was told not to come.
who told him not to come? who? ha, ha! mrs. snagsby sees it all.

but happily (and mrs. snagsby tightly shakes her head and tightly
s
 
 ___________________________
 
miles) that boy was met by mr. chadband yesterday in the streets;
and that boy, as affording a subject which mr. chadband desires to
improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation, was
seized by mr. chadband and threatened with being delivered over to
the police unless he showed the reverend gentleman where he lived and
unless he entered into, and fulfilled, an undertaking to appear in
cook's court to-morrow night, "to--mor--row--night," mrs. snagsby
repeats for mere emphasis with another tight smile and another tight
shake of her head; and to-morrow night that boy will be here, and
to-morrow night mrs. snagsby will have her eye upon him and upon some
one else; and oh, you may walk a long while in 
 
 ___________________________
 
your secret ways (says
mrs. snagsby with haughtiness and scorn), but you can't blind me!

mrs. snagsby sounds no timbrel in anybody's ears, but holds her
purpose quietly, and keeps her counsel. to-morrow comes, the savoury
preparations for the oil trade come, the evening comes. comes mr.
snagsby in his black coat; come the chadbands; come (when the gorging
vessel is replete) the 'prentices and guster, to be edified; comes at
last, with his slouching head, and his shuffle backward, and his
shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, and his shuffle to the
left, and his bit of fur cap in his muddy hand, which he picks as if
it were some mangy bird he had caught and was plucking before eating
raw, jo, the very, very tough subject mr. chadband is to improve.

mrs. snagsby screws a watchful glance on jo as he is brought int
 
 ___________________________
 
o the
little drawing-room by guster. he looks at mr. snagsby the moment he
comes in. aha! why does he look at mr. snagsby? mr. snagsby looks at
him. why should he do that, but that mrs. snagsby sees it all? why
else should that look pass between them, why else should mr. snagsby
be confused and cough a signal cough behind his hand? it is as clear
as crystal that mr. snagsby is that boy's father.

"peace, my friends," says chadband, rising and wiping the oily
exudations from his reverend visage. "peace be with us! my friends,
why with us? because," with his fat smile, "it cannot be against us,
because it must be for us; because it is not hardening, because it is
softening; because it does not make war like the hawk, but comes home
unto us like the dove. therefore, my friends, peace be with us! my
human boy, come forward!"

stretching forth his flabby paw, mr. chadband lays the same on jo's
arm and considers where to stati
 
 ___________________________
 
on him. jo, very doubtful of his
reverend friend's intentions and not at all clear but that something
practical and painful is going to be done to him, mutters, "you let
me alone. i never said nothink to you. you let me alone."

"no, my young friend," says chadband smoothly, "i will not let you
alone. and why? because i am a harvest-labourer, because i am a
toiler and a moiler, because you are delivered over unto me and are
become as a precious instrument in my hands. my friends, may i so
employ this instrument as to use it to your advantage, to your
profit, to your gain, to your welfare, to your enrichment! my young
friend, sit upon this stool."

jo, apparently possessed by an impression that the reverend gentleman
wants to cut his hair, shields his head
 
 ___________________________
 
 with both arms and is got
into the required position with great difficulty and every possible
manifestation of reluctance.

when he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, mr. chadband, retiring
behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, "my friends!"
this is the signal for a general settlement of the audience. the
'prentices giggle internally and nudge each other. guster falls into
a staring and vacant state, compounded of a stunned admiration of mr.
chadband and pity for the friendless outcast whose condition touches
her nearly. mrs. snagsby silently lays trains of gunpowder. mrs.
chadband composes herself grimly by the fire and warms her knees,
finding that sensat
 
 ___________________________
 
ion favourable to the reception of eloquence.

it happens that mr. chadband has a pulpit habit of fixing some member
of his congregation with his eye and fatly arguing his points with
that particular person, who is understood to be expected to be moved
to an occasional grunt, groan, gasp, or other audible expression of
inward working, which expression of inward working, being echoed by
some elderly lady in the next pew and so communicated like a game of
forfeits through a circle of the more fermentable sinners present,
serves the purpose of parliamentary cheering and g
 
 ___________________________
 
ets mr. chadband's
steam up. from mere force of habit, mr. chadband in saying "my
friends!" has rested his eye on mr. snagsby and proceeds to make that
ill-starred stationer, already sufficiently confused, the immediate
recipient of his discourse.

"we have here among us, my friends," says chadband, "a gentile and a
heathen, a dweller in the tents of tom-all-alone's and a mover-on
upon the surface of the earth. we have here among us, my friends,"
and mr. chadband, untwisting the point with his dirty thumb-nail,
bestows an oily smile on mr. snagsby, signifying that he will throw
him an argumentative back-fall presently if he be not already down,
"a brother and a boy. devoid of parents, devoid of relations, devoid
of flocks and herds, devoid of gold and silver and of precious
stones. now, my friends, why do i say he is devoid of these
possessions? why? why is he?" mr. chadband states the question as if
he were propounding an entirely new riddle of much in
 
 ___________________________
 
genuity and
merit to mr. snagsby and entreating him not to give it up.

mr. snagsby, greatly perplexed by the mysterious look he received
just now from his little woman--at about the period when mr. chadband
mentioned the word parents--is tempted into modestly remarking, "i
don't know, i'm sure, sir." on which interruption mrs. chadband
glares and mrs. snagsby says, "for shame!"

"i hear a voice," says chadband; "is it a still small voice, my
friends? i fear not, though i fain would hope so--"

"ah--h!" from mrs. snagsby.

"which says, 'i don't know.' then i will tell you why. i say this
brother present here among us is devoid of parents, devoid of
relations, devoid of flocks and herds, devoid of gold, of silver, and
of precious stones because he is devoid of the light that shines in
upon some of us. what is that light? what is it? i ask you, what is
that light?"

mr. chadband draws back his head and 
 
 ___________________________
 
pauses, but mr. snagsby is not
to be lured on to his destruction again. mr. chadband, leaning
forward over the table, pierces what he has got to follow directly
into mr. snagsby with the thumb-nail already mentioned.

"it is," says chadband, "the ray of rays, the sun of suns, the moon
of moons, the star of stars. it is the light of terewth."

mr. chadband draws himself up again and looks triumphantly at mr.
snagsby as if he would be glad to know how he feels after that.

"of terewth," says mr. chadband, hitting him again. "say not to me
that it is not the lamp of lamps. i say to you it is. i say to you, a
million of times over, it is. it is! i say to you that i will
proclaim it to you, whether you like it or not; nay, that the less
you like it, the more i will proclaim it to you. with a
speaking-trumpet! i say to you that if you rear yourself against it,
you shall fall, you shall be bruised, you shall be battered, you
shall be flawed, you shall be smashed."

the present effect of this flight 
 
 ___________________________
 
of oratory--much admired for its
general power by mr. chadband's followers--being not only to make mr.
chadband unpleasantly warm, but to represent the innocent mr. snagsby
in the light of a determined enemy to virtue, with a forehead of
brass and a heart of adamant, that unfortunate tradesman becomes yet
more disconcerted and is in a very advanced state of low spirits and
false position when mr. chadband accidentally finishes him.

"my friends," he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some
time--and it smokes to such an extent that he seems to light his
pocket-handkerchief at it, which smokes, too, after every dab--"to
pursue the subject we are endeavouring with our lowly gifts to
improve, let us in a spirit of love inquire what is that terewth to
which i have alluded. for, my young friends," suddenly addressing the
'prentices and guster, to their consternation, "if i am told by the
doctor th
 
 ___________________________
 
tle, and to combat and to struggle, and to conquer, for
his sake--when this young hardened heathen told us a story of a cock,
and of a bull, and of a lady, and of a sovereign, was that the
terewth? no. or if it was partly, was it wholly and entirely? no, my
friends, no!"

if mr. snagsby could withstand his little woman's look as it enters
at his eyes, the windows of his soul, and searches the whole
tenement, he were other than the man he is. he cowers and droops.

"or, my juvenile friends," says chadband, descending to the level of
their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his
greasily meek smile of coming a long way downstairs for the purpose,
"if the master of this house was to go forth into the city and there
see an eel, and was to come back, and was to call unto him the
mistress of this house, and was to say, 'sarah, rejoice with me, for
i have seen an elephant!' would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby in tears.

"or put it, my juvenile friends, that he saw an elephant, and
r
 
 ___________________________
 
eturning said 'lo, the city is barren, i have seen but an eel,'
would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby sobbing loudly.

"or put it, my juvenile friends," said chadband, stimulated by the
sound, "that the unnatural parents of this slumbering heathen--for
parents he had, my juvenile friends, beyond a doubt--after casting
him forth to the wolves and the vultures, and the wild dogs and the
young gazelles, and the serpents, went back to their dwellings and
had their pipes, and their pots, and their flutings and their
dancings, and their malt liquors, and their butcher's meat and
poultry, would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby replies by delivering herself a prey to
 
 ___________________________
 
m.

all this time jo has been standing on the spot where he woke up, ever
picking his cap and putting bits of fur in his mouth. he spits them
out with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in his nature to
be an unimprovable reprobate and that it's no good his trying to keep
awake, for he won't never know nothink. though it may be, jo, that
there is a history so interesting and affecting even to minds as near
the brutes as thine, recording deeds done on this earth for common
men, that if the chadbands, removing their own persons from the
light, would but show it thee in simple reverence, would but leave it
unimproved, would but regard it as being eloquent enough without
their modest aid--it might hold thee awake, and thou might learn from
it yet!

jo never heard of any such book. its compilers and the reverend
chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the reverend
chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear him
talk for five minutes. "it an't no good my waiting
 
 ___________________________
 
here have been times, when ladies
lived in strongholds and had unscrupulous attendants within call,
when that poor life of yours would not have been worth a minute's
purchase, with those beautiful eyes looking at you as they look at
this moment.

my lady, slowly using her little hand-screen as a fan, asks him again
what he supposes that his taste for likenesses has to do with her.

"your ladyship," replies mr. guppy, again referring to his paper, "i
am coming to that. dash these notes! oh! 'mrs. chadband.' yes." mr.
guppy draws his chair a little forward and seats himself again. my
lady reclines in her chair composedly, though with a trifle less of
graceful ease than usual perhaps, and never falters in her steady
gaze. "a--stop a minute, though!" mr. guppy refers again. "e.s.
twice? oh, yes! yes, i see my way now, right on."

rolling up the slip of paper as an instrument to point his speech
with, mr. guppy proceeds.

"your ladyship, there is a mystery about miss esther summerson's
birth and bri
 
 ___________________________
 
 started and is looking round, "i
thought i was in tom-all-alone's agin. ain't there nobody here but
you, mr. woodcot?"

"nobody."

"and i ain't took back to tom-all-alone's. am i, sir?"

"no." jo closes his eyes, muttering, "i'm wery thankful."

after watching him closely a little while, allan puts his mouth very
near his ear and says to him in a low, distinct voice, "jo! did you
ever know a prayer?"

"never knowd nothink, sir."

"not so much as one short prayer?"

"no, sir. nothink at all. mr. chadbands he wos a-prayin wunst at mr.
sangsby's and i heerd him, but he sounded as if he wos a-speakin to
hisself, and not to me. he prayed a lot, but i couldn't make out
nothink on it. different times there was other genlmen come down
tom-all-alone's a-prayin, but they all mostly sed as the t'other
'wuns prayed wrong, and all mostly sounded to be a-talking to
theirselves, or a-passing blame on the t'others, and not a-talkin to
us. we never knowd nothink. i never knowd what it wos all about."

it takes
 
 ___________________________
 
 account of his having so
much cheek. don't you get into the same position, because it isn't
worthy of you. you ain't in the habit of conversing with a deaf
person, are you?"

"yes," snarls mr. smallweed, "my wife's deaf."

"that accounts for your pitching your voice so high. but as she ain't
here; just pitch it an octave or two lower, will you, and i'll not
only be obliged to you, but it'll do you more credit," says mr.
bucket. "this other gentleman is in the preaching line, i think?"

"name of chadband," mr. smallweed puts in, speaking henceforth in a
much lower key.

"once had a friend and brother serjeant of the same name," says mr.
bucket, offering his hand, "and consequently feel a liking for it.
mrs. chadband, no doubt?"

"and mrs. snagsby," mr. smallweed introduces.

"husband a law-stationer and a friend of my own," says mr. bucket.
"love him like a brother! now, what's up?"

"do you mean what business have we come upon?" mr. smallweed asks, a
little dashed by the suddenness of this tur
 
 ___________________________
 
n.

"ah! you know what i mean. let us hear what it's all about in
presence of sir leicester dedlock, baronet. come."

mr. smallweed, beckoning mr. chadband, takes a moment's counsel with
him in a whisper. mr. chadband, expressing a considerable amount of
oil from the pores of his forehead and the palms of his hands, says
aloud, "yes. you first!" and retires to his former place.

"i was the client and friend of mr. tulkinghorn," pipes grandfather
smallweed then; "i did business with him. i was useful to him, and he
was useful to me. krook, dead and gone, was my brother-in-law. he was
own brother to a brimstone magpie--leastways mrs. smallweed. i come
into krook's property. i examined all his papers and all hi
 
 ___________________________
 
eed means five hundred.

"that is, i am deputed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to consider
(without admitting or promising anything) this bit of business," says
mr. bucket--sir leicester mechanically bows his head--"and you ask me
to consider a proposal of five hundred pounds. why, it's an
unreasonable proposal! two fifty would be bad enough, but better than
that. hadn't you better say two fifty?"

mr. smallweed is quite clear that he had better not.

"then," says mr. bucket, "let's hear mr. chadband. lord! many a time
i've heard my old fellow-serjeant of that name; and a moderate man he
was in all respects, as ever i come across!"

thus invited, mr. chadband steps forth, and after a little sleek
smiling and a little oil-grinding with the palms of his hands,
delivers himself as follows, "my friends, we are now--rachael, my
wife, and i--in the mansions of the rich and great. why are we now in
the mansions of the rich and great, my friends? is it because we are
invited? because we are bidden 
 
 ___________________________
 
se we are bidden to dance with them? no. then why are
we here, my friends? air we in possession of a sinful secret, and do
we require corn, and wine, and oil, or what is much the same thing,
money, for the keeping thereof? probably so, my friends."

"you're a man of business, you are," returns mr. bucket, very
attentive, "and consequently you're going on to mention what the
nature of your secret is. you are right. you couldn't do better."

"let us then, my brother, in a spirit of love," says mr. chadband
with a cunning eye, "proceed unto it. rachael, my wife, advance!"

mrs. chadband, more than ready, so advances as to jostle her husband
into the background and confronts mr. bucket with a hard, frowning
smile.

"since you want to know what we know," says she, "i'll tell you. i
helped to bring up miss hawdon, her ladyship's daughter. i was in the
service of her ladyship's sister, who was very sensitive to the
disgrace her ladyship brought upon her, and gave out, even to her
ladyship, that the ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ild was dead--she was very nearly so--when she
was born. but she's alive, and i know her." with these words, and a
laugh, and laying a bitter stress on the word "ladyship," mrs.
chadband folds her arms and looks implacably at mr. bucket.

"i suppose now," returns that officer, "you will be expecting a
twenty-pound note or a present of about that figure?"

mrs. chadband merely laughs and contemptuously tells him he can
"offer" twenty pence.

"my friend the law-stationer's good lady, over there," says mr.
bucket, luring mrs. snagsby forward with the finger. "what may your
game be, ma'am?"

mrs. snagsby is at first prevented, by tears and lamentations, from
stating the nature of her game, but by degrees it confusedly comes to
light that she is a woman overwhelmed with injuries and wrongs, whom
mr. snagsby has habitually deceived, abandoned, and sought to keep in
 
 ___________________________
 
 confounding her false
husband, night and day. thus did it come to pass that she brought the
chadbands and mr. tulkinghorn together, and conferred with mr.
tulkinghorn on the change in mr. guppy, and helped to turn up the
circumstances in which the present company are interested, casually,
by the wayside, being still and ever on the great high road that is
to terminate in mr. snagsby's full exposure and a matrimonial
separation. all this, mrs. snagsby, as an injured woman, and the
friend of mrs. chadband, and the follower of mr. chadband, and the
mourner of the late mr. tulkinghorn, is here to certify under the
seal of confidence, with every possible confusion and involvement
possible and impossible, having no pecuniary motive whatever, no
scheme or project but the one mentioned, and bringing here, and
taking everywhere, her own dense atmosphere of dust, arising from the
ceaseless working of her mill of jealousy.

while this exordium is in hand--and it takes some time--mr. bucket,
who has seen 
 
 ___________________________
 
through the transparency of mrs. snagsby's vinegar at a
glance, confers with his familiar demon and bestows his shrewd
attention on the chadbands and mr. smallweed. sir leicester dedlock
remains immovable, with the same icy surface upon him, except that he
once or twice looks towards mr. bucket, as relying on that officer
alone of all mankind.

"very good," says mr. bucket. "now i understand you, you know, and
being deputed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to look into this
little matter," again sir leicester mechanically bows in confirmation
of the statement, "can give it my fair and full attention. now i
won't allude to conspiring t
 
 ___________________________
 
e it can't be worth a mag to him, is so curious! you
see your temper got the better of you; that's where you lost ground,"
says mr. bucket in an argumentative and friendly way.

"i only said i wouldn't go without one of the servants came up to sir
leicester dedlock," returns mr. smallweed.

"that's it! that's where your temper got the better of you. now, you
keep it under another time and you'll make money by it. shall i ring
for them to carry you down?"

"when are we to hear more of this?" mrs. chadband sternly demands.

"bless your heart for a true woman! always curious, your delightful
sex is!" replies mr. bucket with gallantry. "i shall have the
pleasure of giving you a call to-morrow or next day--not forgetting
mr. smallweed and his proposal of two fifty."

"five hundred!" exclaims mr. smallweed.

"all right! nominally five hundred." mr. bucket has his hand on the
bell-rope. "shall i wish you good day for the present on the part of
myself and the gentleman of the house?" he asks in an insi