n
lincolnshire and has left it to the rain, and the crows, and the
rabbits, and the deer, and the partridges and pheasants. the pictures
of the dedlocks past and gone have seemed to vanish into the damp
walls in mere lowness of spirits, as the housekeeper has passed along
the old rooms shutting up the shutters. and when they will next come
forth again, the fashionable intelligence--which, like the fiend, is
omniscient of the past and present, but not the future--cannot yet
undertake to say.

sir leicester dedlock is only a baronet, but there is no mightier
baronet than he. his family is as old as the hills, and infinitely
more respectable. he has a general opinion that the world might get
on without hills but would be done up without dedlocks. he would on
the whole admit nature to be a good idea (a little low, perhaps, when
not enclosed with a park-fence), but an idea dependent for its
execution on your great county families. he is a gentleman of strict
conscience, disdainful of all littleness and meann
 
 ___________________________
 
 any glancing light, his dress is like himself. he never converses
when not professionally consulted. he is found sometimes, speechless
but quite at home, at corners of dinner-tables in great country
houses and near doors of drawing-rooms, concerning which the
fashionable intelligence is eloquent, where everybody knows him and
where half the peerage stops to say "how do you do, mr. tulkinghorn?"
he receives these salutations with gravity and buries them along with
the rest of his knowledge.

sir leicester dedlock is with my lady and is happy to see mr.
tulkinghorn. there is an air of prescription about him which is
always agreeable to sir leicester; he receives it as a kind of
tribute. he likes mr. tulkinghorn's dress; there is a kind of tribute
in that too. it is eminently respectable, and likewise, in a general
way, retainer-like. it expresses, as it were, the steward of the
legal mysteries, the butler of the legal cellar, of the dedlocks.

has mr. tulkinghorn any idea of this himself? it may be so, o
 
 ___________________________
 
got older but, on the contrary, constructing a model
of a power-loom, she was fain, with many tears, to mention his
backslidings to the baronet. "mrs. rouncewell," said sir leicester,
"i can never consent to argue, as you know, with any one on any
subject. you had better get rid of your boy; you had better get him
into some works. the iron country farther north is, i suppose, the
congenial direction for a boy with these tendencies." farther north
he went, and farther north he grew up; and if sir leicester dedlock
ever saw him when he came to chesney wold to visit his mother, or
ever thought of him afterwards, it is certain that he only regarded
him as one of a body of some odd thousand conspirators, swarthy and
grim, who were in the habit of turning out by torchlight two or three
nights in the week for unlawful purposes.

nevertheless, mrs. rouncewell's son has, in the course of nature and
art, grown up, and established himself, and married, and called unto
him mrs. rouncewell's grandson, who, being out
 
 ___________________________
 
ock. it is considered a perfect likeness, and the
best work of the master."

"blest," says mr. guppy, staring in a kind of dismay at his friend,
"if i can ever have seen her. yet i know her! has the picture been
engraved, miss?"

"the picture has never been engraved. sir leicester has always
refused permission."

"well!" says mr. guppy in a low voice. "i'll be shot if it ain't very
curious how well i know that picture! so that's lady dedlock, is it!"

"the picture on the right is the present sir leicester dedlock. the
picture on the left is his father, the late sir leicester."

mr. guppy has no eyes for either of these magnates. "it's
unaccountable to me," he says, still staring at the portrait, "how
well i know that picture! i'm dashed," adds mr. guppy, looking round,
"if i don't think i must have had a dream of that picture, you know!"

as no one present takes any especial interest in mr. guppy's dreams,
the probability is not pursued. but he still remains so absorbed by
the portrait that he stands im
 
 ___________________________
 
ht, with her head
upon my shoulder and the firelight shining in her thoughtful eyes, "i
don't want to talk when we come upstairs here. only to sit a little
while thinking, with your dear face for company, and to hear the wind
and remember the poor sailors at sea--"

ah! perhaps richard was going to be a sailor. we had talked it over
very often now, and there was some talk of gratifying the inclination
of his childhood for the sea. mr. jarndyce had written to a relation
of the family, a great sir leicester dedlock, for his interest in
richard's favour, generally; and sir leicester had replied in a
gracious manner that he would be happy to advance the prospects of
the young gentleman if it should ever prove to be within his power,
which was not at all probable, and that my lady sent her compliments
to the young gentleman (to whom she perfectly remembered that she was
allied by remote consanguinity) and trusted that he would ever do his
duty in any honourable profession to which he might devote himself.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
 stiff-necked, arrogant imbecile, pig-headed numskull, ever, by
some inexplicable mistake of nature, born in any station of life but
a walking-stick's! the whole of that family are the most solemnly
conceited and consummate blockheads! but it's no matter; he should
not shut up my path if he were fifty baronets melted into one and
living in a hundred chesney wolds, one within another, like the ivory
balls in a chinese carving. the fellow, by his agent, or secretary,
or somebody, writes to me 'sir leicester dedlock, baronet, presents
his compliments to mr. lawrence boythorn, and has to call his
attention to the fact that the green pathway by the old
parsonage-house, now the property of mr. lawrence boythorn, is sir
leicester's right of way, being in fact a portion of the park of
chesney wold, and that sir leicester finds it convenient to close up
the same.' i write to the fellow, 'mr. lawrence boythorn presents his
compliments to sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and has to call his
attention to the fact th
 
 ___________________________
 
air with hoodle. then, giving the home department and the
leadership of the house of commons to joodle, the exchequer to
koodle, the colonies to loodle, and the foreign office to moodle,
what are you to do with noodle? you can't offer him the presidency of
the council; that is reserved for poodle. you can't put him in the
woods and forests; that is hardly good enough for quoodle. what
follows? that the country is shipwrecked, lost, and gone to pieces
(as is made manifest to the patriotism of sir leicester dedlock)
because you can't provide for noodle!

on the other hand, the right honourable william buffy, m.p., contends
across the table with some one else that the shipwreck of the
country--about which there is no doubt; it is only the manner of it
that is in question--is attributable to cuffy. if you had done with
cuffy what you ought to have done when he first came into parliament,
and had prevented him from going over to duffy, you would have got
him into alliance with fuffy, you would have had with 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat extent as
he pointed them out that i really thought he would have hurt himself.

"but this is taking a good deal of trouble," said mr. skimpole in his
light way, "when you are not in earnest after all."

"not in earnest!" returned mr. boythorn with unspeakable warmth. "not
in earnest! if i could have hoped to train him, i would have bought a
lion instead of that dog and would have turned him loose upon the
first intolerable robber who should dare to make an encroachment on
my rights. let sir leicester dedlock consent to come out and decide
this question by single combat, and i will meet him with any weapon
known to mankind in any age or country. i am that much in earnest.
not more!"

we arrived at his house on a saturday. on the sunday morning we all
set forth to walk to the little church in the park. entering the
park, almost immediately by the disputed ground, we pursued a
pleasant footpath winding among the verdant turf and the beautiful
trees until it brought us to the church-porch.

the congreg
 
 ___________________________
 
nto mr.
tulkinghorn's great room and deposited on the turkey rug before the
fire. mr. tulkinghorn is not within at the present moment but will be
back directly. the occupant of the pew in the hall, having said thus
much, stirs the fire and leaves the triumvirate to warm themselves.

mr. george is mightily curious in respect of the room. he looks up at
the painted ceiling, looks round at the old law-books, contemplates
the portraits of the great clients, reads aloud the names on the
boxes.

"'sir leicester dedlock, baronet,'" mr. george reads thoughtfully.
"ha! 'manor of chesney wold.' humph!" mr. george stands looking at
these boxes a long while--as if they were pictures--and comes back to
the fire repeating, "sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and manor of
chesney wold, hey?"

"worth a mint of money, mr. george!" whispers grandfather smallweed,
rubbing his legs. "powerfully rich!"

"who do you mean? this old gentleman, or the baronet?"

"this gentleman, this gentleman."

"so i have heard; and knows a thin
 
 ___________________________
 
s heard the last words of all and
evidently applies them to him. "a pretty character to bear," the
trooper growls with a hasty oath as he strides downstairs. "a
threatening, murderous, dangerous fellow!" and looking up, he sees
the clerk looking down at him and marking him as he passes a lamp.
this so intensifies his dudgeon that for five minutes he is in an ill
humour. but he whistles that off like the rest of it and marches home
to the shooting gallery.




chapter xxviii

the ironmaster


sir leicester dedlock has got the better, for the time being, of the
family gout and is once more, in a literal no less than in a
figurative point of view, upon his legs. he is at his place in
lincolnshire; but the waters are out again on the low-lying grounds,
and the cold and damp steal into chesney wold, though well defended,
and eke into sir leicester's bones. the blazing fires of faggot and
coal--dedlock timber and antediluvian forest--that blaze upon the
broad wide hearths and wink in the twilight on the frown
 
 ___________________________
 
ons, genteel but not
profitable), they may not do, being of the dedlock dignity. so they
visit their richer cousins, and get into debt when they can, and live
but shabbily when they can't, and find--the women no husbands, and
the men no wives--and ride in borrowed carriages, and sit at feasts
that are never of their own making, and so go through high life. the
rich family sum has been divided by so many figures, and they are the
something over that nobody knows what to do with.

everybody on sir leicester dedlock's side of the question and of his
way of thinking would appear to be his cousin more or less. from my
lord boodle, through the duke of foodle, down to noodle, sir
leicester, like a glorious spider, stretches his threads of
relationship. but while he is stately in the cousinship of the
everybodys, he is a kind and generous man, according to his dignified
way, in the cousinship of the nobodys; and at the present time, in
despite of the damp, he stays out the visit of several such cousins
at chesn
 
 ___________________________
 
uge and persistency in an
obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird's-eggs.

in any country in a wholesome state, volumnia would be a clear case
for the pension list. efforts have been made to get her on it, and
when william buffy came in, it was fully expected that her name would
be put down for a couple of hundred a year. but william buffy somehow
discovered, contrary to all expectation, that these were not the
times when it could be done, and this was the first clear indication
sir leicester dedlock had conveyed to him that the country was going
to pieces.

there is likewise the honourable bob stables, who can make warm
mashes with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and is a better shot
than most gamekeepers. he has been for some time particularly
desirous to serve his country in a post of good emoluments,
unaccompanied by any trouble or responsibility. in a well-regulated
body politic this natural desire on the part of a spirited young
gentleman so highly connected would be speedily recogn
 
 ___________________________
 
ized, but
somehow william buffy found when he came in that these were not times
in which he could manage that little matter either, and this was the
second indication sir leicester dedlock had conveyed to him that the
country was going to pieces.

the rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages and
capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have
done well enough in life if they could have overcome their
cousinship; as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, and
lounge in purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite as
much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be
how to dispose of them.

in this society, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that he
scorned and despised the whole ignoble career of sir thomas doodle,
he had merely meant to say that party differences should never induce
him to withhold from it the tribute of his warmest admiration; while
it as opportunely turned out, on the other hand, that sir thomas
doodle had in his own bosom expressly booked lord coodle to go down
to posterity as the mirror of virtue and honour. still england has
been some weeks in the dismal strait of having no pilot (as was well
observed by sir leicester dedlock) to weather the storm; and the
marvellous part of the matter is that england has not appeared to
care very much about it, but has gone on eating and drinking and
marrying and giving in marriage as the old world did in the days
before the flood. but coodle knew the danger, and doodle knew the
danger, and all their followers and hangers-on had the clearest
possible perception of the danger. at last sir thomas doodle has not
only condescended to come in, but has done it handsomely, bringing in
wit
 
 ___________________________
 
i was yet
looking after my housekeeping, singing refrains of barcaroles and
drinking songs, italian and german, by the score.

we were all assembled shortly before dinner, and he was still at the
piano idly picking out in his luxurious way little strains of music,
and talking between whiles of finishing some sketches of the ruined
old verulam wall to-morrow, which he had begun a year or two ago and
had got tired of, when a card was brought in and my guardian read
aloud in a surprised voice, "sir leicester dedlock!"

the visitor was in the room while it was yet turning round with me
and before i had the power to stir. if i had had it, i should have
hurried away. i had not even the presence of mind, in my giddiness,
to retire to ada in the window, or to see the window, or to know
where it was. i heard my name and found that my guardian was
presenting me before i could move to a chair.

"pray be seated, sir leicester."

"mr. jarndyce," said sir leicester in reply as he bowed and seated
himself, "i do mysel
 
 ___________________________
 
read, with much gravity and a little trouble, through his
eye-glass, "mr. hirrold--herald--harold--skampling--skumpling--i beg
your pardon--skimpole."

"this is mr. harold skimpole," said my guardian, evidently surprised.

"oh!" exclaimed sir leicester, "i am happy to meet mr. skimpole and
to have the opportunity of tendering my personal regrets. i hope,
sir, that when you again find yourself in my part of the county, you
will be under no similar sense of restraint."

"you are very obliging, sir leicester dedlock. so encouraged, i shall
certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another visit to
your beautiful house. the owners of such places as chesney wold,"
said mr. skimpole with his usual happy and easy air, "are public
benefactors. they are good enough to maintain a number of delightful
objects for the admiration and pleasure of us poor men; and not to
reap all the admiration and pleasure that they yield is to be
ungrateful to our benefactors."

sir leicester seemed to approve of this sent
 
 ___________________________
 
yce, to repeat to yourself, and to
these ladies, the assurance i have already tendered to mr. skimpole.
circumstances undoubtedly prevent my saying that it would afford me
any gratification to hear that mr. boythorn had favoured my house
with his presence, but those circumstances are confined to that
gentleman himself and do not extend beyond him."

"you know my old opinion of him," said mr. skimpole, lightly
appealing to us. "an amiable bull who is determined to make every
colour scarlet!"

sir leicester dedlock coughed as if he could not possibly hear
another word in reference to such an individual and took his leave
with great ceremony and politeness. i got to my own room with all
possible speed and remained there until i had recovered my
self-command. it had been very much disturbed, but i was thankful to
find when i went downstairs again that they only rallied me for
having been shy and mute before the great lincolnshire baronet.

by that time i had made up my mind that the period was come when i
m
 
 ___________________________
 
at he was in no trouble which i could
readily understand.

"what concerns you, my dear esther," said he, "concerns us all. you
cannot be more ready to speak than i am to hear."

"i know that, guardian. but i have such need of your advice and
support. oh! you don't know how much need i have to-night."

he looked unprepared for my being so earnest, and even a little
alarmed.

"or how anxious i have been to speak to you," said i, "ever since the
visitor was here to-day."

"the visitor, my dear! sir leicester dedlock?"

"yes."

he folded his arms and sat looking at me with an air of the
profoundest astonishment, awaiting what i should say next. i did not
know how to prepare him.

"why, esther," said he, breaking into a smile, "our visitor and you
are the two last persons on earth i should have thought of connecting
together!"

"oh, yes, guardian, i know it. and i too, but a little while ago."

the smile passed from his face, and he became graver than before. he
crossed to the door to see that it was shut (b
 
 ___________________________
 
le--i
don't say it's certainly so, mind you, but it's possible--that he may
have been heard to call you a threatening, murdering, dangerous
fellow."

the trooper gasps as if he would admit it all if he could speak.

"now, george," continues mr. bucket, putting his hat upon the table
with an air of business rather in the upholstery way than otherwise,
"my wish is, as it has been all the evening, to make things pleasant.
i tell you plainly there's a reward out, of a hundred guineas,
offered by sir leicester dedlock, baronet. you and me have always
been pleasant together; but i have got a duty to discharge; and if
that hundred guineas is to be made, it may as well be made by me as
any other man. on all of which accounts, i should hope it was clear
to you that i must have you, and that i'm damned if i don't have you.
am i to call in any assistance, or is the trick done?"

mr. george has recovered himself and stands up like a soldier.
"come," he says; "i am ready."

"george," continues mr. bucket, "wait a bi
 
 ___________________________
 
y presently that this was all we said about that. i was
rather disappointed. i feared i might not quite have been all i had
meant to be since the letter and the answer.




chapter lii

obstinacy


but one other day had intervened when, early in the morning as we
were going to breakfast, mr. woodcourt came in haste with the
astounding news that a terrible murder had been committed for which
mr. george had been apprehended and was in custody. when he told us
that a large reward was offered by sir leicester dedlock for the
murderer's apprehension, i did not in my first consternation
understand why; but a few more words explained to me that the
murdered person was sir leicester's lawyer, and immediately my
mother's dread of him rushed into my remembrance.

this unforeseen and violent removal of one whom she had long watched
and distrusted and who had long watched and distrusted her, one for
whom she could have had few intervals of kindness, always dreading in
him a dangerous and secret enemy, appeared so a
 
 ___________________________
 
 the friendliest condition
towards his species and will drink with most of them. he is free with
his money, affable in his manners, innocent in his conversation--but
through the placid stream of his life there glides an under-current
of forefinger.

time and place cannot bind mr. bucket. like man in the abstract, he
is here to-day and gone to-morrow--but, very unlike man indeed, he is
here again the next day. this evening he will be casually looking
into the iron extinguishers at the door of sir leicester dedlock's
house in town; and to-morrow morning he will be walking on the leads
at chesney wold, where erst the old man walked whose ghost is
propitiated with a hundred guineas. drawers, desks, pockets, all
things belonging to him, mr. bucket examines. a few hours afterwards,
he and the roman will be alone together comparing forefingers.

it is likely that these occupations are irreconcilable with home
enjoyment, but it is certain that mr. bucket at present does not go
home. though in general he highly 
 
 ___________________________
 
appreciates the society of mrs.
bucket--a lady of a natural detective genius, which if it had been
improved by professional exercise, might have done great things, but
which has paused at the level of a clever amateur--he holds himself
aloof from that dear solace. mrs. bucket is dependent on their lodger
(fortunately an amiable lady in whom she takes an interest) for
companionship and conversation.

a great crowd assembles in lincoln's inn fields on the day of the
funeral. sir leicester dedlock attends the ceremony in person;
strictly speaking, there are only three other human followers, that
is to say, lord doodle, william buffy, and the debilitated cousin
(thrown in as a make-weight), but the amount of inconsolable
carriages is immense. the peerage contributes more four-wheeled
affliction than has ever been seen in that neighbourhood. such is the
assemblage of armorial bearings on coach panels that the herald's
college might be supposed to have lost its father and mother at a
blow. 
 
 ___________________________
 
is. between the immeasurable track of
space beyond the little wound that has thrown the one into the fixed
sleep which jolts so heavily over the stones of the streets, and the
narrow track of blood which keeps the other in the watchful state
expressed in every hair of his head! but it is all one to both;
neither is troubled about that.

mr. bucket sits out the procession in his own easy manner and glides
from the carriage when the opportunity he has settled with himself
arrives. he makes for sir leicester dedlock's, which is at present a
sort of home to him, where he comes and goes as he likes at all
hours, where he is always welcome and made much of, where he knows
the whole establishment, and walks in an atmosphere of mysterious
greatness.

no knocking or ringing for mr. bucket. he has caused himself to be
provided with a key and can pass in at his pleasure. as he is
crossing the hall, mercury informs him, "here's another letter for
you, mr. bucket, come by post," and gives it him.

"another one, eh?"
 
 ___________________________
 
 three distinctly different bows to these three
people. a bow of homage to sir leicester, a bow of gallantry to
volumnia, and a bow of recognition to the debilitated cousin, to whom
it airily says, "you are a swell about town, and you know me, and i
know you." having distributed these little specimens of his tact, mr.
bucket rubs his hands.

"have you anything new to communicate, officer?" inquires sir
leicester. "do you wish to hold any conversation with me in private?"

"why--not to-night, sir leicester dedlock, baronet."

"because my time," pursues sir leicester, "is wholly at your disposal
with a view to the vindication of the outraged majesty of the law."

mr. bucket coughs and glances at volumnia, rouged and necklaced, as
though he would respectfully observe, "i do assure you, you're a
pretty creetur. i've seen hundreds worse looking at your time of
life, i have indeed."

the fair volumnia, not quite unconscious perhaps of the humanizing
influence of her charms, pauses in the writing of cocked-hat
 
 ___________________________
 
 what is doing? whether they are
going to convict, or whatever it is, that dreadful soldier? whether
he had any accomplices, or whatever the thing is called in the law?
and a great deal more to the like artless purpose.

"why you see, miss," returns mr. bucket, bringing the finger into
persuasive action--and such is his natural gallantry that he had
almost said "my dear"--"it ain't easy to answer those questions at
the present moment. not at the present moment. i've kept myself on
this case, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," whom mr. bucket takes
into the conversation in right of his importance, "morning, noon, and
night. but for a glass or two of sherry, i don't think i could have
had my mind so much upon the stretch as it has been. i could answer
your questions, miss, but duty forbids it. sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, will very soon be made acquainted with all that has been
traced. and i hope that he may find it"--mr. bucket again looks
grave--"to his satisfaction."

the debilitated cousin only hopes
 
 ___________________________
 
s going to cut in before he had rounded his sentence, "or
who vindicate their outraged majesty."

volumnia with all humility explains that she had not merely the plea
of curiosity to urge (in common with the giddy youth of her sex in
general) but that she is perfectly dying with regret and interest for
the darling man whose loss they all deplore.

"very well, volumnia," returns sir leicester. "then you cannot be too
discreet."

mr. bucket takes the opportunity of a pause to be heard again.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i have no objections to telling this
lady, with your leave and among ourselves, that i look upon the case
as pretty well complete. it is a beautiful case--a beautiful
case--and what little is wanting to complete it, i expect to be able
to supply in a few hours."

"i am very glad indeed to hear it," says sir leicester. "highly
creditable to you."

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet," returns mr. bucket very seriously,
"i hope it may at one and the same time do me credit and prove
satisfac
 
 ___________________________
 
 you please."

mr. bucket (still grave) inquires if to-morrow morning, now, would
suit, in case he should be as for'ard as he expects to be. sir
leicester replies, "all times are alike to me." mr. bucket makes his
three bows and is withdrawing when a forgotten point occurs to him.

"might i ask, by the by," he says in a low voice, cautiously
returning, "who posted the reward-bill on the staircase."

"i ordered it to be put up there," replies sir leicester.

"would it be considered a liberty, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, if
i was to ask you why?"

"not at all. i chose it as a conspicuous part of the house. i think
it cannot be too prominently kept before the whole establishment. i
wish my people to be impressed with the enormity of the crime, the
determination to punish it, and the hopelessness of escape. at the
same time, officer, if you in your better knowledge of the subject
see any objection--"

mr. bucket sees none now; the bill having been put up, had better not
be taken down. repeating his thre
 
 ___________________________
 
y the aid of a clean shirt
and a wet hairbrush, with which instrument, on occasions of ceremony,
he lubricates such thin locks as remain to him after his life of
severe study, mr. bucket lays in a breakfast of two mutton chops as a
foundation to work upon, together with tea, eggs, toast, and
marmalade on a corresponding scale. having much enjoyed these
strengthening matters and having held subtle conference with his
familiar demon, he confidently instructs mercury "just to mention
quietly to sir leicester dedlock, baronet, that whenever he's ready
for me, i'm ready for him." a gracious message being returned that
sir leicester will expedite his dressing and join mr. bucket in the
library within ten minutes, mr. bucket repairs to that apartment and
stands before the fire with his finger on his chin, looking at the
blazing coals.

thoughtful mr. bucket is, as a man may be with weighty work to do,
but composed, sure, confident. from the expression of his face he
might be a famous whist-player for a large s
 
 ___________________________
 
o anybody else, but mr. bucket
palpably knows all about it--"and recent circumstances have brought
it on."

as he takes his seat with some difficulty and with an air of pain,
mr. bucket draws a little nearer, standing with one of his large
hands on the library-table.

"i am not aware, officer," sir leicester observes; raising his eyes
to his face, "whether you wish us to be alone, but that is entirely
as you please. if you do, well and good. if not, miss dedlock would
be interested--"

"why, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," returns mr. bucket with his
head persuasively on one side and his forefinger pendant at one ear
like an earring, "we can't be too private just at present. you will
presently see that we can't be too private. a lady, under the
circumstances, and especially in miss dedlock's elevated station of
society, can't but be agreeable to me, but speaking without a view to
myself, i will take the liberty of assuring you that i know we can't
be too private."

"that is enough."

"so much so, sir l
 
 ___________________________
 
eicester dedlock, baronet," mr. bucket resumes,
"that i was on the point of asking your permission to turn the key in
the door."

"by all means." mr. bucket skilfully and softly takes that
precaution, stooping on his knee for a moment from mere force of
habit so to adjust the key in the lock as that no one shall peep in
from the outerside.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i mentioned yesterday evening that i
wanted but a very little to complete this case. i have now completed
it and collected proof against the person who did this crime."

"against the soldier?"

"no, sir leicester dedlock; not the soldier."

sir leicester looks astounded and inquires, "is the man in custody?"

mr. bucket tells him, after a pause, "it was a woman."

sir leicester leans back in his chair, and breathlessly ejaculates,
"good heaven!"

"now, sir leicester dedlock, baronet,"
 
 ___________________________
 
 mr. bucket begins, standing
over him with one hand spread out on the library-table and the
forefinger of the other in impressive use, "it's my duty to prepare
you for a train of circumstances that may, and i go so far as to say
that will, give you a shock. but sir leicester dedlock, baronet, you
are a gentleman, and i know what a gentleman is and what a gentleman
is capable of. a gentleman can bear a shock when it must come, boldly
and steadily. a gentleman can make up his mind to stand up against
almost any blow. why, take yourself, sir leicester dedlock, baronet.
if there's a blow to be inflicted on you, you naturally think of your
family. you ask yourself, how would all them ancestors of yours, away
to julius caesar--not to go beyond him at present--have borne that
blo
 
 ___________________________
 
w; you remember scores of them that would have borne it well; and
you bear it well on their accounts, and to maintain the family
credit. that's the way you argue, and that's the way you act, sir
leicester dedlock, baronet."

sir leicester, leaning back in his chair and grasping the elbows,
sits looking at him with a stony face.

"now, sir leicester dedlock," proceeds mr. bucket, "thus preparing
you, let me beg of you not to trouble your mind for a moment as to
anything having come to my knowledge. i know so much about so many
characters, high and low, that a piece of information more or less
don't signify a straw. i don't suppose there's a move on the board
that would surprise me, and as to this or that move having taken
place, why my knowing it is no odds at all, any possible move
whatever (provided it's in a wrong direction) being a probable mo
 
 ___________________________
 
 yourself be put
out of the way because of my knowing anything of your family
affairs."

"i thank you for your preparation," returns sir leicester after a
silence, without moving hand, foot, or feature, "which i hope is not
necessary; though i give it credit for being well intended. be so
good as to go on. also"--sir leicester seems to shrink in the shadow
of his figure--"also, to take a seat, if you have no objection."

none at all. mr. bucket brings a chair and diminishes his shadow.
"now, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, with this short preface i come
to the point. lady dedlock--"

sir leicester raises himself in his seat and stares at him fiercely.
mr. bucket brings the finger into play as an emollient.

"lady dedlock, you see she's universally admired. that's what her
ladyship is; she's universally admired," says mr. bucket.

"i would greatly prefer, officer," sir leicester returns stiffly, "my
lady's name being entirely omitted from this discussion."

"so would i, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t--it's impossible."

"impossible?"

mr. bucket shakes his relentless head.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, it's altogether impossible. what i
have got to say is about her ladyship. she is the pivot it all turns
on."

"officer," retorts sir leicester with a fiery eye and a quivering
lip, "you know your duty. do your duty, but be careful not to
overstep it. i would not suffer it. i would not endure it. you bring
my lady's name into this communication upon your responsibility--upon
your responsibility. my lady's name is not a name for common persons
to trifle with!"

"sir leicester dedlock, b
 
 ___________________________
 
aronet, i say what i must say, and no more."

"i hope it may prove so. very well. go on. go on, sir!" glancing at
the angry eyes which now avoid him and at the angry figure trembling
from head to foot, yet striving to be still, mr. bucket feels his way
with his forefinger and in a low voice proceeds.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, it becomes my duty to tell you that
the deceased mr. tulkinghorn long entertained mistrusts and
suspicions of lady dedlock."

"if he had dared to breathe them to me, sir--which he never did--i
would have killed him myself!" exclaims sir leicester, striking his
hand upon the table. but in the very heat and fury of the act he
stops, fixed by the knowing eyes of mr. bucket, whose forefinger is
slowly going and who, with mingled confidence and patience, shakes
his head.

"sir leicester de
 
 ___________________________
 
dlock, the deceased mr. tulkinghorn was deep and
close, and what he fully had in his mind in the very beginning i
can't quite take upon myself to say. but i know from his lips that he
long ago suspected lady dedlock of having discovered, through the
sight of some handwriting--in this very house, and when you yourself,
sir leicester dedlock, were present--the existence, in great poverty,
of a certain person who had been her lover before you courted her and
who ought to have been her husband." mr. bucket stops and
deliberately repeats, "ought to have been her husband, not a doubt
about it. i know from his lips that when that person soon afterwards
died, he suspected lady dedlock of visiting his wretched lodging and
his wretched grave, alone and in secret. i know from my own inquiries
and through my eyes and ears that lady dedlock d
 
 ___________________________
 
id make such visit in
the dress of her own maid, for the deceased mr. tulkinghorn employed
me to reckon up her ladyship--if you'll excuse my making use of the
term we commonly employ--and i reckoned her up, so far, completely. i
confronted the maid in the chambers in lincoln's inn fields with a
witness who had been lady dedlock's guide, and there couldn't be the
shadow of a doubt that she had worn the young woman's dress, unknown
to her. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i did endeavour to pave the
way a little towards these unpleasant disclosures yesterday by saying
that very strange things happened even in high families sometimes.
all this, and more, has happened in your own family, and to and
through your own lady. it's my belief that the deceased mr.
tulkinghorn followed up these inquiries to the hour of his death and
that he and lady dedlock even had bad blood between them upon the
matter that very night. now, only you put that to lady dedlock, s
 
 ___________________________
 
ir
leicester dedlock, baronet, and ask her ladyship whether, even after
he had left here, she didn't go down to his chambers with the
intention of saying something further to him, dressed in a loose
black mantle with a deep fringe to it."

sir leicester sits like a statue, gazing at the cruel finger that is
probing the life-blood of his heart.

"you put that to her ladyship, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, from
me, inspector bucket of the detective. and if her ladyship makes any
difficulty about admitting of it, you tell her that it's no use, that
inspector bucket knows it and knows that she passed the soldier as
you called him (though he's not in the army now) and knows that she
knows she passed him on the staircase. now, sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, why do i relate all this?"

sir leicester, who has covered his face with his hands, uttering a
single groan, requests him to pause for
 
 ___________________________
 
ss,
and mr. bucket soon detects an unusual slowness in his speech, with
now and then a curious trouble in beginning, which occasions him to
utter inarticulate sounds. with such sounds he now breaks silence,
soon, however, controlling himself to say that he does not comprehend
why a gentleman so faithful and zealous as the late mr. tulkinghorn
should have communicated to him nothing of this painful, this
distressing, this unlooked-for, this overwhelming, this incredible
intelligence.

"again, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," returns mr. bucket, "put it
to her ladyship to clear that up. put it to her ladyship, if you
think it right, from inspector bucket of the detective. you'll find,
or i'm much mistaken, that the deceased mr. tulkinghorn had the
intention of communicating the whole to you as soon as he considered
it ripe, and further, that he had given her ladyship so to
understand. why, he might have been going to reveal it the very
morning when i examined the body! you don't know what i'm going to
say
 
 ___________________________
 
riend and brother serjeant of the same name," says mr.
bucket, offering his hand, "and consequently feel a liking for it.
mrs. chadband, no doubt?"

"and mrs. snagsby," mr. smallweed introduces.

"husband a law-stationer and a friend of my own," says mr. bucket.
"love him like a brother! now, what's up?"

"do you mean what business have we come upon?" mr. smallweed asks, a
little dashed by the suddenness of this turn.

"ah! you know what i mean. let us hear what it's all about in
presence of sir leicester dedlock, baronet. come."

mr. smallweed, beckoning mr. chadband, takes a moment's counsel with
him in a whisper. mr. chadband, expressing a considerable amount of
oil from the pores of his forehead and the palms of his hands, says
aloud, "yes. you first!" and retires to his former place.

"i was the client and friend of mr. tulkinghorn," pipes grandfather
smallweed then; "i did business with him. i was useful to him, and he
was useful to me. krook, dead and gone, was my brother-in-law. he was
own broth
 
 ___________________________
 
 honoria. dear me, that's not a common name, honoria,
is it? there's no lady in this house that signs honoria is there? oh,
no, i don't think so! oh, no, i don't think so! and not in the same
hand, perhaps? oh, no, i don't think so!"

here mr. smallweed, seized with a fit of coughing in the midst of his
triumph, breaks off to ejaculate, "oh, dear me! oh, lord! i'm shaken
all to pieces!"

"now, when you're ready," says mr. bucket after awaiting his
recovery, "to come to anything that concerns sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, here the gentleman sits, you know."

"haven't i come to it, mr. bucket?" cries grandfather smallweed.
"isn't the gentleman concerned yet? not with captain hawdon, and his
ever affectionate honoria, and their child into the bargain? come,
then, i want to know where those letters are. that concerns me, if it
don't concern sir leicester dedlock. i will know where they are. i
won't have 'em disappear so quietly. i handed 'em over to my friend
and solicitor, mr. tulkinghorn, not to anybody
 
 ___________________________
 
 got 'em. is that the
packet?"

mr. smallweed looks, with greedy eyes, at the little bundle mr.
bucket produces from a mysterious part of his coat, and identifies it
as the same.

"what have you got to say next?" asks mr. bucket. "now, don't open
your mouth too wide, because you don't look handsome when you do it."

"i want five hundred pound."

"no, you don't; you mean fifty," says mr. bucket humorously.

it appears, however, that mr. smallweed means five hundred.

"that is, i am deputed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to consider
(without admitting or promising anything) this bit of business," says
mr. bucket--sir leicester mechanically bows his head--"and you ask me
to consider a proposal of five hundred pounds. why, it's an
unreasonable proposal! two fifty would be bad enough, but better than
that. hadn't you better say two fifty?"

mr. smallweed is quite clear that he had better not.

"then," says mr. bucket, "let's hear mr. chadband. lord! many a time
i've heard my old fellow-serjeant of that n
 
 ___________________________
 
lvement
possible and impossible, having no pecuniary motive whatever, no
scheme or project but the one mentioned, and bringing here, and
taking everywhere, her own dense atmosphere of dust, arising from the
ceaseless working of her mill of jealousy.

while this exordium is in hand--and it takes some time--mr. bucket,
who has seen through the transparency of mrs. snagsby's vinegar at a
glance, confers with his familiar demon and bestows his shrewd
attention on the chadbands and mr. smallweed. sir leicester dedlock
remains immovable, with the same icy surface upon him, except that he
once or twice looks towards mr. bucket, as relying on that officer
alone of all mankind.

"very good," says mr. bucket. "now i understand you, you know, and
being deputed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to look into this
little matter," again sir leicester mechanically bows in confirmation
of the statement, "can give it my fair and full attention. now i
won't allude to conspiring to extort money or anything of that sort,
b
 
 ___________________________
 
s. so it is, and such is life. the
cat's away, and the mice they play; the frost breaks up, and the
water runs. now, with regard to the party to be apprehended."

sir leicester seems to wake, though his eyes have been wide open, and
he looks intently at mr. bucket as mr. bucket refers to his watch.

"the party to be apprehended is now in this house," proceeds mr.
bucket, putting up his watch with a steady hand and with rising
spirits, "and i'm about to take her into custody in your presence.
sir leicester dedlock, baronet, don't you say a word nor yet stir.
there'll be no noise and no disturbance at all. i'll come back in the
course of the evening, if agreeable to you, and endeavour to meet
your wishes respecting this unfortunate family matter and the
nobbiest way of keeping it quiet. now, sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, don't you be nervous on account of the apprehension at
present coming off. you shall see the whole case clear, from first to
last."

mr. bucket rings, goes to the door, briefly whispers
 
 ___________________________
 
 mercury, shuts
the door, and stands behind it with his arms folded. after a suspense
of a minute or two the door slowly opens and a frenchwoman enters.
mademoiselle hortense.

the moment she is in the room mr. bucket claps the door to and puts
his back against it. the suddenness of the noise occasions her to
turn, and then for the first time she sees sir leicester dedlock in
his chair.

"i ask you pardon," she mutters hurriedly. "they tell me there was no
one here."

her step towards the door brings her front to front with mr. bucket.
suddenly a spasm shoots across her face and she turns deadly pale.

"this is my lodger, sir leicester dedlock," says mr. bucket, nodding
at her. "this foreign young woman has been my lodger for some weeks
back."

"what do sir leicester care for that, you think, my angel?" returns
mademoiselle in a jocular strain.

"why, my angel," 
 
 ___________________________
 
 this,
don't you talk too much. you're not expected to say anything here,
and you can't keep too quiet a tongue in your head. in short, the
less you parlay, the better, you know." mr. bucket is very complacent
over this french explanation.

mademoiselle, with that tigerish expansion of the mouth and her black
eyes darting fire upon him, sits upright on the sofa in a rigid
state, with her hands clenched--and her feet too, one might
suppose--muttering, "oh, you bucket, you are a devil!"

"now, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," says mr. bucket, and from this
time forth the finger never rests, "this young woman, my lodger, was
her ladyship's maid at the time i have mentioned to you; and this
young woman, besides being extraordinary vehement and passionate
against her ladyship after being discharged--"

"lie!" cries mademoiselle. "i discharge myself."

"now, why don't you take my advice?" returns mr. bucket in an
impressive, almost in an imploring, tone. "i'm surprised at the
indiscreetness you commit. you'll
 
 ___________________________
 
 something that'll be used
against you, you know. you're sure to come to it. never you mind what
i say till it's given in evidence. it is not addressed to you."

"discharge, too," cries mademoiselle furiously, "by her ladyship! eh,
my faith, a pretty ladyship! why, i r-r-r-ruin my character by
remaining with a ladyship so infame!"

"upon my soul i wonder at you!" mr. bucket remonstrates. "i thought
the french were a polite nation, i did, really. yet to hear a female
going on like that before sir leicester dedlock, baronet!"

"he is a poor abused!" cries mademoiselle. "i spit upon his house,
upon his name, upon his imbecility," all of which she makes the
carpet represent. "oh, that he is a great man! oh, yes, superb! oh,
heaven! bah!"

"well, sir leicester dedlock," proceeds mr. bucket, "this intemperate
foreigner also angrily took it into her head that she had established
a claim upon mr. tulkinghorn, deceased, by attending on the occasion
i told you of at his chambers, though she was liberally paid for
 
 ___________________________
 
y, "you
must take the consequences. now, whether she became my lodger, sir
leicester dedlock, with any deliberate intention then of doing this
deed and blinding me, i give no opinion on; but she lived in my house
in that capacity at the time that she was hovering about the chambers
of the deceased mr. tulkinghorn with a view to a wrangle, and
likewise persecuting and half frightening the life out of an
unfortunate stationer."

"lie!" cries mademoiselle. "all lie!"

"the murder was committed, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and you
know under what circumstances. now, i beg of you to follow me close
with your attention for a minute or two. i was sent for, and the case
was entrusted to me. i examined the place, and the body, and the
papers, and everything. from information i received (from a clerk in
the same house) i took george into custody as having been seen
hanging about there on the night, and at very nigh the time of the
murder, also as having been overheard in high words with the deceased
on former
 
 ___________________________
 
 occasions--even threatening him, as the witness made out.
if you ask me, sir leicester dedlock, whether from the first i
believed george to be the murderer, i tell you candidly no, but he
might be, notwithstanding, and there was enough against him to make
it my duty to take him and get him kept under remand. now, observe!"

as mr. bucket bends forward in some excitement--for him--and
inaugurates what he is going to say with one ghostly beat of his
forefinger in the air, mademoiselle hortense fixes her black eyes
upon him with a dark frown and sets her dry lips closely and firmly
together
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"i went home, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, at night and found this
young woman having supper with my wife, mrs. bucket. she had made a
mighty show of being fond of mrs. bucket from her first offering
herself as our lodger, but that night she made more than ever--in
fact, overdid it. likewise she overdid her respect, and all that, for
the lamented memory of the deceased mr. tulkinghorn. by the living
lord it flashed upon me, as i sat opposite to her at the table and
saw her with a knife in her hand, that she had done it!"

made
 
 ___________________________
 
s the matter with you now?" she asks him.

"don't you think any more," returns mr. bucket with admonitory
finger, "of throwing yourself out of window. that's what's the matter
with me. come! just take my arm. you needn't get up; i'll sit down by
you. now take my arm, will you? i'm a married man, you know; you're
acquainted with my wife. just take my arm."

vainly endeavouring to moisten those dry lips, with a painful sound
she struggles with herself and complies.

"now we're all right again. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, this case
could never have been the case it is but for mrs. bucket, who is a
woman in fifty thousand--in a hundred and fifty thousand! to throw
this young woman off her guard, i have never set foot in our house
since, though i've communicated with mrs. bucket in the baker's
loaves and in the milk as often as required. my whispered words to
mrs. bucket when she had the sheet in her mouth were, 'my dear, can
you throw her off continually with natural accounts of my suspicions
against ge
 
 ___________________________
 
 and keep watch upon her night and day? can you undertake to say,
'she shall do nothing without my knowledge, she shall be my prisoner
without suspecting it, she shall no more escape from me than from
death, and her life shall be my life, and her soul my soul, till i
have got her, if she did this murder?' mrs. bucket says to me, as
well as she could speak on account of the sheet, 'bucket, i can!' and
she has acted up to it glorious!"

"lies!" mademoiselle interposes. "all lies, my friend!"

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, how did my calculations come out
under these circumstances? when i calculated that this impetuous
young woman would overdo it in new directions, was i wrong or right?
i was right. what does she try to do? don't let it give you a turn?
to throw the murder on her ladyship."

sir leicester rises from his chair and staggers down again.

"and she got encouragement in it from hearing that i was always here,
which was done a-purpose. now, open that pocket-book of mine, sir
leicester dedlock,
 
 ___________________________
 
hich i
stopped this very morning, and read the three words 'lady dedlock,
murderess' in it. these letters have been falling about like a shower
of lady-birds. what do you say now to mrs. bucket, from her spy-place
having seen them all 'written by this young woman? what do you say to
mrs. bucket having, within this half-hour, secured the corresponding
ink and paper, fellow half-sheets and what not? what do you say to
mrs. bucket having watched the posting of 'em every one by this young
woman, sir leicester dedlock, baronet?" mr. bucket asks, triumphant
in his admiration of his lady's genius.

two things are especially observable as mr. bucket proceeds to a
conclusion. first, that he seems imperceptibly to establish a
dreadful right of property in mademoiselle. secondly, that the very
atmosphere she breathes seems to narrow and contract about her as if
a close net or a pall were being drawn nearer and yet nearer around
her breathless figure.

"there is no doubt that her ladyship was on the spot at the eve
 
 ___________________________
 
description of your
house at chesney wold. not much in that, you'll say, sir leicester
dedlock, baronet. no. but when my foreign friend here is so
thoroughly off her guard as to think it a safe time to tear up the
rest of that leaf, and when mrs. bucket puts the pieces together and
finds the wadding wanting, it begins to look like queer street."

"these are very long lies," mademoiselle interposes. "you prose great
deal. is it that you have almost all finished, or are you speaking
always?"

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet," proceeds mr. bucket, who delights
in a full title and does violence to himself when he dispenses with
any fragment of it, "the last point in the case which i am now going
to mention shows the necessity of patience in our business, and never
doing a thing in a hurry. i watched this young woman yesterday
without her knowledge when she was looking at the funeral, in company
with my wife, who planned to take her there; and i had so much to
convict her, and i saw such an expression in her
 
 ___________________________
 
mr. before it. the old housekeeper suggests bucket.
thank heaven! that's his meaning.

mr. bucket is found to be downstairs, by appointment. shall he come
up?

there is no possibility of misconstruing sir leicester's burning wish
to see him or the desire he signifies to have the room cleared of
every one but the housekeeper. it is speedily done, and mr. bucket
appears. of all men upon earth, sir leicester seems fallen from his
high estate to place his sole trust and reliance upon this man.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i'm sorry to see you like this. i
hope you'll cheer up. i'm sure you will, on account of the family
credit."

sir leicester puts her letter in his hands and looks intently in his
face while he reads it. a new intelligence comes into mr. bucket's
eye as he reads on; with one hook of his finger, while that eye is
still glancing over the words, he indicates, "sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, i understand you."

sir leicester writes upon the slate. "full forgiveness. find--" mr.
bucket sto
 
 ___________________________
 
ps his hand.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i'll find her. but my search after
her must be begun out of hand. not a minute must be lost."

with the quickness of thought, he follows sir leicester dedlock's
look towards a little box upon a table.

"bring it here, sir leicester dedlock, baronet? certainly. open it
with one of these here keys? certainly. the littlest key? to be sure.
take the notes out? so i will. count 'em? that's soon done. twenty
and thirty's fifty, and twenty's seventy, and fifty's one twenty, and
forty's one sixty. take 'em for expenses? that i'll do, and render an
account of course. don't spare money? no i won't."

the velocity and certainty of mr. bucket's interpretation on all
these heads is little short of miraculous. mrs. rouncewell, who holds
the li
 
 ___________________________
 
ftness of his eyes and hands as he
starts up, furnished for his journey.

"you're george's mother, old lady; that's about what you are, i
believe?" says mr. bucket aside, with his hat already on and
buttoning his coat.

"yes, sir, i am his distressed mother."

"so i thought, according to what he mentioned to me just now. well,
then, i'll tell you something. you needn't be distressed no more.
your son's all right. now, don't you begin a-crying, because what
you've got to do is to take care of sir leicester dedlock, baronet,
and you won't do that by crying. as to your son, he's all right, i
tell you; and he sends his loving duty, and hoping you're the same.
he's discharged honourable; that's about what he is; with no more
imputation on his character than there is on yours, and yours is a
tidy one, i'll bet a pound. you may trust me, for i took your son. he
conducted himself in a game way, too, on that occasion; and he's a
fine-made man, and you're a fine-made old lady, and you're a mother
and son, the pai
 
 ___________________________
 
r of you, as might be showed for models in a caravan.
sir leicester dedlock, baronet, what you've trusted to me i'll go
through with. don't you be afraid of my turning out of my way, right
or left, or taking a sleep, or a wash, or a shave till i have found
what i go in search of. say everything as is kind and forgiving on
your part? sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i will. and i wish you
better, and these family affairs smoothed over--as, lord, many other
family affairs equally has been, and equally will be, to the end of
time."

with this peroration, mr. bucket, buttoned up, goes quietly out,
looking steadily before him as if he were already piercing the night
in quest of the fugitive.

his first step is to take himself to lady dedlock's rooms and look
all over them for any trifling indication that may help him. the
rooms are in darkness now; a
 
 ___________________________
 
don't be alarmed, sir." in a moment his visitor is confidential with
him in the hall, has shut the door, and stands with his hand upon the
lock. "i've had the pleasure of seeing you before. inspector bucket.
look at that handkerchief, sir, miss esther summerson's. found it
myself put away in a drawer of lady dedlock's, quarter of an hour
ago. not a moment to lose. matter of life or death. you know lady
dedlock?"

"yes."

"there has been a discovery there to-day. family affairs have come
out. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, has had a fit--apoplexy or
paralysis--and couldn't be brought to, and precious time has been
lost. lady dedlock disappeared this afternoon and left a letter for
him that looks bad. run your eye over it. here it is!"

mr. jarndyce, having read it, asks him what he thinks.

"i don't know. it looks like suicide. anyways, there's more and more
danger, every minute, of its drawing to that. i'd give a hundred
pound an hour to have got the start of the present time. now, mr.
jarndyce, i am e
 
 ___________________________
 
mployed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to follow
her and find her, to save her and take her his forgiveness. i have
money and full power, but i want something else. i want miss
summerson."

mr. jarndyce in a troubled voice repeats, "miss summerson?"

"now, mr. jarndyce"--mr. bucket has read his face with the greatest
attention all along--"i speak to you as a gentleman of a humane
heart, and under such pressing circumstances as don't often happen.
if ever delay was dangerous, it's dangerous now; and if ever you
couldn't aft
 
 ___________________________
 
"it's a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out
in."

i told him i cared for no weather and was warmly clothed.

"it may be a long job," he observed; "but so that it ends well, never
mind, miss."

"i pray to heaven it may end well!" said i.

he nodded comfortingly. "you see, whatever you do, don't you go and
fret yourself. you keep yourself cool and equal for anything that may
happen, and it'll be the better for you, the better for me, the
better for lady dedlock, and the better for sir leicester dedlock,
baronet."

he was really very kind and gentle, and as he stood before the fire
warming his boots and rubbing his face with his forefinger, i felt a
confidence in his sagacity which reassured me. it was not yet a
quarter to two when i heard horses' feet and wheels outside. "now,
miss summerson," said he, "we are off, if you please!"

he gave me his arm, and the two officers courteously bowed me out,
and we found at the door a phaeton or barouche with a postilion and
post horses. mr. bucket hand
 
 ___________________________
 
new he was far more capable than i of
deciding what we ought to do, but was he sure that this was right?
could i not go forward by myself in search of--i grasped his hand
again in my distress and whispered it to him--of my own mother.

"my dear," he answered, "i know, i know, and would i put you wrong,
do you think? inspector bucket. now you know me, don't you?"

what could i say but yes!

"then you keep up as good a heart as you can, and you rely upon me
for standing by you, no less than by sir leicester dedlock, baronet.
now, are you right there?"

"all right, sir!"

"off she goes, then. and get on, my lads!"

we were again upon the melancholy road by which we had come, tearing
up the miry sleet and thawing snow as if they were torn up by a
waterwheel.




chapter lviii

a wintry day and night


still impassive, as behoves its breeding, the dedlock town house
carries itself as usual towards the street of dismal grandeur. there
are powdered heads from time to time in the little windows of the
hall, loo
 
 ___________________________
 
 long time by the hand. "but the truth is, brother, i am
a--i am a kind of a weed, and it's too late to plant me in a regular
garden."

"my dear george," returns the elder, concentrating his strong steady
brow upon him and smiling confidently, "leave that to me, and let me
try."

george shakes his head. "you could do it, i have not a doubt, if
anybody could; but it's not to be done. not to be done, sir! whereas
it so falls out, on the other hand, that i am able to be of some
trifle of use to sir leicester dedlock since his illness--brought on
by family sorrows--and that he would rather have that help from our
mother's son than from anybody else."

"well, my dear george," returns the other with a very slight shade
upon his open face, "if you prefer to serve in sir leicester
dedlock's household brigade--"

"there it is, brother," cries the trooper, checking him, with his
hand upon his knee again; "there it is! you don't take kindly to that
idea; i don't mind it. you are not used to being officered; i am.
