naturally asked how.

"i felt i was so awkward," she replied, "that i made up my mind to be
improved in that respect at all events and to learn to dance. i told
ma i was ashamed of myself, and i must be taught to dance. ma looked
at me in that provoking way of hers as if i wasn't in sight, but i
was quite determined to be taught to dance, and so i went to mr.
turveydrop's academy in newman street."

"and was it there, my dear--" i began.

"yes, it was there," said caddy, "and i am engaged to mr. turveydrop.
there are two mr. turveydrops, father and son. my mr. turveydrop is
the son, of course. i only wish i had been better brought up and was
likely to make him a better wife, for i am very fond of him."

"i am sorry to hear this," said i, "i must confess."

"i don't know why you should be sorry," she retorted a little
anxiously, "but i am engaged to mr. turveydrop, whether or no, and he
is very fond of me. it's a secret as yet, even on his side, because
old mr. turveydrop has a share in the connex
 
 ___________________________
 
ion and it might break
his heart or give him some other shock if he was told of it abruptly.
old mr. turveydrop is a very gentlemanly man indeed--very
gentlemanly."

"does his wife know of it?" asked ada.

"old mr. turveydrop's wife, miss clare?" returned miss jellyby,
opening her eyes. "there's no such person. he is a widower."

we were here interrupted by peepy, whose leg had undergone so much on
account of his sister's unconsciously jerking it like a bell-rope
whenever she was emphatic that the afflicted child now bemoaned his
sufferings with a very low-spirited noise. as he appealed to me for
compassion, and as i was only a listener, i undertook to hold him.
miss jellyby proceeded, after begging peepy's pardon w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith a kiss and
assuring him that she hadn't meant to do it.

"that's the state of the case," said caddy. "if i ever blame myself,
i still think it's ma's fault. we are to be married whenever we can,
and then i shall go to pa at the office and write to ma. it won't
much agitate ma; i am only pen and ink to her. one great comfort is,"
said caddy with a sob, "that i shall never hear of africa after i am
married. young mr. turveydrop hates it for my sake, and if old mr.
turveydrop knows there is such a place, it's as much as he does."

"it was he who was very gentlemanly, i think!" said i.

"very gentlemanly indeed," said caddy. "he is celebrated almost
everywhere for his deportment."

"does he teach?" asked ada.

"no, he don't teach anything in particular," replied caddy. "but his
deportment is beautiful."

caddy went on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance that
there was one thing more she wished us to know,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and felt we ought to
know, and which she hoped would not offend us. it was that she had
improved her acquaintance with miss flite, the little crazy old lady,
and that she frequently went there early in the morning and met her
lover for a few minutes before breakfast--only for a few minutes. "i
go there at other times," said caddy, "but prince does not come then.
young mr. turveydrop's name is prince; i wish it wasn't, because it
sounds like a dog, but of course he didn't christen himself. old mr.
turveydrop had him christened prince in remembrance of the prince
regent. old mr. turveydrop adored the prince regent on account of his
deportment. i hope you won't think the worse of me for having made
these little appointments at miss flite's, where i first went with
you, because i like the poor thing for her own sake and i believe she
likes me. if you could see young mr. turvey
 
 ___________________________
 
rush, and went out, bending
our steps towards newman street, which was very near.

i found the academy established in a sufficiently dingy house at the
corner of an archway, with busts in all the staircase windows. in the
same house there were also established, as i gathered from the plates
on the door, a drawing-master, a coal-merchant (there was, certainly,
no room for his coals), and a lithographic artist. on the plate
which, in size and situation, took precedence of all the rest, i
read, mr. turveydrop. the door was open, and the hall was blocked up
by a grand piano, a harp, and several other musical instruments in
cases, all in progress of removal, and all looking rakish in the
daylight. miss jellyby informed me that the academy had been lent,
last night, for a concert.

we went upstairs--it had been quite a fine house once, when it was
anybody's business to keep it clean and fresh, and nobody's business
to smoke in it all day--and into mr. turveydrop's great room, which
was built out into a
 
 ___________________________
 
th cane forms
along the walls, and the walls ornamented at regular intervals with
painted lyres and little cut-glass branches for candles, which seemed
to be shedding their old-fashioned drops as other branches might shed
autumn leaves. several young lady pupils, ranging from thirteen or
fourteen years of age to two or three and twenty, were assembled; and
i was looking among them for their instructor when caddy, pinching my
arm, repeated the ceremony of introduction. "miss summerson, mr.
prince turveydrop!"

i curtsied to a little blue-eyed fair man of youthful appearance with
flaxen hair parted in the middle and curling at the ends all round
his head. he had a little fiddle, which we used to call at school a
kit, under his left arm, and its little bow in the same hand. his
little dancing-shoes were particularly diminutive, and he had a
little innocent, feminine manner which not only appealed to me in an
amiable way, but made this singular effect upon me, that i received
the impression that he w
 
 ___________________________
 
y was not coming."

"i beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to me, who have
detained her, and to receive my excuses, sir," said i.

"oh, dear!" said he.

"and pray," i entreated, "do not allow me to be the cause of any more
delay."

with that apology i withdrew to a seat between peepy (who, being well
used to it, had already climbed into a corner place) and an old lady
of a censorious countenance whose two nieces were in the class and
who was very indignant with peepy's boots. prince turveydrop then
tinkled the strings of his kit with his fingers, and the young ladies
stood up to dance. just then there appeared from a side-door old mr.
turveydrop, in the full lustre of his deportment.

he was a fat old gentleman with a false complexion, false teeth,
false whiskers, and a wig. he had a fur collar, and he had a padded
breast to his coat, which only wanted a star or a broad blue ribbon
to be complete. he was pinched in, and swelled out, and got up, and
strapped down, as much as he could 
 
 ___________________________
 
m, and in his hand a pair of white gloves with which he
flapped it as he stood poised on one leg in a high-shouldered,
round-elbowed state of elegance not to be surpassed. he had a cane,
he had an eye-glass, he had a snuff-box, he had rings, he had
wristbands, he had everything but any touch of nature; he was not
like youth, he was not like age, he was not like anything in the
world but a model of deportment.

"father! a visitor. miss jellyby's friend, miss summerson."

"distinguished," said mr. turveydrop, "by miss summerson's presence."
as he bowed to me in that tight state, i almost believe i saw creases
come into the whites of his eyes.

"my father," said the son, aside, to me with quite an affecting
belief in him, "is a celebrated character. my father is greatly
admired."

"go on, prince! go on!" said mr. turveydrop, standing with his back
to the fire and waving his gloves condescendingly. "go on, my son!"

at this command, or by this gracious permission, the lesson went on.
prince turveydro
 
 ___________________________
 
terms, confided him to their son as one who had an inextinguishable
claim upon him and whom he could never regard with too much pride and
deference. the son, inheriting his mother's belief, and having the
deportment always before him, had lived and grown in the same faith,
and now, at thirty years of age, worked for his father twelve hours a
day and looked up to him with veneration on the old imaginary
pinnacle.

"the airs the fellow gives himself!" said my informant, shaking her
head at old mr. turveydrop with speechless indignation as he drew on
his tight gloves, of course unconscious of the homage she was
rendering. "he fully believes he is one of the aristocracy! and he is
so condescending to the son he so egregiously deludes that you might
suppose him the most virtuous of parents. oh!" said the old lady,
apostrophizing him with infinite vehemence. "i could bite you!"

i could not help being amused, though i heard the old lady out with
feelings of real concern. it was difficult to doubt her w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith the
father and son before me. what i might have thought of them without
the old lady's account, or what i might have thought of the old
lady's account without them, i cannot say. there was a fitness of
things in the whole that carried conviction with it.

my eyes were yet wandering, from young mr. turveydrop working so
hard, to old mr. turveydrop deporting himself so beautifully, when
the latter came ambling up to me and entered into conversation.

he asked me, first of all, whether i conferred a charm and a
distinction on london by residing in it? i did not think it necessary
to reply that i was perfectly aware i should not do that, in any
case, but merely told him where i did reside.

"a lady so graceful and accomplished," he said, kissing his
right glove and afterwards extending it towards the pupils,
"will look leniently on the defi
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, which it seemed impossible for him to make
without lifting up his eyebrows and shutting his eyes "--we are not
what we used to be in point of deportment."

"are we not, sir?" said i.

"we have degenerated," he returned, shaking his head, which he could
do to a very limited extent in his cravat. "a levelling age is not
favourable to deportment. it develops vulgarity. perhaps i speak with
some little partiality. it may not be for me to say that i have been
called, for some years now, gentleman turveydrop, or that his royal
highness the prince regent did me the honour to inquire, on my
removing my hat as he drove out of the pavilion at brighton (that
fine building), 'who is he? who the devil is he? why don't i know
him? why hasn't he thirty thousand a year?' but these are little
matters of anecdote--the general property, ma'am--still repeated
occasionally among the upper classes."

"indeed?" said i.

he replied with the high-shouldered bow. "where what is left among us
of deportment," he added, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 appears to be an excellent master," i observed.

"understand me, my dear madam, he is an excellent master. all that
can be acquired, he has acquired. all that can be imparted, he can
impart. but there are things--" he took another pinch of snuff and
made the bow again, as if to add, "this kind of thing, for instance."

i glanced towards the centre of the room, where miss jellyby's lover,
now engaged with single pupils, was undergoing greater drudgery than
ever.

"my amiable child," murmured mr. turveydrop, adjusting his cravat.

"your son is indefatigable," said i.

"it is my reward," said mr. turveydrop, "to hear you say so. in some
respects, he treads in the footsteps of his sainted mother. she was a
devoted creature. but wooman, lovely wooman," said mr. turveydrop
with very disagreeable gallantry, "what a sex you are!"

i rose and joined miss jellyby, who was by this time putting on her
bonnet. the time allotted to a lesson having fully elapsed, there was
a general putting on of bonnets. when
 
 ___________________________
 
 miss jellyby and the
unfortunate prince found an opportunity to become betrothed i don't
know, but they certainly found none on this occasion to exchange a
dozen words.

"my dear," said mr. turveydrop benignly to his son, "do you know the
hour?"

"no, father." the son had no watch. the father had a handsome gold
one, which he pulled out with an air that was an example to mankind.

"my son," said he, "it's two o'clock. recollect your school at
kensington at three."

"that's time enough for me, father," said prince. "i can take a
morsel of dinner standing and be off."

"my dear boy," returned his father, "you must be very quick. you will
find the cold mutton on the table."

"thank you, father.
 
 ___________________________
 
 are you off now, father?"

"yes, my dear. i suppose," said mr. turveydrop, shutting his eyes and
lifting up his shoulders with modest consciousness, "that i must show
myself, as usual, about town."

"you had better dine out comfortably somewhere," said his son.

"my dear child, i intend to. i shall take my little meal, i think, at
the french house, in the opera colonnade."

"that's right. good-bye, father!" said prince, shaking hands.

"good-bye, my son. bless you!"

mr. turveydrop said this in quite a pious manner, and it seemed to do
his son good, who, in parting from him, was so pleased with him, so
dutiful to him, and so proud of him that i almost felt as if it were
an unkindness to the younger man not to be able to believe implicitly
in the elder. the few moments that were occupied by prince in taking
leave of us (and particularly of one of us, as i saw, being in the
secret), enhanced my favourable impression of his almost childish
character. i felt a liking for him 
 
 ___________________________
 
imself
among the few other gentlemen left. for some moments, i was so lost
in reconsidering what i had heard and seen in newman street that i
was quite unable to talk to caddy or even to fix my attention on what
she said to me, especially when i began to inquire in my mind whether
there were, or ever had been, any other gentlemen, not in the dancing
profession, who lived and founded a reputation entirely on their
deportment. this became so bewildering and suggested the possibility
of so many mr. turveydrops that i said, "esther, you must make up
your mind to abandon this subject altogether and attend to caddy." i
accordingly did so, and we chatted all the rest of the way to
lincoln's inn.

caddy told me that her lover's education had been so neglected that
it was not always easy to read his notes. she said if he were not so
anxious about his spelling and took less pains to make it clear, he
would do better; but he put so many unnecessary letters into short
words that they sometimes quite lost the
 
 ___________________________
 
ld be useful for
prince's wife to know in our house. we live in such a state of muddle
that it's impossible, and i have only been more disheartened whenever
i have tried. so i get a little practice with--who do you think? poor
miss flite! early in the morning i help her to tidy her room and
clean her birds, and i make her cup of coffee for her (of course she
taught me), and i have learnt to make it so well that prince says
it's the very best coffee he ever tasted, and would quite delight old
mr. turveydrop, who is very particular indeed about his coffee. i can
make little puddings too; and i know how to buy neck of mutton, and
tea, and sugar, and butter, and a good many housekeeping things. i am
not clever at my needle, yet," said caddy, glancing at the repairs on
peepy's frock, "but perhaps i shall improve, and since i have been
engaged to prince and have been doing all this, i have felt
better-tempered, i hope, and more forgiving to ma. it rather put me
out at first this morning to see you and 
 
 ___________________________
 
from her heart, and touched
mine. "caddy, my love," i replied, "i begin to have a great affection
for you, and i hope we shall become friends."

"oh, do you?" cried caddy. "how happy that would make me!"

"my dear caddy," said i, "let us be friends from this time, and let
us often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right
way through them." caddy was overjoyed. i said everything i could in
my old-fashioned way to comfort and encourage her, and i would not
have objected to old mr. turveydrop that day for any smaller
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

by this time we were come to mr. krook's, whose private door stood
open. there was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room to
let on the second floor. it reminded caddy to tell me as we proceeded
upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an inquest and
that our little friend had been ill of the fright. the door and
window of the vacant room being open, we looked in. it was the room
with the 
 
 ___________________________
 
e read to you, i am prepared to disclose the truth
to ma whenever you think proper. and i think, prince,' said i, 'that
esther thinks that i should be in a better, and truer, and more
honourable position altogether if you did the same to your papa.'"

"yes, my dear," said i. "esther certainly does think so."

"so i was right, you see!" exclaimed caddy. "well! this troubled
prince a good deal, not because he had the least doubt about it, but
because he is so considerate of the feelings of old mr. turveydrop;
and he had his apprehensions that old mr. turveydrop might break his
heart, or faint away, or be very much overcome in some affecting
manner or other if he made such an announcement. he feared old mr.
turveydrop might consider it undutiful and might receive too great a
shock. for old mr. turveydrop's deportment is very beautiful, you
know, esther," said caddy, "and his feelings are extremely
sensitive."

"are they, my dear?"

"oh, extremely sensitive. prince says so. now, this has caused my
da
 
 ___________________________
 
aged with a not very
hopeful pupil--a stubborn little girl with a sulky forehead, a deep
voice, and an inanimate, dissatisfied mama--whose case was certainly
not rendered more hopeful by the confusion into which we threw her
preceptor. the lesson at last came to an end, after proceeding as
discordantly as possible; and when the little girl had changed her
shoes and had had her white muslin extinguished in shawls, she was
taken away. after a few words of preparation, we then went in search
of mr. turveydrop, whom we found, grouped with his hat and gloves, as
a model of deportment, on the sofa in his private apartment--the only
comfortable room in the house. he appeared to have dressed at his
leisure in the intervals of a light collation, and his dressing-case,
brushes, and so forth, all of quite an elegant kind, lay about.

"father, miss summerson; miss jellyby."

"charmed! enchanted!" said mr. turveydrop, rising with his
high-shouldered bow. "permit me!" handing chairs. "be seated!"
kissing the t
 
 ___________________________
 
 sex stimulates us and rewards us by the
condescension of its lovely presence. it is much in these times (and
we have made an awfully degenerating business of it since the days of
his royal highness the prince regent--my patron, if i may presume to
say so) to experience that deportment is not wholly trodden under
foot by mechanics. that it can yet bask in the smile of beauty, my
dear madam."

i said nothing, which i thought a suitable reply; and he took a pinch
of snuff.

"my dear son," said mr. turveydrop, "you have four schools this
afternoon. i would recommend a hasty sandwich."

"thank you, father," returned prince, "i will be sure to be punctual.
my dear father, may i beg you to prepare your mind for what i am
going to say?"

"good heaven!" exclaimed the model, pale and aghast as prince and
caddy, hand in hand, bent down before him. "what is this? is this
lunacy! or what is this?"

"father," returned prince with great submission, "i love this young
lady, and we are engaged."

"engaged!" crie
 
 ___________________________
 
d mr. turveydrop, reclining on the sofa and shutting
out the sight with his hand. "an arrow launched at my brain by my own
child!"

"we have been engaged for some time, father," faltered prince, "and
miss summerson, hearing of it, advised that we should declare the
fact to you and was so very kind as to attend on the present
occasion. miss jellyby is a young lady who deeply respects you,
father."

mr. turveydrop uttered a groan.

"no, pray don't! pray don't, father," urged his son. "miss jellyby is
a young lady who deeply respects you, and our first desire is to
consider your comfort."

mr. turveydrop sobbed.

"no, pray don't, father!" cried his son.

"boy," said mr. turveydrop, "it is well that your sainted mother is
spared this pang. strike deep, and spare not. strike home, sir,
strike home!"

"pray don't say so, father," implored prince, in tears. "it goes to
my heart. i do assure you, father, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
our first wish and intention
is to consider your comfort. caroline and i do not forget our
duty--what is my duty is caroline's, as we have often said
together--and with your approval and consent, father, we will devote
ourselves to making your life agreeable."

"strike home," murmured mr. turveydrop. "strike home!" but he seemed
to listen, i thought, too.

"my dear father," returned prince, "we well know what little comforts
you are accustomed to and have a right to, and it will always be our
study and our pride to provide those before anything. if you will
bless us with your approval and consent, father, we shall not think
of being married until it is quite agreeable to you; and when we are
married, we shall always make you--of course--our first
consideration. you must ever be the head an
 
 ___________________________
 
d master here, father; and
we feel how truly unnatural it would be in us if we failed to know it
or if we failed to exert ourselves in every possible way to please
you."

mr. turveydrop underwent a severe internal struggle and came upright
on the sofa again with his cheeks puffing over his stiff cravat, a
perfect model of parental deportment.

"my son!" said mr. turveydrop. "my children! i cannot resist your
prayer. be happy!"

his benignity as he raised his future daughter-in-law and stretched
out his hand to his son (who kissed it with affectionate respect and
gratitude) was the most confusing sight i ever saw.

"my children," said mr. turveydrop, paternally encircling caddy with
his left arm as she sat beside him, and putting his right hand
gracefully on his hip. "my son and daughter, your happiness shall be
my care. i will watch over you. you shall always liv
 
 ___________________________
 
e with
me"--meaning, of course, i will always live with you--"this house is
henceforth as much yours as mine; consider it your home. may you long
live to share it with me!"

the power of his deportment was such that they really were as much
overcome with thankfulness as if, instead of quartering himself upon
them for the rest of his life, he were making some munificent
sacrifice in their favour.

"for myself, my children," said mr. turveydrop, "i am falling into
the sear and yellow leaf, and it is impossible to say how long the
last feeble traces of gentlemanly deportment may linger in this
weaving and spinning age. but, so long, i will do my duty to society
and will show myself, as usual, about town. my wants are few and
simple. my little apartment here, my few essentials for the toilet,
my frugal morning meal, and my little dinner will suffice. i charge
your dutiful affection with the supply of these requirements, and i
charge mys
 
 ___________________________
 
elf with all the rest."

they were overpowered afresh by his uncommon generosity.

"my son," said mr. turveydrop, "for those little points in which you
are deficient--points of deportment, which are born with a man, which
may be improved by cultivation, but can never be originated--you may
still rely on me. i have been faithful to my post since the days of
his royal highness the prince regent, and i will not desert it now.
no, my son. if you have ever contemplated your father's poor position
with a feeling of pride, you may rest assured that he will do nothing
to tarnish it. for yourself, prince, whose ch
 
 ___________________________
 
aracter is different (we
cannot be all alike, nor is it advisable that we should), work, be
industrious, earn money, and extend the connexion as much as
possible."

"that you may depend i will do, dear father, with all my heart,"
replied prince.

"i have no doubt of it," said mr. turveydrop. "your qualities are not
shining, my dear child, but they are steady and useful. and to both
of you, my children, i would merely observe, in the spirit of a
sainted wooman on whose path i had the happiness of casting, i
believe, some ray of light, take care of the establishment, take care
of my simple wants, and bless you both!"

old mr. turveydrop then became so very gallant, in honour of the
occasion, that i told caddy we must really go to thavies inn at once
if we were to go at all that day.
 
 ___________________________
 
 so we took our departure after a
very loving farewell between caddy and her betrothed, and during our
walk she was so happy and so full of old mr. turveydrop's praises
that i would not have said a word in his disparagement for any
consideration.

the house in thavies inn had bills in the windows announcing that it
was to let, and it looked dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than
ever. the name of poor mr. jellyby had appeared in the list of
bankrupts but a day or two before, and he was shut up in the
dining-room with two gentlemen and a heap of blue bags,
account-books, and papers, making the most desperate endeavours to
understand his affairs. they
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation
and then serenely pursuing it after shaking her head, "you are going
to tell me some nonsense."

caddy untied the strings of her bonnet, took her bonnet off, and
letting it dangle on the floor by the strings, and crying heartily,
said, "ma, i am engaged."

"oh, you ridiculous child!" observed mrs. jellyby with an abstracted
air as she looked over the dispatch last opened; "what a goose you
are!"

"i am engaged, ma," sobbed caddy, "to young mr. turveydrop, at the
academy; and old mr. turveydrop (who is a very gentlemanly man
indeed) has given his consent, and i beg and pray you'll give us
yours, ma, because i never could be happy without it. i never, never
could!" sobbed caddy, quite forgetful of her general complainings and
of everything but her natural affection.

"you see again, miss summerson," observed mrs. jellyby serenely,
"what a happiness it is to be so much occupied as i am and to have
this necessity for self-concentration that i have.
 
 ___________________________
 
rd
loud voices in the parlour overhead, and occasionally a violent
tumbling about of the furniture. the last effect i am afraid was
caused by poor mr. jellyby's breaking away from the dining-table and
making rushes at the window with the intention of throwing himself
into the area whenever he made any new attempt to understand his
affairs.

as i rode quietly home at night after the day's bustle, i thought a
good deal of caddy's engagement and felt confirmed in my hopes (in
spite of the elder mr. turveydrop) that she would be the happier and
better for it. and if there seemed to be but a slender chance of her
and her husband ever finding out what the model of deportment really
was, why that was all for the best too, and who would wish them to be
wiser? i did not wish them to be any wiser and indeed was half
ashamed of not entirely believing in him myself. and i looked up at
the stars, and thought about travellers in distant countries and the
stars they saw, and hoped i might always be so blest and
 
 ___________________________
 
re
than usual he went to the docks to look for it, and hardly ever found
it.

as soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this shorn
lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in hatton garden
(where i found the children, when i afterwards went there, cutting
the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking themselves
with it), caddy had brought about a meeting between him and old mr.
turveydrop; and poor mr. jellyby, being very humble and meek, had
deferred to mr. turveydrop's deportment so submissively that they had
become excellent friends. by degrees, old mr. turveydrop, thus
familiarized with the idea of his son's marriage, had worked up his
parental feelings to the height of contemplating that event as being
near at hand and had given his gracious consent to the young couple
commencing housekeeping at the academy in newman street when they
would.

"and your papa, caddy. what did he say?"

"oh! poor pa," said caddy, "only cried and said he hoped we might get
on
 
 ___________________________
 
ousekeeping, and lessons to charley, and
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with ada, the
three weeks slipped fast away. then i went home with caddy to see
what could be done there, and ada and charley remained behind to take
care of my guardian.

when i say i went home with caddy, i mean to the furnished lodging in
hatton garden. we went to newman street two or three times, where
preparations were in progress too--a good many, i observed, for
enhancing the comforts of old mr. turveydrop, and a few for putting
the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the house--but
our great point was to make the furnished lodging decent for the
wedding-breakfast and to imbue mrs. jellyby beforehand with some
faint sense of the occasion.

the latter was the more difficult thing of the two because mrs.
jellyby and an unwholesome boy occupied the front sitting-room (the
back one was a mere closet), and it was littered down with
waste-paper and borrioboolan documents, as an untidy stabl
 
 ___________________________
 
t
when my darling came, i thought--and i think now--that i never had
seen such a dear face as my beautiful pet's.

we made a little feast for the children upstairs, and we put peepy at
the head of the table, and we showed them caddy in her bridal dress,
and they clapped their hands and hurrahed, and caddy cried to think
that she was going away from them and hugged them over and over again
until we brought prince up to fetch her away--when, i am sorry to
say, peepy bit him. then there was old mr. turveydrop downstairs, in
a state of deportment not to be expressed, benignly blessing caddy
and giving my guardian to understand that his son's happiness was his
own parental work and that he sacrificed personal considerations to
ensure it. "my dear sir," said mr. turveydrop, "these young people
will live with me; my house is large enough for their accommodation,
and they shall not want the shelter of my roof. i could have
wished--you will understand the allusion, mr. jarndyce, for you
remember my illust
 
 ___________________________
 
pon the poor and
applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; as miss wisk
was that the only practical thing for the world was the emancipation
of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. mrs. jellyby, all the
while, sat smiling at the limited vision that could see anything but
borrioboola-gha.

but i am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the ride
home instead of first marrying caddy. we all went to church, and mr.
jellyby gave her away. of the air with which old mr. turveydrop, with
his hat under his left arm (the inside presented at the clergyman
like a cannon) and his eyes creasing themselves up into his wig,
stood stiff and high-shouldered behind us bridesmaids during the
ceremony, and afterwards saluted us, i could never say enough to do
it justice. miss wisk, whom i cannot report as prepossessing in
appearance, and whose manner was grim, listened to the proceedings,
as part of woman's wrongs, with a disdainful face. mrs. jellyby, with
her calm smile and her brig
 
 ___________________________
 
 stairs with his head against the wall. i hope he
found some consolation in walls. i almost think he did.

and then prince took her arm in his and turned with great emotion and
respect to his father, whose deportment at that moment was
overwhelming.

"thank you over and over again, father!" said prince, kissing his
hand. "i am very grateful for all your kindness and consideration
regarding our marriage, and so, i can assure you, is caddy."

"very," sobbed caddy. "ve-ry!"

"my dear son," said mr. turveydrop, "and dear daughter, i have done
my duty. if the spirit of a sainted wooman hovers above us and looks
down on the occasion, that, and your constant affection, will be my
recompense. you will not fail in your duty, my son and daughter, i
believe?"

"dear father, never!" cried prince.

"never, never, dear mr. turveydrop!" said caddy.

"this," returned mr. turveydrop, "is as it should be. my children, my
home is yours, my heart is yours, my all is yours. i will never leave
you; nothing but death s
 
 ___________________________
 
hall part us. my dear son, you contemplate an
absence of a week, i think?"

"a week, dear father. we shall return home this day week."

"my dear child," said mr. turveydrop, "let me, even under the present
exceptional circumstances, recommend strict punctuality. it is highly
important to keep the connexion together; and schools, if at all
neglected, are apt to take offence."

"this day week, father, we shall be sure to be home to dinner."

"good!" said mr. turveydrop. "you will find fires, my dear caroline,
in your own room, and dinner prepared in my apartment. yes, yes,
prince!" anticipating some self-denying objection on his son's part
with a great air. "you and our caroline will be strange in the upper
part of the premises and will, therefore, dine that day in my
apartment. now, bless ye!"

they drove away, and whether i wondered most at mrs. jellyby or at
mr. turveydrop, i did not know. ada and my guardian were in the same
condition when we came to talk
 
 ___________________________
 
on a little business
expedition. leaving home very early in the morning, i got to london
by stage-coach in such good time that i got to newman street with the
day before me.

caddy, who had not seen me since her wedding-day, was so glad and so
affectionate that i was half inclined to fear i should make her
husband jealous. but he was, in his way, just as bad--i mean as good;
and in short it was the old story, and nobody would leave me any
possibility of doing anything meritorious.

the elder mr. turveydrop was in bed, i found, and caddy was
milling his chocolate, which a melancholy little boy who was an
apprentice--it seemed such a curious thing to be apprenticed to the
trade of dancing--was waiting to carry upstairs. her father-in-law
was extremely kind and considerate, caddy told me, and they lived
most happily together. (when she spoke of their living together, she
meant that the old gentleman had all the good things and all the good
lodging, while she and her husband had what they could get, 
 
 ___________________________
 
use as well as we can."

"that is only for their steps, of course?" said i.

"only for their steps," said caddy. "in that way they practise, so
many hours at a time, whatever steps they happen to be upon. they
dance in the academy, and at this time of year we do figures at five
every morning."

"why, what a laborious life!" i exclaimed.

"i assure you, my dear," returned caddy, smiling, "when the out-door
apprentices ring us up in the morning (the bell rings into our room,
not to disturb old mr. turveydrop), and when i put up the window and
see them standing on the door-step with their little pumps under
their arms, i am actually reminded of the sweeps."

all this presented the art to me in a singular light, to be sure.
caddy enjoyed the effect of her communication and cheerfully
recounted the particulars of her own studies.

"you see, my dear, to save expense i ought to know something of the
piano, and i ought to know something of the kit too, and consequently
i have to practise those two instru
 
 ___________________________
 
e nature of his objections. returning with their jackets buttoned
and their pumps stuck in them, they then produced packets of cold
bread and meat and bivouacked under a painted lyre on the wall. the
little gauzy child, having whisked her sandals into the reticule and
put on a trodden-down pair of shoes, shook her head into the dowdy
bonnet at one shake, and answering my inquiry whether she liked
dancing by replying, "not with boys," tied it across her chin, and
went home contemptuous.

"old mr. turveydrop is so sorry," said caddy, "that he has not
finished dressing yet and cannot have the pleasure of seeing you
before you go. you are such a favourite of his, esther."

i expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it
necessary to add that i readily dispensed with this attention.

"it takes him a long time to dress," said caddy, "because he is very
much looked up to in such things, you know, and has a reputation to
support. you can't think how kind he is to pa. he talks to pa of an
eve
 
 ___________________________
 
ning about the prince regent, and i never saw pa so interested."

there was something in the picture of mr. turveydrop bestowing his
deportment on mr. jellyby that quite took my fancy. i asked caddy if
he brought her papa out much.

"no," said caddy, "i don't know that he does that, but he talks to
pa, and pa greatly admires him, and listens, and likes it. of course
i am aware that pa has hardly any claims to deportment, but they get
on together delightfully. you can't think what good companions they
make. i never saw pa take snuff before in my life, but he takes one
pinch out of mr. turveydrop's box regularly 
 
 ___________________________
 
and keeps putting it to
his nose and taking it away again all the evening."

that old mr. turveydrop should ever, in the chances and changes of
life, have come to the rescue of mr. jellyby from borrioboola-gha
appeared to me to be one of the pleasantest of oddities.

"as to peepy," said caddy with a little hesitation, "whom i was most
afraid of--next to having any family of my own, esther--as an
inconvenience to mr. turveydrop, the kindness of the old gentleman to
that child is beyond everything. he asks to see him, my dear! he lets
him take the newspaper up to him in bed; he gives him the crusts of
his toast to eat; he sends him on little errands about the house; he
tells him to come to me for sixpences. in short," said caddy
cheerily, "and not to prose, i am a very fortunate girl and ought to
be very grateful. where are we going, esther?"

"to the old street road," said i, "where i have a few words to say to
the so
 
 ___________________________
 
 cheer her, and we did not talk in our usual confidential
manner. whenever i went home at night we were together, but caddy's
rest was broken by pain, and i often remained to nurse her.

with her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and their
home to strive for, what a good creature caddy was! so self-denying,
so uncomplaining, so anxious to get well on their account, so afraid
of giving trouble, and so thoughtful of the unassisted labours of her
husband and the comforts of old mr. turveydrop; i had never known the
best of her until now. and it seemed so curious that her pale face
and helpless figure should be lying there day after day where dancing
was the business of life, where the kit and the apprentices began
early every morning in the ball-room, and where the untidy little boy
waltzed by himself in the kitchen all the afternoon.

at caddy's request i took the supreme direction of her apartment,
trimmed it up, and pushed her, couch and all, into a lighter and more
airy and more
 
 ___________________________
 
rrioboolan
on its native shores. as bright-eyed as ever, as serene, and as
untidy, she would say, "well, caddy, child, and how do you do
to-day?" and then would sit amiably smiling and taking no notice of
the reply or would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number
of letters she had lately received and answered or of the
coffee-bearing power of borrioboola-gha. this she would always do
with a serene contempt for our limited sphere of action, not to be
disguised.

then there was old mr. turveydrop, who was from morning to night and
from night to morning the subject of innumerable precautions. if the
baby cried, it was nearly stifled lest the noise should make him
uncomfortable. if the fire wanted stirring in the night, it was
surreptitiously done lest his rest should be broken. if caddy
required any little comfort that the house contained, she first
carefully discussed whether he was likely to require it too. in
return for this consideration he would come into the room once a day,
all bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t blessing it--showing a condescension, and a patronage, and a
grace of manner in dispensing the light of his high-shouldered
presence from which i might have supposed him (if i had not known
better) to have been the benefactor of caddy's life.

"my caroline," he would say, making the nearest approach that he
could to bending over her. "tell me that you are better to-day."

"oh, much better, thank you, mr. turveydrop," caddy would reply.

"delighted! enchanted! and our dear miss summerson. she is not quite
prostrated by fatigue?" here he would crease up his eyelids and kiss
his fingers to me, though i am happy to say he had ceased to be
particular in his attentions since i had been so altered.

"not at all," i would assure him.

"charming! we must take care of our dear caroline, miss summerson. we
must spare nothing that will restore her. we must nourish her. my
dear caroline"--he would turn to his daughter
 
 ___________________________
 
th caddy and her husband to be melted to tears by these
affectionate self-sacrifices.

"nay, my dears," he would remonstrate; and when i saw caddy's thin
arm about his fat neck as he said it, i would be melted too, though
not by the same process. "nay, nay! i have promised never to leave
ye. be dutiful and affectionate towards me, and i ask no other
return. now, bless ye! i am going to the park."

he would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his
hotel dinner. i hope i do old mr. turveydrop no wrong, but i never
saw any better traits in him than these i faithfully record, except
that he certainly conceived a liking for peepy and would take the
child out walking with great pomp, always on those occasions sending
him home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally with a
halfpenny in his pocket. but even this disinterestedness was attended
with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for before peepy was
sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with the professor of
depo
 
 ___________________________
 
s taken up with the rights of women to
sit in parliament, and caddy tells me it is a mission involving more
correspondence than the old one. i had almost forgotten caddy's poor
little girl. she is not such a mite now, but she is deaf and dumb. i
believe there never was a better mother than caddy, who learns, in
her scanty intervals of leisure, innumerable deaf and dumb arts to
soften the affliction of her child.

as if i were never to have done with caddy, i am reminded here of
peepy and old mr. turveydrop. peepy is in the custom house, and doing
extremely well. old mr. turveydrop, very apoplectic, still exhibits
his deportment about town, still enjoys himself in the old manner, is
still believed in in the old way. he is constant in his patronage of
peepy and is understood to have bequeathed him a favourite french
clock in his dressing-room--which is not his property.

with the first money we saved at home, we added to our pretty house
by throwing out a little growlery expressly for my guardian, 