king his head and lifting his eyebrows.
"i know next to nothing of his habits except that he keeps himself
very close."

thus whispering, they both go in together. as the light goes in, the
great eyes in the shutters, darkening, seem to close. not so the eyes
upon the bed.

"god save us!" exclaims mr. tulkinghorn. "he is dead!" krook drops
the heavy hand he has taken up so suddenly that the arm swings over
the bedside.

they look at one another for a moment.

"send for some doctor! call for miss flite up the stairs, sir. here's
poison by the bed! call out for flite, will you?" says krook, with
his lean hands spread out above the body like a vampire's wings.

mr. tulkinghorn hurries to the landing and calls, "miss flite! flite!
make haste, here, whoever you are! flite!" krook follows him with his
eyes, and while he is calling, finds opportunity to steal to the old
portmanteau and steal back again.

"run, flite, run! the nearest doctor! run!" so mr. krook addresses a
crazy little woman who is 
 
 ___________________________
 
 will hold the
candle for mr. snagsby, my friend, he'll soon see whether there is
anything to help you."

"in the first place, here's an old portmanteau, sir," says snagsby.

ah, to be sure, so there is! mr. tulkinghorn does not appear to have
seen it before, though he is standing so close to it, and though
there is very little else, heaven knows.

the marine-store merchant holds the light, and the law-stationer
conducts the search. the surgeon leans against the corner of the
chimney-piece; miss flite peeps and trembles just within the door.
the apt old scholar of the old school, with his dull black breeches
tied with ribbons at the knees, his large black waistcoat, his
long-sleeved black coat, and his wisp of limp white neckerchief tied
in the bow the peerage knows so well, stands in exactly the same
place and attitude.

there are some worthless articles of clothing in the old portmanteau;
there is a bundle of pawnbrokers' duplicates, those turnpike tickets
on the road of poverty; there is 
 
 ___________________________
 
very gentlemanly, i think!" said i.

"very gentlemanly indeed," said caddy. "he is celebrated almost
everywhere for his deportment."

"does he teach?" asked ada.

"no, he don't teach anything in particular," replied caddy. "but his
deportment is beautiful."

caddy went on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance that
there was one thing more she wished us to know, and felt we ought to
know, and which she hoped would not offend us. it was that she had
improved her acquaintance with miss flite, the little crazy old lady,
and that she frequently went there early in the morning and met her
lover for a few minutes before breakfast--only for a few minutes. "i
go there at other times," said caddy, "but prince does not come then.
young mr. turveydrop's name is prince; i wish it wasn't, because it
sounds like a dog, but of course he didn't christen himself. old mr.
turveydrop had him christened prince in remembrance of the prince
regent. old mr. turveydrop adored the prince regent on accoun
 
 ___________________________
 
t of his
deportment. i hope you won't think the worse of me for having made
these little appointments at miss flite's, where i first went with
you, because i like the poor thing for her own sake and i believe she
likes me. if you could see young mr. turveydrop, i am sure you would
think well of him--at least, i am sure you couldn't possibly think
any ill of him. i am going there now for my lesson. i couldn't ask
you to go with me, miss summerson; but if you would," said caddy, who
had said all this earnestly and tremblingly, "i should be very
glad--very glad."

it happened that we had arranged with my guardi
 
 ___________________________
 
re, thanks to ma!

"there's another thing i want to tell you, now we are alone,"
continued caddy, "which i should not have liked to mention unless you
had seen prince, miss summerson. you know what a house ours is. it's
of no use my trying to learn anything that it would be useful for
prince's wife to know in our house. we live in such a state of muddle
that it's impossible, and i have only been more disheartened whenever
i have tried. so i get a little practice with--who do you think? poor
miss flite! early in the morning i help her to tidy her room and
clean her birds, and i make her cup of coffee for her (of course she
taught me), and i have learnt to make it so well that prince says
it's the very best coffee he ever tasted, and would quite delight old
mr. turveydrop, who is very particular indeed about his coffee. i can
make little puddings too; and i know how to buy neck of mutton, and
tea, and sugar, and butter, and a good many housekeeping things. i am
not clever at my needle, yet," s
 
 ___________________________
 
er
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

by this time we were come to mr. krook's, whose private door stood
open. there was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room to
let on the second floor. it reminded caddy to tell me as we proceeded
upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an inquest and
that our little friend had been ill of the fright. the door and
window of the vacant room being open, we looked in. it was the room
with the dark door to which miss flite had secretly directed my
attention when i was last in the house. a sad and desolate place it
was, a gloomy, sorrowful place that gave me a strange sensation of
mournfulness and even dread. "you look pale," said caddy when we came
out, "and cold!" i felt as if the room had chilled me.

we had walked slowly while we were talking, and my guardian and ada
were here before us. we found them in miss flite's garret. they were
looking at the birds, while a medical gentleman who was so good as to
attend
 
 ___________________________
 
 miss flite with much solicitude and compassion spoke with her
cheerfully by the fire.

"i have finished my professional visit," he said, coming forward.
"miss flite is much better and may appear in court (as her mind is
set upon it) to-morrow. she has been greatly missed there, i
understand."

miss flite received the compliment with complacency and dropped a
general curtsy to us.

"honoured, indeed," said she, "by another visit from the wards in
jarndyce! ve-ry happy to receive jarndyce of bleak house beneath my
humble roof!" with a special curtsy. "fitz-jarndyce, my dear"--she
had bestowed that name on caddy, it appeared, and always called her
by it--"a double welcome!"

"has she been very ill?" asked mr. jarndyce of the gentleman whom we
had found in attendance on her. she answered for hersel
 
 ___________________________
 
 the question in a whisper.

"oh, decidedly unwell! oh, very unwell indeed," she said
confidentially. "not pain, you know--trouble. not bodily so much as
nervous, nervous! the truth is," in a subdued voice and trembling,
"we have had death here. there was poison in the house. i am very
susceptible to such horrid things. it frightened me. only mr.
woodcourt knows how much. my physician, mr. woodcourt!" with
great stateliness. "the wards in jarndyce--jarndyce of bleak
house--fitz-jarndyce!"

"miss flite," said mr. woodcourt in a grave kind of voice, as if he
were appealing to her while speaking to us, and laying his hand
gently on her arm, "miss flite describes her illness with her usual
accuracy. she was alarmed by an occurrence in the house which might
have alarmed a stronger person, and was made ill by the distress and
agitation. she brought me here in the first hurry of the discovery,
though too late for me to be of any use to the unfortunate man. i
have compensated myself for that disappo
 
 ___________________________
 
intment by coming here since
and being of some small use to her."

"the kindest physician in the college," whispered miss flite to me.
"i expect a judgment. on the day of judgment. and shall then confer
estates."

"she will be as well in a day or two," said mr. woodcourt, looking at
her with an observant smile, "as she ever will be. in other words,
quite well of course. have you heard of her good fortune?"

"most extraordinary!" said miss flite, smiling brightly. "you never
heard of such a thing, my dear! every saturday, conversation kenge or
guppy (clerk to conversation k.) places in my hand a paper of
shillings. shillings. i assure you! always the same number in the
paper. always one for every day in the week. now you know, really! so
well-timed, is it not? ye-es! from whence do these papers come, you
say? that is the great question. naturally. shall i tell you what i
think? i think," said miss flite, drawing herself back with a ver
 
 ___________________________
 
 assure you to the greatest advantage!"

i congratulated her (as she addressed herself to me) upon this
fortunate addition to her income and wished her a long continuance of
it. i did not speculate upon the source from which it came or wonder
whose humanity was so considerate. my guardian stood before me,
contemplating the birds, and i had no need to look beyond him.

"and what do you call these little fellows, ma'am?" said he in his
pleasant voice. "have they any names?"

"i can answer for miss flite that they have," said i, "for she
promised to tell us what they were. ada remembers?"

ada remembered very well.

"did i?" said miss flite. "who's that at my door? what are you
listening at my door for, krook?"

the old man of the house, pushing it open before him, appeared there
with his fur cap in his hand and his cat at his heels.

"i warn't listening, miss flite," he said, "i was going to give a rap
with my knuckles, only you're so quick!"

"make your cat go down. drive her away!" the old l
 
 ___________________________
 
ady angrily
exclaimed.

"bah, bah! there ain't no danger, gentlefolks," said mr. krook,
looking slowly and sharply from one to another until he had looked at
all of us; "she'd never offer at the birds when i was here unless i
told her to it."

"you will excuse my landlord," said the old lady with a dignified
air. "m, quite m! what do you want, krook, when i have company?"

"hi!" said the old man. "you know i am the chancellor."

"well?" returned miss flite. "what of that?"

"for the chancellor," said the old man with a chuckle, "not to be
acquainted with a jarndyce is queer, ain't it, miss flite? mightn't i
take the liberty? your servant, sir. i know jarndyce and jarndyce
a'most as well as you do, sir. i knowed old squire tom, sir. i never
to my knowledge see you afore though, not even in court. yet, i go
there a mortal sight of times in the course of the year, taking one
day with another."

"i never go there," said mr. jarndyce (which he never d
 
 ___________________________
 
learned brother in your meaning, sir, though
perhaps it is but nat'ral in a jarndyce. the burnt child, sir! what,
you're looking at my lodger's birds, mr. jarndyce?" the old man had
come by little and little into the room until he now touched my
guardian with his elbow and looked close up into his face with his
spectacled eyes. "it's one of her strange ways that she'll never tell
the names of these birds if she can help it, though she named 'em
all." this was in a whisper. "shall i run 'em over, flite?" he asked
aloud, winking at us and pointing at her as she turned away,
affecting to sweep the grate.

"if you like," she answered hurriedly.

the old man, looking up at the cages after another look at us, went
through the list.

"hope, joy, youth, peace, rest, life, dust, ashes, waste, want, ruin,
despair, madness, death, cunning, folly, words, wigs, rags,
sheepskin, plunder, precedent, jargon, gammon, and spinach. that's
the whole collection," said the old man, "all cooped up together, by
my 
 
 ___________________________
 
d!" muttered my guardian.

"when my noble and learned brother gives his judgment, they're to be
let go free," said krook, winking at us again. "and then," he added,
whispering and grinning, "if that ever was to happen--which it
won't--the birds that have never been caged would kill 'em."

"if ever the wind was in the east," said my guardian, pretending to
look out of the window for a weathercock, "i think it's there
to-day!"

we found it very difficult to get away from the house. it was not
miss flite who detained us; she was as reasonable a little creature
in consulting the convenience of others as there possibly could be.
it was mr. krook. he seemed unable to detach himself from mr.
jarndyce. if he had been linked to him, he could hardly have attended
him more closely. he proposed to show us his court of chancery and
all the strange medley it contained; during the whole of our
inspection (prolonged by himself) he kept close to mr. jarndyce and
sometimes detained him under one pretence or o
 
 ___________________________
 
ly laughed in return, and telling me that she had come for
half an hour, at the expiration of which time prince would be waiting
for her at the corner, sat chatting with me and ada in the window,
every now and then handing me the flowers again or trying how they
looked against my hair. at last, when she was going, she took me into
my room and put them in my dress.

"for me?" said i, surprised.

"for you," said caddy with a kiss. "they were left behind by
somebody."

"left behind?"

"at poor miss flite's," said caddy. "somebody who has been very good
to her was hurrying away an hour ago to join a ship and left these
flowers behind. no, no! don't take them out. let the pretty little
things lie here," said caddy, adjusting them with a careful hand,
"because i was present myself, and i shouldn't wonder if somebody
left them on purpose!"

"do they look like that sort of thing?" said ada, coming laughingly
behind me and clasping me merrily round the waist. "oh, yes, indeed
they do, dame durden! th
 
 ___________________________
 
 about to interrupt when the sagacious smallweed checks
him with a dry cough and the words, "hem! shakspeare!"

"there are two branches to this subject, jobling," says mr. guppy.
"that is the first. i come to the second. you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane. come, jobling," says mr. guppy in his
encouraging cross-examination-tone, "i think you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane?"

"i know him by sight," says mr. jobling.

"you know him by sight. very well. and you know little flite?"

"everybody knows her," says mr. jobling.

"everybody knows her. very well. now it has been one of my duties of
late to pay flite a certain weekly allowance, deducting from it the
amount of her weekly rent, which i have paid (in consequence of
instructions i have received) to krook himself, regularly in her
presence. this has brought me into communication with krook and into
a knowledge of his house and his habits. i know he has a room to let.
you may live there at a very low charge under any
 
 ___________________________
 
tainment by standing treat at
the play but that there are chords in the human mind which would
render it a hollow mockery.

on the morrow, in the dusk of evening, mr. weevle modestly appears at
krook's, by no means incommoded with luggage, and establishes himself
in his new lodging, where the two eyes in the shutters stare at him
in his sleep, as if they were full of wonder. on the following day
mr. weevle, who is a handy good-for-nothing kind of young fellow,
borrows a needle and thread of miss flite and a hammer of his
landlord and goes to work devising apologies for window-curtains, and
knocking up apologies for shelves, and hanging up his two teacups,
milkpot, and crockery sundries on a pennyworth of little hooks, like
a shipwrecked sailor making the best of it.

but what mr. weevle prizes most of all his few possessions (next
after his light whiskers, for which he has an attachment that only
whiskers can awaken in the breast of man) is a choice collection of
copper-plate impressions fro
 
 ___________________________
 
han that the will under which he
and ada were to take i don't know how many thousands of pounds must
be finally established if there were any sense or justice in the
court of chancery--but oh, what a great if that sounded in my
ears--and that this happy conclusion could not be much longer
delayed. he proved this to himself by all the weary arguments on that
side he had read, and every one of them sunk him deeper in the
infatuation. he had even begun to haunt the court. he told us how he
saw miss flite there daily, how they talked together, and how he did
her little kindnesses, and how, while he laughed at her, he pitied
her from his heart. but he never thought--never, my poor, dear,
sanguine richard, capable of so much happiness then, and with such
better things before him--what a fatal link was riveting between his
fresh youth and her faded age, between his free hopes and her caged
birds, and her hungry garret, and her wandering mind.

ada loved him too well to mistrust him much in anything
 
 ___________________________
 
y were assembled was
a bitter jest, was held in universal horror, contempt, and
indignation, was known for something so flagrant and bad that little
short of a miracle could bring any good out of it to any one--this
was so curious and self-contradictory to me, who had no experience of
it, that it was at first incredible, and i could not comprehend it. i
sat where richard put me, and tried to listen, and looked about me;
but there seemed to be no reality in the whole scene except poor
little miss flite, the madwoman, standing on a bench and nodding at
it.

miss flite soon espied us and came to where we sat. she gave me a
gracious welcome to her domain and indicated, with much gratification
and pride, its principal attractions. mr. kenge also came to speak to
us and did the honours of the place in much the same way, with the
bland modesty of a proprietor. it was not a very good day for a
visit, he said; he would have preferred the first day of term; but it
was imposing, it was imposing.

when 
 
 ___________________________
 
people about him as he tramped on,
staring over their heads into the body of the court.

"george!" said richard as i called his attention to him.

"you are well met, sir," he returned. "and you, miss. could you point
a person out for me, i want? i don't understand these places."

turning as he spoke and making an easy way for us, he stopped when we
were out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain.

"there's a little cracked old woman," he began, "that--"

i put up my finger, for miss flite was close by me, having kept
beside me all the time and having called the attention of several of
her legal acquaintance to me (as i had overheard to my confusion) by
whispering in their ears, "hush! fitz jarndyce on my left!"

"hem!" said mr. george. "you remember, miss, that we passed some
conversation on a certain man this morning? gridley," in a low
whisper behind his hand.

"yes," said i.

"he is hiding at my place. i couldn't mention it. hadn't his
authority. he is on his last march, miss
 
 ___________________________
 
, and has a whim to see her.
he says they can feel for one another, and she has been almost as
good as a friend to him here. i came down to look for her, for when i
sat by gridley this afternoon, i seemed to hear the roll of the
muffled drums."

"shall i tell her?" said i.

"would you be so good?" he returned with a glance of something like
apprehension at miss flite. "it's a providence i met you, miss; i
doubt if i should have known how to get on with that lady." and he
put one hand in his breast and stood upright in a martial attitude as
i informed little miss flite, in her ear, of the purport of his kind
errand.

"my angry friend from shropshire! almost as celebrated as myself!"
she exclaimed. "now really! my dear, i will wait upon him with the
greatest pleasure."

"he is living concealed at mr. george's," said i. "hush! this is mr.
george."

"in--deed!"
 
 ___________________________
 
 returned miss flite. "very proud to have the honour! a
military man, my dear. you know, a perfect general!" she whispered to
me.

poor miss flite deemed it necessary to be so courtly and polite, as a
mark of her respect for the army, and to curtsy so very often that it
was no easy matter to get her out of the court. when this was at last
done, and addressing mr. george as "general," she gave him her arm,
to the great entertainment of some idlers who were looking on, he was
so discomposed and begged me so respectfully "not to desert him" that
i could not make up my mind to do it, especially as miss flite was
always tractable with me and a
 
 ___________________________
 
n his
broad breast again and shaking hands with him. "i don't say it wasn't
handsome in you to keep my man so close, do i? be equally
good-tempered to me, old boy! old william tell, old shaw, the life
guardsman! why, he's a model of the whole british army in himself,
ladies and gentlemen. i'd give a fifty-pun' note to be such a figure
of a man!"

the affair being brought to this head, mr. george, after a little
consideration, proposed to go in first to his comrade (as he called
him), taking miss flite with him. mr. bucket agreeing, they went away
to the further end of the gallery, leaving us sitting and standing by
a table covered with guns. mr. bucket took this opportunity of
entering into a little light conversation, asking me if i were afraid
of fire-arms, as most young ladies were; asking richard if he were a
good shot; asking phil squod which he considered the best of those
rifles and what it might be worth first-hand, telling him in return
that it was a pity he ever gave way to his tem
 
 ___________________________
 
of our meeting.
but you know i made a fight for it, you know i stood up with my
single hand against them all, you know i told them the truth to the
last, and told them what they were, and what they had done to me; so
i don't mind your seeing me, this wreck."

"you have been courageous with them many and many a time," returned
my guardian.

"sir, i have been," with a faint smile. "i told you what would come
of it when i ceased to be so, and see here! look at us--look at us!"
he drew the hand miss flite held through her arm and brought her
something nearer to him.

"this ends it. of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits and
hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul alone
comes natural to me, and i am fit for. there is a tie of many
suffering years between us two, and it is the only tie i ever had on
earth that chancery has not broken."

"accept my blessing, gridley," said miss flite in tears. "accept my
blessing!"

"i thought, boastfully, that they never could b
 
 ___________________________
 
ncery. george, you lend mr. gridley a
hand, and let's see now whether he won't be better up than down."

"he is very weak," said the trooper in a low voice.

"is he?" returned bucket anxiously. "i only want to rouse him. i
don't like to see an old acquaintance giving in like this. it would
cheer him up more than anything if i could make him a little waxy
with me. he's welcome to drop into me, right and left, if he likes. i
shall never take advantage of it."

the roof rang with a scream from miss flite, which still rings in my
ears.

"oh, no, gridley!" she cried as he fell heavily and calmly back from
before her. "not without my blessing. after so many years!"

the sun was down, the light had gradually stolen from the roof, and
the shadow had crept upward. but to me the shadow of that pair, one
living and one dead, fell heavier on richard's departure than the
darkness of the darkest night. and through richard's farewell words i
heard it echoed: "of all my old associations, of all my old pursu
 
 ___________________________
 
ortunate deceased. all this and a great deal more the two
gentlemen who have formed an amicable partnership in the melancholy
catastrophe write down on the spot; and the boy population of the
court (out of bed in a moment) swarm up the shutters of the sol's
arms parlour, to behold the tops of their heads while they are about
it.

the whole court, adult as well as boy, is sleepless for that night,
and can do nothing but wrap up its many heads, and talk of the
ill-fated house, and look at it. miss flite has been bravely rescued
from her chamber, as if it were in flames, and accommodated with a
bed at the sol's arms. the sol neither turns off its gas nor shuts
its door all night, for any kind of public excitement makes good for
the sol and causes the court to stand in need of comfort. the house
has not done so much in the stomachic article of cloves or in
brandy-and-water warm since the inquest. the moment the pot-boy heard
what had happened, he rolled up his shirt-sleeves tight to his
shoulder
 
 ___________________________
 
et.
but there is nothing to be done in opposition to the smallweed
interest. mr. tulkinghorn's clerk comes down from his official pew in
the chambers to mention to the police that mr. tulkinghorn is
answerable for its being all correct about the next of kin and that
the papers and effects will be formally taken possession of in due
time and course. mr. smallweed is at once permitted so far to assert
his supremacy as to be carried on a visit of sentiment into the next
house and upstairs into miss flite's deserted room, where he looks
like a hideous bird of prey newly added to her aviary.

the arrival of this unexpected heir soon taking wind in the court
still makes good for the sol and keeps the court upon its mettle.
mrs. piper and mrs. perkins think it hard upon the young man if there
really is no will, and consider that a handsome present ought to be
made him out of the estate. young piper and young perkins, as members
of that restless juvenile circle which is the terror of the
foot-passen
 
 ___________________________
 
less for laughing
heartily over it, and we settled that i should send him a letter of
thanks on the morrow and accept his offer. it was a most agreeable
one to me, for all the places i could have thought of, i should have
liked to go to none so well as chesney wold.

"now, little housewife," said my guardian, looking at his watch, "i
was strictly timed before i came upstairs, for you must not be tired
too soon; and my time has waned away to the last minute. i have one
other petition. little miss flite, hearing a rumour that you were
ill, made nothing of walking down here--twenty miles, poor soul, in a
pair of dancing shoes--to inquire. it was heaven's mercy we were at
home, or she would have walked back again."

the old conspiracy to make me happy! everybody seemed to be in it!

"now, pet," said my guardian, "if it would not be irksome to you to
admit the harmless little creature one afternoon before you save
boythorn's otherwise devoted house from demolition, i believe you
would make her pr
 
 ___________________________
 
inent name is jarndyce--could do in a lifetime."

i have no doubt he knew there would be something in the simple image
of the poor afflicted creature that would fall like a gentle lesson
on my mind at that time. i felt it as he spoke to me. i could not
tell him heartily enough how ready i was to receive her. i had always
pitied her, never so much as now. i had always been glad of my little
power to soothe her under her calamity, but never, never, half so
glad before.

we arranged a time for miss flite to come out by the coach and share
my early dinner. when my guardian left me, i turned my face away upon
my couch and prayed to be forgiven if i, surrounded by such
blessings, had magnified to myself the little trial that i had to
undergo. the childish prayer of that old birthday when i had aspired
to be industrious, contented, and true-hearted and to do good to some
one and win some love to myself if i could came back into my mind
with a reproachful sense of all the happiness i had since enjoy
 
 ___________________________
 
urned towards me. if i
were weak now, what had i profited by those mercies? i repeated the
old childish prayer in its old childish words and found that its old
peace had not departed from it.

my guardian now came every day. in a week or so more i could walk
about our rooms and hold long talks with ada from behind the
window-curtain. yet i never saw her, for i had not as yet the courage
to look at the dear face, though i could have done so easily without
her seeing me.

on the appointed day miss flite arrived. the poor little creature ran
into my room quite forgetful of her usual dignity, and crying from
her very heart of hearts, "my dear fitz jarndyce!" fell upon my neck
and kissed me twenty times.

"dear me!" said she, putting her hand into her reticule, "i have
nothing here but documents, my dear fitz jarndyce; i must borrow a
pocket handkerchief."

charley gave her one, and the good creature certainly made use of it,
for she held it to her eyes with both hands and sat so, shedding
tears 
 
 ___________________________
 
for the next ten minutes.

"with pleasure, my dear fitz jarndyce," she was careful to explain.
"not the least pain. pleasure to see you well again. pleasure at
having the honour of being admitted to see you. i am so much fonder
of you, my love, than of the chancellor. though i do attend court
regularly. by the by, my dear, mentioning pocket handkerchiefs--"

miss flite here looked at charley, who had been to meet her at the
place where the coach stopped. charley glanced at me and looked
unwilling to pursue the suggestion.

"ve-ry right!" said miss flite, "ve-ry correct. truly! highly
indiscreet of me to mention it; but my dear miss fitz jarndyce, i am
afraid i am at times (between ourselves, you wouldn't think it) a
little--rambling you know," said miss flite, touching her forehead.
"nothing more."

"what were you going to tell me?" said i, smiling, for i saw
 
 ___________________________
 
 she
wanted to go on. "you have roused my curiosity, and now you must
gratify it."

miss flite looked at charley for advice in this important crisis, who
said, "if you please, ma'am, you had better tell then," and therein
gratified miss flite beyond measure.

"so sagacious, our young friend," said she to me in her mysterious
way. "diminutive. but ve-ry sagacious! well, my dear, it's a pretty
anecdote. nothing more. still i think it charming. who should follow
us down the road from the coach, my dear, but a poor person in a very
ungenteel bonnet--"

"jenny, if you please, miss," said charley.

"just so!" miss flite acquiesced with the greatest suavity. "jenny.
ye-es! and what does she tell our young friend but that there has
been a l
 
 ___________________________
 
ief away with her as a little
keepsake merely because it was my amiable fitz jarndyce's! now, you
know, so very prepossessing in the lady with the veil!"

"if you please, miss," said charley, to whom i looked in some
astonishment, "jenny says that when her baby died, you left a
handkerchief there, and that she put it away and kept it with the
baby's little things. i think, if you please, partly because it was
yours, miss, and partly because it had covered the baby."

"diminutive," whispered miss flite, making a variety of motions about
her own forehead to express intellect in charley. "but exceedingly
sagacious! and so dear! my love, she's clearer than any counsel i
ever heard!"

"yes, charley," i returned. "i remember it. well?"

"well, miss," said charley, "and that's the handkerchief the lady
took. and jenny wants you to know that she wouldn't have made away
with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady took it and
left some money instead. jenny don't know her at all, if you pleas
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
miss!"

"why, who can she be?" said i.

"my love," miss flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with
her most mysterious look, "in my opinion--don't mention this to our
diminutive friend--she's the lord chancellor's wife. he's married,
you know. and i understand she leads him a terrible life. throws his
lordship's papers into the fire, my dear, if he won't pay the
jeweller!"

i did not think very much about this lady then, for i had an
impression that it might be caddy. besides, my attention was diverted
by my visitor, who was cold after her ride an
 
 ___________________________
 
had brought
down in a paper parcel. i had to preside, too, over the
entertainment, consisting of a dish of fish, a roast fowl, a
sweetbread, vegetables, pudding, and madeira; and it was so pleasant
to see how she enjoyed it, and with what state and ceremony she did
honour to it, that i was soon thinking of nothing else.

when we had finished and had our little dessert before us,
embellished by the hands of my dear, who would yield the
superintendence of everything prepared for me to no one, miss flite
was so very chatty and happy that i thought i would lead her to her
own history, as she was always pleased to talk about herself. i began
by saying "you have attended on the lord chancellor many years, miss
flite?"

"oh, many, many, many years, my dear. but i expect a judgment.
shortly."

there was an anxiety even in her hopefulness that made me doubtful if
i had done right in approaching the subject. i thought i would say no
more about it.

"my father expected a judgment," said miss flite. "my
 
 ___________________________
 
 can't leave
it. and you must expect."

i tried to assure her that this was not so. she heard me patiently
and smilingly, but was ready with her own answer.

"aye, aye, aye! you think so because i am a little rambling. ve-ry
absurd, to be a little rambling, is it not? ve-ry confusing, too. to
the head. i find it so. but, my dear, i have been there many years,
and i have noticed. it's the mace and seal upon the table."

what could they do, did she think? i mildly asked her.

"draw," returned miss flite. "draw people on, my dear. draw peace out
of them. sense out of them. good looks out of them. good qualities
out of them. i have felt them even drawing my rest away in the night.
cold and glittering devils!"

she tapped me several times upon the arm and nodded good-humouredly
as if she were anxious i should understand that i had no cause to
fear her, though she spoke so gloomily, and confided these awful
secrets to me.

"let me see," said she. "i'll tell you my own case. before they ever
drew m
 
 ___________________________
 
low, strained voice, as if the shock were fresh upon
her, she gradually resumed her usual air of amiable importance.

"you don't quite credit me, my dear! well, well! you will, some day.
i am a little rambling. but i have noticed. i have seen many new
faces come, unsuspicious, within the influence of the mace and seal
in these many years. as my father's came there. as my brother's. as
my sister's. as my own. i hear conversation kenge and the rest of
them say to the new faces, 'here's little miss flite. oh, you are new
here; and you must come and be presented to little miss flite!' ve-ry
good. proud i am sure to have the honour! and we all laugh. but, fitz
jarndyce, i know what will happen. i know, far better than they do,
when the attraction has begun. i know the signs, my dear. i saw them
begin in gridley. and i saw them end. fitz jarndyce, my love,"
speaking low again, "i saw them beginning in our friend the ward in
jarndyce. let some one hold him back. or he'll be drawn to ruin."

she loo
 
 ___________________________
 

mine. "you have not congratulated me on my physician. positively not
once, yet!"

i was obliged to confess that i did not quite know what she meant.

"my physician, mr. woodcourt, my dear, who was so exceedingly
attentive to me. though his services were rendered quite
gratuitously. until the day of judgment. i mean the judgment that
will dissolve the spell upon me of the mace and seal."

"mr. woodcourt is so far away, now," said i, "that i thought the time
for such congratulation was past, miss flite."

"but, my child," she returned, "is it possible that you don't know
what has happened?"

"no," said i.

"not what everybody has been talking of, my beloved fitz jarndyce!"

"no," said i. "you forget how long i have been here."

"true! my dear, for the moment--true. i blame myself. but my memory
has been drawn out of me, with everything else, by what i mentioned.
ve-ry strong influence, is it not? well, my dear, there has been a
terrible shipwreck over in those east indian seas."

"mr. woodcou
 
 ___________________________
 
 scarf and gloves,
"my brave physician ought to have a title bestowed upon him. and no
doubt he will. you are of that opinion?"

that he well deserved one, yes. that he would ever have one, no.

"why not, fitz jarndyce?" she asked rather sharply.

i said it was not the custom in england to confer titles on men
distinguished by peaceful services, however good and great, unless
occasionally when they consisted of the accumulation of some very
large amount of money.

"why, good gracious," said miss flite, "how can you say that? surely
you know, my dear, that all the greatest ornaments of england in
knowledge, imagination, active humanity, and improvement of every
sort are added to its nobility! look round you, my dear, and
consider. you must be rambling a little now, i think, if you don't
know that this is the great reason why titles will always last in the
land!"

i am afraid she believed what she said, for there were moments when
she was very mad indeed.

and now i must part with the little s
 
 ___________________________
 
ll but consider it so; and
you are as heartily welcome here!"

"spoken like the best of little women!" cried richard gaily.

i asked him how he liked his profession.

"oh, i like it well enough!" said richard. "it's all right. it does
as well as anything else, for a time. i don't know that i shall care
about it when i come to be settled, but i can sell out then
and--however, never mind all that botheration at present."

so young and handsome, and in all respects so perfectly the opposite
of miss flite! and yet, in the clouded, eager, seeking look that
passed over him, so dreadfully like her!

"i am in town on leave just now," said richard.

"indeed?"

"yes. i have run over to look after my--my chancery interests before
the long vacation," said richard, forcing a careless laugh. "we are
beginning to spin along with that old suit at last, i promise you."

no wonder that i shook my head!

"as you say, it's not a pleasant subject." richard spoke with the
same shade crossing his face as before. "
 
 ___________________________
 
be there with mr. richard carstone, and i sent it in to
mr. woodcourt. he came immediately. i told him i was rejoiced to be
by chance among the first to welcome him home to england. and i saw
that he was very sorry for me.

"you have been in shipwreck and peril since you left us, mr.
woodcourt," said i, "but we can hardly call that a misfortune which
enabled you to be so useful and so brave. we read of it with the
truest interest. it first came to my knowledge through your old
patient, poor miss flite, when i was recovering from my severe
illness."

"ah! little miss flite!" he said. "she lives the same life yet?"

"just the same."

i was so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to
be able to put it aside.

"her gratitude to you, mr. woodcourt, is delightful. she is a most
affectionate creature, as i have reason to say."

"you--you have found her so?" he returned. "i--i am glad of that." he
was so very sorry for me that he could scarcely speak.

"i assure you," said i, "that
 
 ___________________________
 
somewhat; and by little and little he eats the slice
of bread he had so hopelessly laid down. observant of these signs of
improvement, allan engages him in conversation and elicits to his no
small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil, with all its
consequences. jo slowly munches as he slowly tells it. when he has
finished his story and his bread, they go on again.

intending to refer his difficulty in finding a temporary place of
refuge for the boy to his old patient, zealous little miss flite,
allan leads the way to the court where he and jo first foregathered.
but all is changed at the rag and bottle shop; miss flite no longer
lodges there; it is shut up; and a hard-featured female, much
obscured by dust, whose age is a problem, but who is indeed no other
than the interesting judy, is tart and spare in her replies. these
sufficing, however, to inform the visitor that miss flite and her
birds are domiciled with a mrs. blinder, in bell yard, he repairs to
that neighbouring place, whe
 
 ___________________________
 
re miss flite (who rises early that she
may be punctual at the divan of justice held by her excellent friend
the chancellor) comes running downstairs with tears of welcome and
with open arms.

"my dear physician!" cries miss flite. "my meritorious,
distinguished, honourable officer!" she uses some odd expressions,
but is as cordial and full of heart as sanity itself can be--more so
than it often is. allan, very patient with her, waits until she has
no more raptures to express, then points out jo, trembling in a
doorway, and tells her how he comes there.

"where can i lodge him hereabouts for the present? now, you have a
fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise me."

miss flite, mighty proud of the compliment, sets
 
 ___________________________
 
 herself to consider;
but it is long before a bright thought occurs to her. mrs. blinder is
entirely let, and she herself occupies poor gridley's room.
"gridley!" exclaims miss flite, clapping her hands after a twentieth
repetition of this remark. "gridley! to be sure! of course! my dear
physician! general george will help us out."

it is hopeless to ask for any information about general george, and
would be, though miss flite had not already run upstairs to put on
her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself with
her reticule of documents. but as she informs her physician in her
disjointed manner on coming down in full array that general george,
whom she often calls upon, knows her dear fitz jarndyce and takes a
great interest in all connected with her, allan is induced to think
that they may be in the right way. so he tells jo, for his
encouragement, that this walking about will soon be over now;
 
 ___________________________
 

and the bare perspective beyond it, allan woodcourt augurs well. he
also descries promise in the figure of mr. george himself, striding
towards them in his morning exercise with his pipe in his mouth, no
stock on, and his muscular arms, developed by broadsword and
dumbbell, weightily asserting themselves through his light
shirt-sleeves.

"your servant, sir," says mr. george with a military salute.
good-humouredly smiling all over his broad forehead up into his crisp
hair, he then defers to miss flite, as, with great stateliness, and
at some length, she performs the courtly ceremony of presentation. he
winds it up with another "your servant, sir!" and another salute.

"excuse me, sir. a sailor, i believe?" says mr. george.

"i am proud to find i have the air of one," returns allan; "but i am
only a sea-going doctor."

"indeed, sir! i should have thought you was a regular blue-jacket
myself."

allan hopes mr. george will forgive his intrusion the more readily on
that account, and particularly
 
 ___________________________
 
 that he will not lay aside his pipe,
which, in his politeness, he has testified some intention of doing.
"you are very good, sir," returns the trooper. "as i know by
experience that it's not disagreeable to miss flite, and since it's
equally agreeable to yourself--" and finishes the sentence by putting
it between his lips again. allan proceeds to tell him all he knows
about jo, unto which the trooper listens with a grave face.

"and that's the lad, sir, is it?" he inquires, looking along the
entry to where jo stands staring up at the great letters on the
whitewashed front, which have no meaning in his eyes.

"that's he," says allan. "and, mr. george, i am in this difficulty
about him. i am unwilling to place
 
 ___________________________
 
rywhere, and cognizant of everything."

"i ask your pardon, sir," says mr. george. "but you have not
mentioned that party's name. is it a secret, sir?"

"the boy makes it one. but his name is bucket."

"bucket the detective, sir?"

"the same man."

"the man is known to me, sir," returns the trooper after blowing out
a cloud of smoke and squaring his chest, "and the boy is so far
correct that he undoubtedly is a--rum customer." mr. george smokes
with a profound meaning after this and surveys miss flite in silence.

"now, i wish mr. jarndyce and miss summerson at least to know that
this jo, who tells so strange a story, has reappeared, and to have it
in their power to speak with him if they should desire to do so.
therefore i want to get him, for the present moment, into any poor
lodging kept by decent people where he would be admitted. decent
people and jo, mr. george," says allan, following the direction of
the trooper's eyes along the entry, "have not been much acquainted,
as you see. hence
 
 ___________________________
 
 i do, guv'ner," is phil's reply.

"now i was thinking, sir," says mr. george in a martial sort of
confidence, as if he were giving his opinion in a council of war at a
drum-head, "that if this man was to take him to a bath and was to lay
out a few shillings in getting him one or two coarse articles--"

"mr. george, my considerate friend," returns allan, taking out his
purse, "it is the very favour i would have asked."

phil squod and jo are sent out immediately on this work of
improvement. miss flite, quite enraptured by her success, makes the
best of her way to court, having great fears that otherwise her
friend the chancellor may be uneasy about her or may give the
judgment she has so long expected in her absence, and observing
"which you know, my dear physician, and general, after so many years,
would be too absurdly unfortunate!" allan takes the opportunity of
going out to procure some restorative medicines, and obtaining them
near at hand, soon returns to find the trooper walking up an
 
 ___________________________
 
and was rather taken by surprise. for a moment
all that i had had in my mind in connexion with mr. woodcourt seemed
to come back and confuse me.

"you don't object to him, little woman?"

"object to him, guardian? oh no!"

"and you don't think the patient would object to him?"

so far from that, i had no doubt of her being prepared to have a
great reliance on him and to like him very much. i said that he was
no stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in his kind
attendance on miss flite.

"very good," said my guardian. "he has been here to-day, my dear, and
i will see him about it to-morrow."

i felt in this short conversation--though i did not know how, for she
was quiet, and we interchanged no look--that my dear girl well
remembered how merrily she had clasped me round the waist when no
other hands than caddy's had brought me the little parting token.
this caused me to feel that i ought to tell her, and caddy too, that
i was going to be the mistress of bleak house and that i
 
 ___________________________
 
dy
jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?"

"yes," i said; "and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be
made rich, guardian."

"i wish it was," he returned, "with all my heart."

so did i too, for that matter. i said so.

"aye! we would make him as rich as a jew if we knew how. would we
not, little woman?"

i laughed as i worked and replied that i was not sure about that, for
it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be
many who could ill spare him. as miss flite, and caddy herself, and
many others.

"true," said my guardian. "i had forgotten that. but we would agree
to make him rich enough to live, i suppose? rich enough to work with
tolerable peace of mind? rich enough to have his own happy home and
his own household gods--and household goddess, too, perhaps?"

that was quite another thing, i said. we must all agree in that.

"to be sure," said my guardian. "all of us. i have a great regard for
woodcourt, a high esteem for him; and i have been soundin
 
 ___________________________
 
ng poorer and poorer every day.

she shone in the miserable corner like a beautiful star. she adorned
and graced it so that it became another place. paler than she had
been at home, and a little quieter than i had thought natural when
she was yet so cheerful and hopeful, her face was so unshadowed that
i half believed she was blinded by her love for richard to his
ruinous career.

i went one day to dine with them while i was under this impression.
as i turned into symond's inn, i met little miss flite coming out.
she had been to make a stately call upon the wards in jarndyce, as
she still called them, and had derived the highest gratification from
that ceremony. ada had already told me that she called every monday
at five o'clock, with one little extra white bow in her bonnet, which
never appeared there at any other time, and with her largest reticule
of documents on her arm.

"my dear!" she began. "so delighted! how do you do! so glad to see
you. and you are going to visit our interesting j
 
 ___________________________
 
arndyce wards? to be
sure! our beauty is at home, my dear, and will be charmed to see
you."

"then richard is not come in yet?" said i. "i am glad of that, for i
was afraid of being a little late."

"no, he is not come in," returned miss flite. "he has had a long day
in court. i left him there with vholes. you don't like vholes, i
hope? don't like vholes. dan-gerous man!"

"i am afraid you see richard oftener than ever now," said i.

"my dearest," returned miss flite, "daily and hourly. you know what i
told you of the attraction on the chancellor's table? my dear, next
to myself he is the most constant suitor in court. he begins quite to
amuse our little party. ve-ry friendly little party, are we not?"

it was miserable to hear this from her poor mad lips, though it was
no surprise.

"in short, my valued friend," pursued miss flite, advancing her lips
to my ear with an air of equal patronage and mystery, "i must tell
you a secret. i have made him my executo
 
 ___________________________
 
r. nominated, constituted,
and appointed him. in my will. ye-es."

"indeed?" said i.

"ye-es," repeated miss flite in her most genteel accents, "my
executor, administrator, and assign. (our chancery phrases, my love.)
i have reflected that if i should wear out, he will be able to watch
that judgment. being so very regular in his attendance."

it made me sigh to think of him.

"i did at one time mean," said miss flite, echoing the sigh, "to
nominate, constitute, and appoint poor gridley. also very regular, my
charming girl. i assure you, most exemplary! but he wore out, poor
man, so i have appointed his successor. don't mention it. this is in
confidence."

she carefully opened her reticule a little way and showed me a folded
piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she spoke.

"another secret, my dear. i have added to my collection of birds."

"really, miss flite?" said i, knowing how it pleased her
 
 ___________________________
 
own. i have fallen like a poor stray
shadow on your way, i have married you to poverty and trouble, i have
scattered your means to the winds. you will forgive me all this, my
ada, before i begin the world?"

a smile irradiated his face as she bent to kiss him. he slowly laid
his face down upon her bosom, drew his arms closer round her neck,
and with one parting sob began the world. not this world, oh, not
this! the world that sets this right.

when all was still, at a late hour, poor crazed miss flite came
weeping to me and told me she had given her birds their liberty.




chapter lxvi

down in lincolnshire


there is a hush upon chesney wold in these altered days, as there is
upon a portion of the family history. the story goes that sir
leicester paid some who could have spoken out to hold their peace;
but it is a lame story, feebly whispering and creeping about, and any
brighter spark of life it shows soon dies away. it is known for
certain that the handsome lady dedlock lies in the mauso