

chapter i

in chancery


london. michaelmas term lately over, and the lord chancellor sitting
in lincoln's inn hall. implacable november weather. as much mud in
the streets as if the waters had but newly retired from the face of
the earth, and it would not be wonderful to meet a megalosaurus,
forty feet long or so, waddling like an elephantine lizard up holborn
hill. smoke lowering down from chimney-pots, making a soft black
drizzle, with flakes of soot in it as big as full-grown
snowflakes--gone into mourning, one might imagine, for the death of
the sun. dogs, undistinguishable in mire. horses, scarcely better;
splashed to their very blinkers. foot passengers, jostling one
another's umbrellas in a general infection of ill temper, and losing
their foot-hold at street-corners, where tens of thousands of other
foot passengers have been sli
 
 ___________________________
 
r manner which i don't think i can better explain than by
reverting for a moment to our loan to mr. skimpole.

mr. jarndyce had ascertained the amount, either from mr. skimpole
himself or from coavinses, and had placed the money in my hands with
instructions to me to retain my own part of it and hand the rest to
richard. the number of little acts of thoughtless expenditure which
richard justified by the recovery of his ten pounds, and the number
of times he talked to me as if he had saved or realized that amount,
would form a sum in simple addition.

"my prudent mother hubbard, why not?" he said to me when he wanted,
without the least consideration, to bestow five pounds on the
brickmaker. "i made ten pounds, clear, out of coavinses' business."

"how was that?" said i.

"why, i got rid of ten pounds which i was quite content to get rid of
and never expected to see any more. you don't deny that?"

"no," said i.

"very well! then i came into possession of ten pounds--"

"the same ten pounds
 
 ___________________________
 
 they
bring our dear brother here departed to receive christian burial.

with houses looking on, on every side, save where a reeking little
tunnel of a court gives access to the iron gate--with every villainy
of life in action close on death, and every poisonous element of
death in action close on life--here they lower our dear brother down
a foot or two, here sow him in corruption, to be raised in
corruption: an avenging ghost at many a sick-bedside, a shameful
testimony to future ages how civilization and barbarism walked this
boastful island together.

come night, come darkness, for you cannot come too soon or stay too
long by such a place as this! come, straggling lights into the
windows of the ugly houses; and you who do iniquity therein, do it at
least with this dread scene shut out! come, flame of gas, burning so
sullenly above the iron gate, on which the poisoned air deposits its
witch-ointment slimy to the touch! it is well that you should call to
every passerby, "look here!"

wi
 
 ___________________________
 
"how old are you?"

"nineteen, my lady."

"nineteen," repeats my lady thoughtfully. "take care they don't spoil
you by flattery."

"yes, my lady."

my lady taps her dimpled cheek with the same delicate gloved fingers
and goes on to the foot of the oak staircase, where sir leicester
pauses for her as her knightly escort. a staring old dedlock in a
panel, as large as life and as dull, looks as if he didn't know what
to make of it, which was probably his general state of mind in the
days of queen elizabeth.

that evening, in the housekeeper's room, rosa can do nothing but
murmur lady dedlock's praises. she is so affable, so graceful, so
beautiful, so elegant; has such a sweet voice and such a thrilling
touch that rosa can feel it yet! mrs. rouncewell confirms all this,
not without personal pride, reserving only the one point of
affability. mrs. rouncewell is not quite sure as to that. heaven
forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of
that excellent family, above all,
 
 ___________________________
 
t'll come in his way. my master will be
against it, and he'll be beat, and see me beat, and made to fear his
home, and perhaps to stray wild. if i work for him ever so much, and
ever so hard, there's no one to help me; and if he should be turned
bad 'spite of all i could do, and the time should come when i should
sit by him in his sleep, made hard and changed, an't it likely i
should think of him as he lies in my lap now and wish he had died as
jenny's child died!"

"there, there!" says jenny. "liz, you're tired and ill. let me take
him."

in doing so, she displaces the mother's dress, but quickly readjusts
it over the wounded and bruised bosom where the baby has been lying.

"it's my dead child," says jenny, walking up and down as she nurses,
"that makes me love this child so dear, and it's my dead child that
makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its being taken
away from her now. while she thinks that, i think what fortune would
i give to have my darling back. but we mean t
 
 ___________________________
 
ld
think, to judge from the state of the furniture), and had satisfied
every one concerned that he could do no more, poor man. so, he had
been honourably dismissed to "the office" to begin the world again.
what he did at the office, i never knew; caddy said he was a
"custom-house and general agent," and the only thing i ever
understood about that business was that when he wanted money more
than usual he went to the docks to look for it, and hardly ever found
it.

as soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this shorn
lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in hatton garden
(where i found the children, when i afterwards went there, cutting
the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking themselves
with it), caddy had brought about a meeting between him and old mr.
turveydrop; and poor mr. jellyby, being very humble and meek, had
deferred to mr. turveydrop's deportment so submissively that they had
become excellent friends. by degrees, old mr. turveydrop, 
 
 ___________________________
 
pped me a curtsy.

"thank you, miss. if you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
the name of jenny?"

"a brickmaker's wife, charley? yes."

"she came and spoke to me when i was out a little while ago, and said
you knew her, miss. she asked me if i wasn't the young lady's little
maid--meaning you for the young lady, miss--and i said yes, miss."

"i thought she had left this neighbourhood altogether, charley."

"so she had, miss, but she's come back again to where she used to
live--she and liz. did you know another poor person of the name of
liz, miss?"

"i think i do, charley, though not by name."

"that's what she said!" returned charley. "they have both come back,
miss, and have been tramping high and low."

"tramping high and low, have they, charley?"

"yes, miss." if charley could only have made the letters in her copy
as round as the eyes with which she looked into my face, they would
have been excellent. "and this poor person came about the house three
or four days, hoping to 
 
 ___________________________
 
m stolbuns, and so i took the
stolbuns road. it's as good as another."

he always concluded by addressing charley.

"what is to be done with him?" said i, taking the woman aside. "he
could not travel in this state even if he had a purpose and knew
where he was going!"

"i know no more, ma'am, than the dead," she replied, glancing
compassionately at him. "perhaps the dead know better, if they could
only tell us. i've kept him here all day for pity's sake, and i've
given him broth and physic, and liz has gone to try if any one will
take him in (here's my pretty in the bed--her child, but i call it
mine); but i can't keep him long, for if my husband was to come home
and find him here, he'd be rough in putting him out and might do him
a hurt. hark! here comes liz back!"

the other woman came hurriedly in as she spoke, and the boy got up
with a half-obscured sense that he was expected to be going. when the
little child awoke, and when and how charley got at it, took it out
of bed, and began to
 
 ___________________________
 
ad a comical shake or
two and set off directly, while charley would stand still and laugh
with such enjoyment that her laughter was like music. i don't know
who had given stubbs his name, but it seemed to belong to him as
naturally as his rough coat. once we put him in a little chaise and
drove him triumphantly through the green lanes for five miles; but
all at once, as we were extolling him to the skies, he seemed to take
it ill that he should have been accompanied so far by the circle of
tantalizing little gnats that had been hovering round and round his
ears the whole way without appearing to advance an inch, and stopped
to think about it. i suppose he came to the decision that it was not
to be borne, for he steadily refused to move until i gave the reins
to charley and got out and walked, when he followed me with a sturdy
sort of good humour, putting his head under my arm and rubbing his
ear against my sleeve. it was in vain for me to say, "now, stubbs, i
feel quite sure from what i k
 
 ___________________________
 
of amount as owing to the
peculiar and pressing nature of liabilities mr. c. has incurred and
the means he has of liquidating or meeting the same. i have staved
off many little matters for mr. c., but there is a limit to staving
off, and we have reached it. i have made some advances out of pocket
to accommodate these unpleasantnesses, but i necessarily look to
being repaid, for i do not pretend to be a man of capital, and i have
a father to support in the vale of taunton, besides striving to
realize some little independence for three dear girls at home. my
apprehension is, mr. c.'s circumstances being such, lest it should
end in his obtaining leave to part with his commission, which at all
events is desirable to be made known to his connexions."

mr. vholes, who had looked at me while speaking, here emerged into
the silence he could hardly be said to have broken, so stifled was
his tone, and looked before him again.

"imagine the poor fellow without even his present resource," said my
gua
 
 ___________________________
 
 her
forehead, and seeing his busy and composed face, she quietly drops
them again.

"where is he now?" asks the surgeon.

"he got into trouble last night, sir; but he'll look for me at the
lodging-house."

"he will get into worse trouble if he often misuses his large and
heavy hand as he has misused it here. but you forgive him, brutal as
he is, and i say no more of him, except that i wish he deserved it.
you have no young child?"

the woman shakes her head. "one as i calls mine, sir, but it's
liz's."

"your own is dead. i see! poor little thing!"

by this time he has finished and is putting up his case. "i suppose
you have some settled home. is it far from here?" he asks,
good-humouredly making light of what he has done as she gets up and
curtsys.

"it's a good two or three and twenty mile from here, sir. at saint
albans. you know saint albans, sir? i thought you gave a start like,
as if you did."

"yes, i know something of it. and now i will ask you a question in
return. have you money
 
 ___________________________
 
opposite side of the street. in
this order, the two come up out of tom-all-alone's into the broad
rays of the sunlight and the purer air.




chapter xlvii

jo's will


as allan woodcourt and jo proceed along the streets where the high
church spires and the distances are so near and clear in the morning
light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, allan revolves in
his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. "it surely is a
strange fact," he considers, "that in the heart of a civilized world
this creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of
than an unowned dog." but it is none the less a fact because of its
strangeness, and the difficulty remains.

at first he looks behind him often to assure himself that jo is still
really following. but look where he will, he still beholds him close
to the opposite houses, making his way with his wary hand from brick
to brick and from door to door, and often, as he creeps along,
glancing over at him watchfully. soon satis
 
 ___________________________
 
ects so curiously at variance with
himself, would be to see a sight--which nobody does see, as he is
particular to lock himself in.

"a spicy boudoir, this," says mr. bucket, who feels in a manner
furbished up in his french by the blow of the morning. "must have
cost a sight of money. rum articles to cut away from, these; she must
have been hard put to it!"

opening and shutting table-drawers and looking into caskets and
jewel-cases, he sees the reflection of himself in various mirrors,
and moralizes thereon.

"one might suppose i was a-moving in the fashionable circles and
getting myself up for almac's," says mr. bucket. "i begin to think i
must be a swell in the guards without knowing it."

ever looking about, he has opened a dainty little chest in an inner
drawer. his great hand, turning over some gloves which it can
scarcely feel, they are so light and soft within it, comes upon a
white handkerchief.

"hum! let's have a look at you," says mr. bucket, putting down the
light. "what shou
 
 ___________________________
 
d as the door stood ajar, i
pushed it open.

there were only three of them sitting at breakfast, the child lying
asleep on a bed in the corner. it was jenny, the mother of the dead
child, who was absent. the other woman rose on seeing me; and the
men, though they were, as usual, sulky and silent, each gave me a
morose nod of recognition. a look passed between them when mr. bucket
followed me in, and i was surprised to see that the woman evidently
knew him.

i had asked leave to enter of course. liz (the only name by which i
knew her) rose to give me her own chair, but i sat down on a stool
near the fire, and mr. bucket took a corner of the bedstead. now that
i had to speak and was among people with whom i was not familiar, i
became conscious of being hurried and giddy. it was very difficult to
begin, and i could not help bursting into tears.

"liz," said i, "i have come a long way in the night and through the
snow to inquire after a lady--"

"who has been here, you know," mr. bucket struc
 
 ___________________________
 
 the end of the stage, and still the lost trace was not
recovered. i looked at him anxiously when we stopped to change, but i
knew by his yet graver face as he stood watching the ostlers that he
had heard nothing. almost in an instant afterwards, as i leaned back
in my seat, he looked in, with his lighted lantern in his hand, an
excited and quite different man.

"what is it?" said i, starting. "is she here?"

"no, no. don't deceive yourself, my dear. nobody's here. but i've got
it!"

the crystallized snow was in his eyelashes, in his hair, lying in
ridges on his dress. he had to shake it from his face and get his
breath before he spoke to me.

"now, miss summerson," said he, beating his finger on the apron,
"don't you be disappointed at what i'm a-going to do. you know me.
i'm inspector bucket, and you can trust me. we've come a long way;
never mind. four horses out there for the next stage up! quick!"

there was a commotion in the yard, and a man came running out of the
stables to know i
 
 ___________________________
 

darkened his life.

"just so," assented mr. vholes again. "still, with a view to
everything being openly carried on, i will, with your permission,
miss summerson, observe to you that i consider this a very
ill-advised marriage indeed. i owe the opinion not only to mr. c.'s
connexions, against whom i should naturally wish to protect myself,
but also to my own reputation--dear to myself as a professional man
aiming to keep respectable; dear to my three girls at home, for whom
i am striving to realize some little independence; dear, i will even
say, to my aged father, whom it is my privilege to support."

"it would become a very different marriage, a much happier and better
marriage, another marriage altogether, mr. vholes," said i, "if
richard were persuaded to turn his back on the fatal pursuit in which
you are engaged with him."

mr. vholes, with a noiseless cough--or rather gasp--into one of his
black gloves, inclined his head as if he did not wholly dispute even
that.

"miss summerson,