n order that he may have something to
throw at the venerable partner of his respected age whenever she
makes an allusion to money--a subject on which he is particularly
sensitive.

"and where's bart?" grandfather smallweed inquires of judy, bart's
twin sister.

"he an't come in yet," says judy.

"it's his tea-time, isn't it?"

"no."

"how much do you mean to say it wants then?"

"ten minutes."

"hey?"

"ten minutes." (loud on the part of judy.)

"ho!" says grandfather smallweed. "ten minutes."

grandmother smallweed, who has been mumbling and shaking her head at
the trivets, hearing figures mentioned, connects them with money and
screeches like a horrible old parrot without any plumage, "ten
ten-pound notes!"

grandfather smallweed immediately throws the cushion at her.

"drat you, be quiet!" says the good old man.

the effect of this act of jaculation is twofold. it not only doubles
up mrs. smallweed's head against the side of her porter's chair and
causes her to present, when extricated by her granddaugh
 
 ___________________________
 
ation and his emulation of that shining
enchanter.

judy, with a gong-like clash and clatter, sets one of the sheet-iron
tea-trays on the table and arranges cups and saucers. the bread she
puts on in an iron basket, and the butter (and not much of it) in a
small pewter plate. grandfather smallweed looks hard after the tea as
it is served out and asks judy where the girl is.

"charley, do you mean?" says judy.

"hey?" from grandfather smallweed.

"charley, do you mean?"

this touches a spring in grandmother smallweed, who, chuckling as
usual at the trivets, cries, "over the water! charley over the water,
charley over the water, over the water to charley, charley over the
water, over the water to charley!" and becomes quite energetic about
it. grandfather looks at the cushion but has not sufficiently
recovered his late exertion.

"ha!" he says when there is silence. "if that's her name. she eats a
deal. it would be better to allow her for her keep."

judy, with her brother's wink, shakes her head and purses 