es, with cane forms
along the walls, and the walls ornamented at regular intervals with
painted lyres and little cut-glass branches for candles, which seemed
to be shedding their old-fashioned drops as other branches might shed
autumn leaves. several young lady pupils, ranging from thirteen or
fourteen years of age to two or three and twenty, were assembled; and
i was looking among them for their instructor when caddy, pinching my
arm, repeated the ceremony of introduction. "miss summerson, mr.
prince turveydrop!"

i curtsied to a little blue-eyed fair man of youthful appearance with
flaxen hair parted in the middle and curling at the ends all round
his head. he had a little fiddle, which we used to call at school a
kit, under his left arm, and its little bow in the same hand. his
little dancing-shoes were particularly diminutive, and he had a
little innocent, feminine manner which not only appealed to me in an
amiable way, but made this singular effect upon me, that i received
the impression that he w
 
 ___________________________
 
jellyby was not coming."

"i beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to me, who have
detained her, and to receive my excuses, sir," said i.

"oh, dear!" said he.

"and pray," i entreated, "do not allow me to be the cause of any more
delay."

with that apology i withdrew to a seat between peepy (who, being well
used to it, had already climbed into a corner place) and an old lady
of a censorious countenance whose two nieces were in the class and
who was very indignant with peepy's boots. prince turveydrop then
tinkled the strings of his kit with his fingers, and the young ladies
stood up to dance. just then there appeared from a side-door old mr.
turveydrop, in the full lustre of his deportment.

he was a fat old gentleman with a false complexion, false teeth,
false whiskers, and a wig. he had a fur collar, and he had a padded
breast to his coat, which only wanted a star or a broad blue ribbon
to be complete. he was pinched in, and swelled out, and got up, and
strapped down, as much as he could 
 
 ___________________________
 
d mr. turveydrop, "by miss summerson's presence."
as he bowed to me in that tight state, i almost believe i saw creases
come into the whites of his eyes.

"my father," said the son, aside, to me with quite an affecting
belief in him, "is a celebrated character. my father is greatly
admired."

"go on, prince! go on!" said mr. turveydrop, standing with his back
to the fire and waving his gloves condescendingly. "go on, my son!"

at this command, or by this gracious permission, the lesson went on.
prince turveydrop sometimes played the kit, dancing; sometimes played
the piano, standing; sometimes hummed the tune with what little
breath he could spare, while he set a pupil right; always
conscientiously moved with the least proficient through every step
and every part of the figure; and never rested for an instant. his
distinguished father did nothing whatever but stand before the fire,
a model of deportment.

"and he never does anything else," said the old lady of the
censorious countenance. "yet would you