 he has children of his own, sir?" inquired
richard.

"yes, rick! half-a-dozen. more! nearer a dozen, i should think. but
he has never looked after them. how could he? he wanted somebody to
look after him. he is a child, you know!" said mr. jarndyce.

"and have the children looked after themselves at all, sir?" inquired
richard.

"why, just as you may suppose," said mr. jarndyce, his countenance
suddenly falling. "it is said that the children of the very poor are
not brought up, but dragged up. harold skimpole's children have
tumbled up somehow or other. the wind's getting round again, i am
afraid. i feel it rather!"

richard observed that the situation was exposed on a sharp night.

"it is exposed," said mr. jarndyce. "no doubt that's the cause. bleak
house has an exposed sound. but you are coming my way. come along!"

our luggage having arrived and being all at hand, i was dressed in a
few minutes and engaged in putting my worldly goods away when a maid
(not the one in attendance upon ada, but anot
 
 ___________________________
 
as to let him live. that wasn't
much. his wants were few. give him the papers, conversation, music,
mutton, coffee, landscape, fruit in the season, a few sheets of
bristol-board, and a little claret, and he asked no more. he was a
mere child in the world, but he didn't cry for the moon. he said to
the world, "go your several ways in peace! wear red coats, blue
coats, lawn sleeves; put pens behind your ears, wear aprons; go after
glory, holiness, commerce, trade, any object you prefer; only--let
harold skimpole live!"

all this and a great deal more he told us, not only with the
utmost brilliancy and enjoyment, but with a certain vivacious
candour--speaking of himself as if he were not at all his own affair,
as if skimpole were a third person, as if he knew that skimpole had
his singularities but still had his claims too, which were the
general business of the community and must not be slighted. he was
quite enchanting. if i felt at all confused at that early time in
endeavouring to reconcile anything
 
 ___________________________
 
row myself
into objects with surprising ardour. i can admire her without envy. i
can sympathize with the objects. i can dream of them. i can lie down
on the grass--in fine weather--and float along an african river,
embracing all the natives i meet, as sensible of the deep silence and
sketching the dense overhanging tropical growth as accurately as if i
were there. i don't know that it's of any direct use my doing so, but
it's all i can do, and i do it thoroughly. then, for heaven's sake,
having harold skimpole, a confiding child, petitioning you, the
world, an agglomeration of practical people of business habits, to
let him live and admire the human family, do it somehow or other,
like good souls, and suffer him to ride his rocking-horse!"

it was plain enough that mr. jarndyce had not been neglectful of the
adjuration. mr. skimpole's general position there would have rendered
it so without the addition of what he presently said.

"it's only you, the generous creatures, whom i envy," said mr.
skimpol
 
 ___________________________
 
owing, the lights and
shadows were passing across the fields, the birds were singing."

"nobody said they warn't, in my hearing," returned coavinses.

"no," observed mr. skimpole. "but what did you think upon the road?"

"wot do you mean?" growled coavinses with an appearance of strong
resentment. "think! i've got enough to do, and little enough to get
for it without thinking. thinking!" (with profound contempt).

"then you didn't think, at all events," proceeded mr. skimpole, "to
this effect: 'harold skimpole loves to see the sun shine, loves to
hear the wind blow, loves to watch the changing lights and shadows,
loves to hear the birds, those choristers in nature's great
cathedral. and does it seem to me that i am about to deprive harold
skimpole of his share in such possessions, which are his only
birthright!' you thought nothing to that effect?"

"i--certainly--did--not," said coavinses, whose doggedness in utterly
renouncing the idea was of that intense kind that he could only give
adequate expre
 
 ___________________________
 
right!" said mr. jarndyce, brightening. "your woman's wit
hits the mark. he is a child--an absolute child. i told you he was a
child, you know, when i first mentioned him."

certainly! certainly! we said.

"and he is a child. now, isn't he?" asked mr. jarndyce, brightening
more and more.

he was indeed, we said.

"when you come to think of it, it's the height of childishness in
you--i mean me--" said mr. jarndyce, "to regard him for a moment as a
man. you can't make him responsible. the idea of harold skimpole with
designs or plans, or knowledge of consequences! ha, ha, ha!"

it was so delicious to see the clouds about his bright face clearing,
and to see him so heartily pleased, and to know, as it was impossible
not to know, that the source of his pleasure was the goodness which
was tortured by condemning, or mistrusting, or secretly accusing any
one, that i saw the tears in ada's eyes, while she echoed his laugh,
and felt them in my own.

"why, what a cod's head and shoulders i am," said mr. jarndy
 
 ___________________________
 
e social
system is to be agreeable. it's a system of harmony, in short.
therefore if you object, i object. now, excellent boythorn, let us go
to dinner!'"

"but excellent boythorn might say," returned our host, swelling and
growing very red, "i'll be--"

"i understand," said mr. skimpole. "very likely he would."

"--if i will go to dinner!" cried mr. boythorn in a violent burst and
stopping to strike his stick upon the ground. "and he would probably
add, 'is there such a thing as principle, mr. harold skimpole?'"

"to which harold skimpole would reply, you know," he returned in his
gayest manner and with his most ingenuous smile, "'upon my life i
have not the least idea! i don't know what it is you call by that
name, or where it is, or who possesses it. if you possess it and find
it comfortable, i am quite delighted and congratulate you heartily.
but i know nothing about it, i assure you; for i am a mere child, and
i lay no claim to it, and i don't want it!' so, you see, excellent
boythorn and i woul
 
 ___________________________
 
by what a
happy talent for business he was surrounded. he gave us, in his glass
of negus, "better health to our young friend!" and supposed and gaily
pursued the case of his being reserved like whittington to become
lord mayor of london. in that event, no doubt, he would establish the
jarndyce institution and the summerson almshouses, and a little
annual corporation pilgrimage to st. albans. he had no doubt, he
said, that our young friend was an excellent boy in his way, but his
way was not the harold skimpole way; what harold skimpole was, harold
skimpole had found himself, to his considerable surprise, when he
first made his own acquaintance; he had accepted himself with all his
failings and had thought it sound philosophy to make the best of the
bargain; and he hoped we would do the same.

charley's last report was that the boy was quiet. i could see, from
my window, the lantern they had left him burning quietly; and i went
to bed very happy to think that he was sheltered.

there was more movement
 
 ___________________________
 
reeable jocularity of surprise. "but every man's not obliged to be
solvent? i am not. i never was. see, my dear miss summerson," he took
a handful of loose silver and halfpence from his pocket, "there's so
much money. i have not an idea how much. i have not the power of
counting. call it four and ninepence--call it four pound nine. they
tell me i owe more than that. i dare say i do. i dare say i owe as
much as good-natured people will let me owe. if they don't stop, why
should i? there you have harold skimpole in little. if that's
responsibility, i am responsible."

the perfect ease of manner with which he put the money up again and
looked at me with a smile on his refined face, as if he had been
mentioning a curious little fact about somebody else, almost made me
feel as if he really had nothing to do with it.

"now, when you mention responsibility," he resumed, "i am disposed to
say that i never had the happiness of knowing any one whom i should
consider so refreshingly responsible as yourself. you
 
 ___________________________
 
and then he is good friends with mr.
vholes and borrows five pounds of him. he means nothing by it and
thinks nothing of it. he told you himself, i'll be bound, my dear?"

"oh, yes!" said i.

"exactly!" cried my guardian, quite triumphant. "there you have the
man! if he had meant any harm by it or was conscious of any harm in
it, he wouldn't tell it. he tells it as he does it in mere
simplicity. but you shall see him in his own home, and then you'll
understand him better. we must pay a visit to harold skimpole and
caution him on these points. lord bless you, my dears, an infant, an
infant!"

in pursuance of this plan, we went into london on an early day and
presented ourselves at mr. skimpole's door.

he lived in a place called the polygon, in somers town, where there
were at that time a number of poor spanish refugees walking about in
cloaks, smoking little paper cigars. whether he was a better tenant
than one might have supposed, in consequence of his friend somebody
always paying his rent at last,
 
 ___________________________
 
of the county, and who would appear to possess a
cultivated taste for the fine arts, was likewise deterred by some
such cause from examining the family pictures with that leisure, that
attention, that care, which he might have desired to bestow upon them
and which some of them might possibly have repaid." here he produced
a card and read, with much gravity and a little trouble, through his
eye-glass, "mr. hirrold--herald--harold--skampling--skumpling--i beg
your pardon--skimpole."

"this is mr. harold skimpole," said my guardian, evidently surprised.

"oh!" exclaimed sir leicester, "i am happy to meet mr. skimpole and
to have the opportunity of tendering my personal regrets. i hope,
sir, that when you again find yourself in my part of the county, you
will be under no similar sense of restraint."

"you are very obliging, sir leicester dedlock. so encouraged, i shall
certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another visit to
your beautiful house. the owners of such places as chesney wold,"
sa