fact that it has had no child born
to it and that the complete little men and women whom it has produced
have been observed to bear a likeness to old monkeys with something
depressing on their minds.

at the present time, in the dark little parlour certain feet below
the level of the street--a grim, hard, uncouth parlour, only
ornamented with the coarsest of baize table-covers, and the hardest
of sheet-iron tea-trays, and offering in its decorative character no
bad allegorical representation of grandfather smallweed's
mind--seated in two black horsehair porter's chairs, one on each side
of the fire-place, the superannuated mr. and mrs. smallweed while
away the rosy hours. on the stove are a couple of trivets for the
pots and kettles which it is grandfather smallweed's usual occupation
to watch, and projecting from the chimney-piece between them is a
sort of brass gallows for roasting, which he also superintends when
it is in action. under the venerable mr. smallweed's seat and guarded
by his spindle legs i
 
 ___________________________
 
s a drawer in his chair, reported to contain
property to a fabulous amount. beside him is a spare cushion with
which he is always provided in order that he may have something to
throw at the venerable partner of his respected age whenever she
makes an allusion to money--a subject on which he is particularly
sensitive.

"and where's bart?" grandfather smallweed inquires of judy, bart's
twin sister.

"he an't come in yet," says judy.

"it's his tea-time, isn't it?"

"no."

"how much do you mean to say it wants then?"

"ten minutes."

"hey?"

"ten minutes." (loud on the part of judy.)

"ho!" says grandfather smallweed. "ten minutes."

grandmother smallweed, who has been mumbling and shaking her head at
the trivets, hearing figures mentioned, connects them with money and
screeches like a horrible old parrot without any plumage, "ten
ten-pound notes!"

gr
 
 ___________________________
 
 change into a cricket or a frog himself. but he is so much
the better off than his sister that on his narrow world of fact an
opening has dawned into such broader regions as lie within the ken of
mr. guppy. hence his admiration and his emulation of that shining
enchanter.

judy, with a gong-like clash and clatter, sets one of the sheet-iron
tea-trays on the table and arranges cups and saucers. the bread she
puts on in an iron basket, and the butter (and not much of it) in a
small pewter plate. grandfather smallweed looks hard after the tea as
it is served out and asks judy where the girl is.

"charley, do you mean?" says judy.

"hey?" from grandfather smallweed.

"charley, do you mean?"

this touches a spring in grandmother smallweed, who, chuckling as
usual at the trivets, cries, "over the water! charley over the water,
charley over the water, over the water to charley, charley over the
water, over the water to charley!" and becomes quite energetic about
it. grandfather looks at the cushion but has not s
 
 ___________________________
 

"i'm a-cleaning the upstairs back room, miss," replies charley.

"mind you do it thoroughly, and don't loiter. shirking won't do for
me. make haste! go along!" cries judy with a stamp upon the ground.
"you girls are more trouble than you're worth, by half."

on this severe matron, as she returns to her task of scraping the
butter and cutting the bread, falls the shadow of her brother,
looking in at the window. for whom, knife and loaf in hand, she opens
the street-door.

"aye, aye, bart!" says grandfather smallweed. "here you are, hey?"

"here i am," says bart.

"been along with your friend again, bart?"

small nods.

"dining at his expense, bart?"

small nods again.

"that's right. live at his expense as much as you can, and take
warning by his foolish example. that's the use of such a friend. the
only use you can put him to," says the venerable sage.

his grandson, without receiving this good counsel as dutifully as he
might, honours it with all such acceptance as may lie in a slight
wink and a nod and 
 
 ___________________________
 
read and butter together and launching two or three dirty tea-cups
into the ebb-tide of the basin of tea as a hint that she considers
the eating and drinking terminated.

"now! who is it, and what's wanted?" says the snappish judy.

it is one mr. george, it appears. without other announcement or
ceremony, mr. george walks in.

"whew!" says mr. george. "you are hot here. always a fire, eh? well!
perhaps you do right to get used to one." mr. george makes the latter
remark to himself as he nods to grandfather smallweed.

"ho! it's you!" cries the old gentleman. "how de do? how de do?"

"middling," replies mr. george, taking a chair. "your granddaughter i
have had the honour of seeing before; my service to you, miss."

"this is my grandson," says grandfather smallweed. "you ha'n't seen
him before. he is in the law and not much at home."

"my service to him, too! he is like his sister. he is very like his
sister. he is devilish like his sister," says mr. george, laying a
great and not altogether complimentary s
 
 ___________________________
 
tress on his last adjective.

"and how does the world use you, mr. george?" grandfather smallweed
inquires, slowly rubbing his legs.

"pretty much as usual. like a football."

he is a swarthy brown man of fifty, well made, and good looking, with
crisp dark hair, bright eyes, and a broad chest. his sinewy and
powerful hands, as sunburnt as his face, have evidently been used to
a pretty rough life. what is curious about him is that he sits
forward on his chair as if he were, from long habit, allowing space
for some dress or accoutrements that he has altogether laid aside.
his step too is meas
 
 ___________________________
 
uld absorb into himself the whole family
and the whole four-roomed house, extra little back-kitchen and all.

"do you rub your legs to rub life into 'em?" he asks of grandfather
smallweed after looking round the room.

"why, it's partly a habit, mr. george, and--yes--it partly helps the
circulation," he replies.

"the cir-cu-la-tion!" repeats mr. george, folding his arms upon his
chest and seeming to become two sizes larger. "not much of that, i
should think."

"truly i'm old, mr. george," says grandfather smallweed. "but i can
carry my years. i'm older than her," nodding at his wife, "and see
what she is? you're a brimstone chatterer!" with a sudden revival of
his late hostility.

"unlucky old soul!" says mr. george, turning his head in that
direction. "don't scold the old lady. look at her here, with her poor
cap half off her head and her poor hair all in a muddle. hold up,
ma'am. that's better. there we are! think of your mother, mr.
smallweed," says mr. george, coming back to his seat from assisting
he
 
 ___________________________
 
r was a credit to anybody."

"surprising!" cries the old man.

"however," mr. george resumes, "the less said about it, the better
now. come! you know the agreement. always a pipe out of the two
months' interest! (bosh! it's all correct. you needn't be afraid to
order the pipe. here's the new bill, and here's the two months'
interest-money, and a devil-and-all of a scrape it is to get it
together in my business.)"

mr. george sits, with his arms folded, consuming the family and the
parlour while grandfather smallweed is assisted by judy to two black
leathern cases out of a locked bureau, in one of which he secures the
document he has just received, and from the other takes another
similar document which he hands to mr. george, who twists it up for a
pipelight. as the old man inspects, through his glasses, every
up-stroke and down-stroke of both documents before he releases them
from their leathern prison, and as he counts the money three times
over and requires judy to say every word she utters at least twi
 
 ___________________________
 
ny."

"don't you read or get read to?"

the old man shakes his head with sharp sly triumph. "no, no. we have
never been readers in our family. it don't pay. stuff. idleness.
folly. no, no!"

"there's not much to choose between your two states," says the
visitor in a key too low for the old man's dull hearing as he looks
from him to the old woman and back again. "i say!" in a louder voice.

"i hear you."

"you'll sell me up at last, i suppose, when i am a day in arrear."

"my dear friend!" cries grandfather smallweed, stretching out both
hands to embrace him. "never! never, my dear friend! but my friend in
the city that i got to lend you the money--he might!"

"oh! you can't answer for him?" says mr. george, finishing the
inquiry in his lower key with the words "you lying old rascal!"

"my dear friend, he is not to be depended on. i wouldn't trust him.
he will have his bond, my dear friend."

"devil doubt him," says mr. george. charley appearing with a
tray, on which are the pipe, a small paper of tobacco, 
 
 ___________________________
 
(if trooper he be or have been) takes her bonnet off,
with a light touch for so strong a hand, and pats her on the head.
"you give the house almost a wholesome look. it wants a bit of youth
as much as it wants fresh air." then he dismisses her, lights his
pipe, and drinks to mr. smallweed's friend in the city--the one
solitary flight of that esteemed old gentleman's imagination.

"so you think he might be hard upon me, eh?"

"i think he might--i am afraid he would. i have known him do it,"
says grandfather smallweed incautiously, "twenty times."

incautiously, because his stricken better-half, who has been dozing
over the fire for some time, is instantly aroused and jabbers "twenty
thousand pounds, twenty twenty-pound notes in a money-box, twenty
guineas, twenty million twenty per cent, twenty--" and is then cut
short by the flying cushion, which the visitor, to whom this singular
experiment appears to be a novelty, snatches from her face as it
crushes her in the usual manner.

"you're a brimstone idiot. y
 
 ___________________________
 
glass to his lips with a
round, full action, "that i am the only man alive (or dead either)
that gets the value of a pipe out of you?"

"well," returns the old man, "it's true that i don't see company, mr.
george, and that i don't treat. i can't afford to it. but as you, in
your pleasant way, made your pipe a condition--"

"why, it's not for the value of it; that's no great thing. it was a
fancy to get it out of you. to have something in for my money."

"ha! you're prudent, prudent, sir!" cries grandfather smallweed,
rubbing his legs.

"very. i always was." puff. "it's a sure sign of my prudence that i
ever found the way here." puff. "also, that i am what i am." puff. "i
am well known to be prudent," says mr. george, composedly smoking. "i
rose in life that way."

"don't be down-hearted, sir. you may rise yet."

mr. george laughs and drinks.

"ha'n't you no relations, now," asks grandfather smallweed with a
twinkle in his eyes, "who would pay off this little principal or who
would lend you a good name or t
 
 ___________________________
 
o such relations,
mr. george?"

mr. george, still composedly smoking, replies, "if i had, i shouldn't
trouble them. i have been trouble enough to my belongings in my day.
it may be a very good sort of penitence in a vagabond, who has wasted
the best time of his life, to go back then to decent people that he
never was a credit to and live upon them, but it's not my sort. the
best kind of amends then for having gone away is to keep away, in my
opinion."

"but natural affection, mr. george," hints grandfather smallweed.

"for two good names, hey?" says mr. george, shaking his head and
still composedly smoking. "no. that's not my sort either."

grandfather smallweed has been gradually sliding down in his chair
since his last adjustment and is now a bundle of clothes with a voice
in it calling for judy. that houri, appearing, shakes him up in the
usual manner and is charged by the old gentleman to remain near him.
for he seems chary of putting his visitor to the trouble of repeating
his late attentions.

"ha!" 
 
 ___________________________
 
e--if at that time you could have
helped us, mr. george, it would have been the making of you."

"i was willing enough to be 'made,' as you call it," says mr. george,
smoking not quite so placidly as before, for since the entrance of
judy he has been in some measure disturbed by a fascination, not of
the admiring kind, which obliges him to look at her as she stands by
her grandfather's chair, "but on the whole, i am glad i wasn't now."

"why, mr. george? in the name of--of brimstone, why?" says
grandfather smallweed with a plain appearance of exasperation.
(brimstone apparently suggested by his eye lighting on mrs. smallweed
in her slumber.)

"for two reasons, comrade."

"and what two reasons, mr. george? in the name of the--"

"of our friend in the city?" suggests mr. george, composedly
drinking.

"aye, if you like. what two reasons?"

"in the first place," returns mr. george, but still looking at judy
as if she being so old and so like her grandfather it is indifferent
which of the two he addresses, "you
 
 ___________________________
 
diately to recite the popular verses
commemorative of the time when they did contrive to blow old england
up alive but for her keeping her lips tightly and defiantly closed as
the chair is put down. at which point the figure in it gasping, "o
lord! oh, dear me! i am shaken!" adds, "how de do, my dear friend,
how de do?" mr. george then descries, in the procession, the
venerable mr. smallweed out for an airing, attended by his
granddaughter judy as body-guard.

"mr. george, my dear friend," says grandfather smallweed, removing
his right arm from the neck of one of his bearers, whom he has nearly
throttled coming along, "how de do? you're surprised to see me, my
dear friend."

"i should hardly have been more surprised to have seen your friend in
the city," returns mr. george.

"i am very seldom out," pants mr. smallweed. "i haven't been out for
many months. it's inconvenient--and it comes expensive. but i longed
so much to see you, my dear mr. george. how de do, sir?"

"i am well enough," says mr. george. "i
 
 ___________________________
 
 hope you are the same."

"you can't be too well, my dear friend." mr. smallweed takes him by
both hands. "i have brought my granddaughter judy. i couldn't keep
her away. she longed so much to see you."

"hum! she bears it calmly!" mutters mr. george.

"so we got a hackney-cab, and put a chair in it, and just round the
corner they lifted me out of the cab and into the chair, and carried
me here that i might see my dear friend in his own establishment!
this," says grandfather smallweed, alluding to the bearer, who has
been in danger of strangulation and who withdraws adjusting his
windpipe, "is the driver of the cab. he has nothing extra. it is by
agreement included in his fare. this person," the other bearer, "we
engaged in the street outside for a pint of beer. which is twopence.
judy, give the person twopence. i was not sure you had a workman of
your own here, my dear friend, or we needn't have employed this
person."

grandfather smallweed refers to phil with a glance of c
 
 ___________________________
 
onsiderable
terror and a half-subdued "o lord! oh, dear me!" nor in his
apprehension, on the surface of things, without some reason, for
phil, who has never beheld the apparition in the black-velvet cap
before, has stopped short with a gun in his hand with much of the air
of a dead shot intent on picking mr. smallweed off as an ugly old
bird of the crow species.

"judy, my child," says grandfather smallweed, "give the person his
twopence. it's a great deal for what he has done."

the person, who is one of those extraordinary specimens of human
fungus that spring up spontaneously in the western streets of london,
ready dressed in an old red jacket, with a "mission" for holding
horses and calling coaches, received his twopence with anything but
transport, tosses the money into the air, catches it over-handed, and
retires.

"my dear mr. george," says grandfather smallweed, "would you be so
kind as he
 
 ___________________________
 
 backed her grandfather a little way from the
fire, and having shaken him up as usual, and having released his
overshadowed eye from its black-velvet extinguisher, mr. smallweed
again says, "oh, dear me! o lord!" and looking about and meeting mr.
george's glance, again stretches out both hands.

"my dear friend! so happy in this meeting! and this is your
establishment? it's a delightful place. it's a picture! you never
find that anything goes off here accidentally, do you, my dear
friend?" adds grandfather smallweed, very ill at ease.

"no, no. no fear of that."

"and your workman. he--oh, dear me!--he never lets anything off
without meaning it, does he, my dear friend?"

"he has never hurt anybody but himself," says mr. george, smiling.

"but he might, you know. he seems to have hurt himself a good deal,
and he might hurt somebody else," the old gentleman returns. "he
mightn't mean it--or he even might. mr. george, will you order him to
leave his infernal fire-arms alone and go away?"

obedient to a nod f
 
 ___________________________
 
nce would call his wind, that in his grievous
distress he utters enforced sounds like a paviour's rammer.

when judy has by these means set him up again in his chair, with a
white face and a frosty nose (but still clawing), she stretches out
her weazen forefinger and gives mr. george one poke in the back. the
trooper raising his head, she makes another poke at her esteemed
grandfather, and having thus brought them together, stares rigidly at
the fire.

"aye, aye! ho, ho! u--u--u--ugh!" chatters grandfather smallweed,
swallowing his rage. "my dear friend!" (still clawing).

"i tell you what," says mr. george. "if you want to converse with me,
you must speak out. i am one of the roughs, and i can't go about and
about. i haven't the art to do it. i am not clever enough. it don't
suit me. when you go winding round and round me," says the trooper,
putting his pipe between his lips again, "damme, if i don't feel as
if i was being smothered!"

and he inflates his broad chest to its utmost extent as if to assure
h
 
 ___________________________
 
 attend to me, sir," says grandfather
smallweed. "i am an old man, my dear mr. george, and i need some
attention. i can carry my years; i am not a brimstone poll-parrot"
(snarling and looking unconsciously for the cushion), "but i need
attention, my dear friend."

"well!" returns the trooper, wheeling his chair to face the old man.
"now then?"

"my friend in the city, mr. george, has done a little business with a
pupil of yours."

"has he?" says mr. george. "i am sorry to hear it."

"yes, sir." grandfather smallweed rubs his legs. "he is a fine young
soldier now, mr. george, by the name of carstone. friends came
forward and paid it all up, honourable."

"did they?" returns mr. george. "do you think your friend in the city
would like a piece of advice?"

"i think he would, my dear friend. from you."

"i advise him, then, to do no more business in that quarter. there's
no more to be got by it. the young gentleman, to my knowledge, is
brought to a dead halt."

"no, no, my dear friend. no, no, mr. george. no, 
 
 ___________________________
 
no, no, sir,"
remonstrates grandfather smallweed, cunningly rubbing his spare legs.
"not quite a dead halt, i think. he has good friends, and he is good
for his pay, and he is good for the selling price of his commission,
and he is good for his chance in a lawsuit, and he is good for his
chance in a wife, and--oh, do you know, mr. george, i think my friend
would consider the young gentleman good for something yet?" says
grandfather smallweed, turning up his velvet cap and scratching his
ear like a monkey.

mr. george, who has put aside his pipe and sits with an arm on his
chair-back, beats a tattoo on the ground with his right foot as if he
were not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation has
taken.

"but to pass from one subject to another," resumes mr. smallweed.
"'to promote the conversation,' as a joker might say. to pass, mr.
george, from the ensign to the captain."

"what are you up to, now?" asks mr. george, paus
 
 ___________________________
 
george with a low whistle as he sees
both grandfather and granddaughter looking hard at him. "you are
there! well? what about it? come, i won't be smothered any more.
speak!"

"my dear friend," returns the old man, "i was applied--judy, shake me
up a little!--i was applied to yesterday about the captain, and my
opinion still is that the captain is not dead."

"bosh!" observes mr. george.

"what was your remark, my dear friend?" inquires the old man with his
hand to his ear.

"bosh!"

"ho!" says grandfather smallweed. "mr. george, of my opinion you can
judge for yourself according to the questions asked of me and the
reasons given for asking 'em. now, what do you think the lawyer
making the inquiries wants?"

"a job," says mr. george.

"nothing of the kind!"

"can't be a lawyer, then," says mr. george, folding his arms with an
air of confirmed resolution.

"my dear friend, he is a lawyer, and a famous one. he wants to see
some fragment in captain hawdon's writing. he don't want to keep it.
he only wants to 
 
 ___________________________
 
eezing up his velvet cap between his angry hands, "i
have half a million of his signatures, i think! but you,"
breathlessly recovering his mildness of speech as judy re-adjusts the
cap on his skittle-ball of a head, "you, my dear mr. george, are
likely to have some letter or paper that would suit the purpose.
anything would suit the purpose, written in the hand."

"some writing in that hand," says the trooper, pondering; "may be, i
have."

"my dearest friend!"

"may be, i have not."

"ho!" says grandfather smallweed, crest-fallen.

"but if i had bushels of it, i would not show as much as would make a
cartridge without knowing why."

"sir, i have told you why. my dear mr. george, i have told you why."

"not enough," says the trooper, shaking his head. "i must know more,
and approve it."

"then, will you come to the lawyer? my dear friend, will you come and
see the gentleman?" urges grandfather smallweed, pulling out a lean
old silver watch with hands like the leg of a skeleton. "i told him
it was probable i
 
 ___________________________
 
 room. he looks up at
the painted ceiling, looks round at the old law-books, contemplates
the portraits of the great clients, reads aloud the names on the
boxes.

"'sir leicester dedlock, baronet,'" mr. george reads thoughtfully.
"ha! 'manor of chesney wold.' humph!" mr. george stands looking at
these boxes a long while--as if they were pictures--and comes back to
the fire repeating, "sir leicester dedlock, baronet, and manor of
chesney wold, hey?"

"worth a mint of money, mr. george!" whispers grandfather smallweed,
rubbing his legs. "powerfully rich!"

"who do you mean? this old gentleman, or the baronet?"

"this gentleman, this gentleman."

"so i have heard; and knows a thing or two, i'll hold a wager. not
bad quarters, either," says mr. george, looking round again. "see the
strong-box yonder!"

this reply is cut short by mr. tulkinghorn's arrival. there is no
change in him, of course. rustily drest, with his spectacles in his
hand, and their very case worn threadbare. in manner, close and dry.
in voice
 
 ___________________________
 
 and looks (from
behind that blind which is always down) at the trio sitting in a
little semicircle before him.

"now, i can feel what i am about" (as perhaps he can in two senses),
"mr. smallweed." the old gentleman is newly shaken up by judy to bear
his part in the conversation. "you have brought our good friend the
sergeant, i see."

"yes, sir," returns mr. smallweed, very servile to the lawyer's
wealth and influence.

"and what does the sergeant say about this business?"

"mr. george," says grandfather smallweed with a tremulous wave of his
shrivelled hand, "this is the gentleman, sir."

mr. george salutes the gentleman but otherwise sits bolt upright and
profoundly silent--very forward in his chair, as if the full
complement of regulation appendages for a field-day hung about him.

mr. tulkinghorn proceeds, "well, george--i believe your name is
george?"

"it is so, sir."

"what do you say, george?"

"i ask your pardon, sir," returns the trooper, "but i should wish to
know what you say?"

"do you mean 
 
 ___________________________
 
am told. that is so, is it not?"

"yes, sir, that is so," says mr. george with military brevity.

"therefore you may happen to have in your possession
something--anything, no matter what; accounts, instructions, orders,
a letter, anything--in captain hawdon's writing. i wish to compare
his writing with some that i have. if you can give me the
opportunity, you shall be rewarded for your trouble. three, four,
five, guineas, you would consider handsome, i dare say."

"noble, my dear friend!" cries grandfather smallweed, screwing up his
eyes.

"if not, say how much more, in your conscience as a soldier, you can
demand. there is no need for you to part with the writing, against
your inclination--though i should prefer to have it."

mr. george sits squared in exactly the same attitude, looks at the
painted ceiling, and says never a word. the irascible mr. smallweed
scratches the air.

"the question is," says mr. tulkinghorn in his methodical, subdued,
uninterested way, "first, whether you have any of captain haw
 
 ___________________________
 
t's--it's worse than your smattering chattering magpie of a
grandmother," to the imperturbable judy, who only looks at the fire,
"to know he has got what's wanted and won't give it up. he, not to
give it up! he! a vagabond! but never mind, sir, never mind. at the
most, he has only his own way for a little while. i have him
periodically in a vice. i'll twist him, sir. i'll screw him, sir. if
he won't do it with a good grace, i'll make him do it with a bad one,
sir! now, my dear mr. george," says grandfather smallweed, winking at
the lawyer hideously as he releases him, "i am ready for your kind
assistance, my excellent friend!"

mr. tulkinghorn, with some shadowy sign of amusement manifesting
itself through his self-possession, stands on the hearth-rug with his
back to the fire, watching the disappearance of mr. smallweed and
acknowledging the trooper's parting salute with one slight nod.

it is more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman, mr. george
finds, than to bear a hand in carrying him downstairs,
 
 ___________________________
 
e coach
stops almost at their feet, are the venerable mr. smallweed and mrs.
smallweed, accompanied by their granddaughter judy.

an air of haste and excitement pervades the party, and as the tall
hat (surmounting mr. smallweed the younger) alights, mr. smallweed
the elder pokes his head out of window and bawls to mr. guppy, "how
de do, sir! how de do!"

"what do chick and his family want here at this time of the morning,
i wonder!" says mr. guppy, nodding to his familiar.

"my dear sir," cries grandfather smallweed, "would you do me a
favour? would you and your friend be so very obleeging as to carry me
into the public-house in the court, while bart and his sister bring
their grandmother along? would you do an old man that good turn,
sir?"

mr. guppy looks at his friend, repeating inquiringly, "the
public-house in the court?" and they prepare to bear the venerable
burden to the sol's arms.

"there's your fare!" says the patriarch to the coachman with a fierce
grin and shaking his incapable fist at him. "a
 
 ___________________________
 
s probably as much to do with these
demonstrations as any imbecile intention in the poor old woman, but
on the present occasion they are so particularly lively in connexion
with the windsor arm-chair, fellow to that in which mr. smallweed is
seated, that she only quite desists when her grandchildren have held
her down in it, her lord in the meanwhile bestowing upon her, with
great volubility, the endearing epithet of "a pig-headed jackdaw,"
repeated a surprising number of times.

"my dear sir," grandfather smallweed then proceeds, addressing mr.
guppy, "there has been a calamity here. have you heard of it, either
of you?"

"heard of it, sir! why, we discovered it."

"you discovered it. you two discovered it! bart, they discovered it!"

the two discoverers stare at the smallweeds, who return the
compliment.

"my dear friends," whines grandfather smallweed, putting out both his
hands, "i owe you a thousand thanks for discharging the melancholy
office of discovering the ashes of mrs. smallweed's brother."

"e
 
 ___________________________
 
h?" says mr. guppy.

"mrs. smallweed's brother, my dear friend--her only relation. we were
not on terms, which is to be deplored now, but he never would be on
terms. he was not fond of us. he was eccentric--he was very
eccentric. unless he has left a will (which is not at all likely) i
shall take out letters of administration. i have come down to look
after the property; it must be sealed up, it must be protected. i
have come down," repeats grandfather smallweed, hooking the air
towards him with all his ten fingers at once, "to look after the
property."

"i think, small," says the disconsolate mr. guppy, "you might have
mentioned that the old man was your uncle."

"you two were so close about him that i thought you would like me to
be the same," returns that old bird with a secretly glistening eye.
"besides, i wasn't proud of him."

"besides which, it was nothing to you, you know, whether he was or
not," says judy. also with a secretly glistening eye.

 
 ___________________________
 
but
indeed with a malignant sneer, leaves them standing there while she
consults the oracle as to their admission. the oracle may be inferred
to give consent from the circumstance of her returning with the words
on her honey lips that they can come in if they want to it. thus
privileged, they come in and find mr. smallweed with his feet in the
drawer of his chair as if it were a paper foot-bath and mrs.
smallweed obscured with the cushion like a bird that is not to sing.

"my dear friend," says grandfather smallweed with those two lean
affectionate arms of his stretched forth. "how de do? how de do? who
is our friend, my dear friend?"

"why this," returns george, not able to be very conciliatory at
first, "is matthew bagnet, who has obliged me in that matter of ours,
you know."

"oh! mr. bagnet? surely!" the old man looks at him under his hand.

"hope you're well, mr. bagnet? fine man, mr. george! military air,
sir!"

no chairs being offered, mr. george brings one forward for bagnet and
one for himself. th
 
 ___________________________
 
ips, for that purpose.

"judy," says mr. smallweed, "bring the pipe."

"why, i don't know," mr. george interposes, "that the young woman
need give herself that trouble, for to tell you the truth, i am not
inclined to smoke it to-day."

"ain't you?" returns the old man. "judy, bring the pipe."

"the fact is, mr. smallweed," proceeds george, "that i find myself in
rather an unpleasant state of mind. it appears to me, sir, that your
friend in the city has been playing tricks."

"oh, dear no!" says grandfather smallweed. "he never does that!"

"don't he? well, i am glad to hear it, because i thought it might be
his doing. this, you know, i am speaking of. this letter."

grandfather smallweed smiles in a very ugly way in recognition of the
letter.

"what does it mean?" asks mr. george.

"judy," says the old man. "have you got the pipe? give it to me. did
you say what does it mean, my good friend?"

"aye! now, come, come, you know, mr. smallweed," urges the trooper,
constraining himself to speak as smoothly and 
 
 ___________________________
 
, and are
both well aware of the understanding there has always been. i am
prepared to do the usual thing which i have done regularly and to
keep this matter going. i never got a letter like this from you
before, and i have been a little put about by it this morning,
because here's my friend matthew bagnet, who, you know, had none of
the money--"

"i don't know it, you know," says the old man quietly.

"why, con-found you--it, i mean--i tell you so, don't i?"

"oh, yes, you tell me so," returns grandfather smallweed. "but i
don't know it."

"well!" says the trooper, swallowing his fire. "i know it."

mr. smallweed replies with excellent temper, "ah! that's quite
another thing!" and adds, "but it don't matter. mr. bagnet's
situation is all one, whether or no."

the unfortunate george makes a great effort to arrange the affair
comfortably and to propitiate mr. smallweed by taking him upon his
own terms.

"that's just what i mean. as you say, mr. smallweed, here's matthew
bagnet liable to be fixed whether or 
 
 ___________________________
 
carum sort of a good-for-nought that more kicks than halfpence
come natural to, why he's a steady family man, don't you see? now,
mr. smallweed," says the trooper, gaining confidence as he proceeds
in his soldierly mode of doing business, "although you and i are good
friends enough in a certain sort of a way, i am well aware that i
can't ask you to let my friend bagnet off entirely."

"oh, dear, you are too modest. you can ask me anything, mr. george."
(there is an ogreish kind of jocularity in grandfather smallweed
to-day.)

"and you can refuse, you mean, eh? or not you so much, perhaps, as
your friend in the city? ha ha ha!"

"ha ha ha!" echoes grandfather smallweed. in such a very hard manner
and with eyes so particularly green that mr. bagnet's natural gravity
is much deepened by the contemplation of that venerable man.

"come!" says the sanguine george. "i am glad to find we can be
pleasant, because i want to arrange this pleasantly. here's my friend
bagnet, and here am i. we'll settle the matter on t
 
 ___________________________
 
a is there? oh,
no, i don't think so! oh, no, i don't think so! and not in the same
hand, perhaps? oh, no, i don't think so!"

here mr. smallweed, seized with a fit of coughing in the midst of his
triumph, breaks off to ejaculate, "oh, dear me! oh, lord! i'm shaken
all to pieces!"

"now, when you're ready," says mr. bucket after awaiting his
recovery, "to come to anything that concerns sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, here the gentleman sits, you know."

"haven't i come to it, mr. bucket?" cries grandfather smallweed.
"isn't the gentleman concerned yet? not with captain hawdon, and his
ever affectionate honoria, and their child into the bargain? come,
then, i want to know where those letters are. that concerns me, if it
don't concern sir leicester dedlock. i will know where they are. i
won't have 'em disappear so quietly. i handed 'em over to my friend
and solicitor, mr. tulkinghorn, not to anybody else."

"why, he paid you for them, you know, and handsome too," says mr.
bucket.

"i don't care for that. i w