saviour said of children.
she answered nothing, but sat weeping--weeping very much.

when i turned, i found that the young man had taken out the dog and
was standing at the door looking in upon us with dry eyes, but quiet.
the girl was quiet too and sat in a corner looking on the ground. the
man had risen. he still smoked his pipe with an air of defiance, but
he was silent.

an ugly woman, very poorly clothed, hurried in while i was glancing
at them, and coming straight up to the mother, said, "jenny! jenny!"
the mother rose on being so addressed and fell upon the woman's neck.

she also had upon her face and arms the marks of ill usage. she had
no kind of grace about her, but the grace of sympathy; but when she
condoled with the woman, and her own tears fell, she wanted no
beauty. i say condoled, but her only words were "jenny! jenny!" all
the rest was in the tone in which she said them.

i thought it very touching to see these two women, coarse and shabby
and beaten, so united; to see wha
 
 ___________________________
 
eemed
ashamed and turned away as we went by.

we left our escort within sight of the brickmaker's dwelling and
proceeded by ourselves. when we came to the door, we found the woman
who had brought such consolation with her standing there looking
anxiously out.

"it's you, young ladies, is it?" she said in a whisper. "i'm
a-watching for my master. my heart's in my mouth. if he was to catch
me away from home, he'd pretty near murder me."

"do you mean your husband?" said i.

"yes, miss, my master. jenny's asleep, quite worn out. she's scarcely
had the child off her lap, poor thing, these seven days and nights,
except when i've been able to take it for a minute or two."

as she gave way for us, she went softly in and put what we had
brought near the miserable bed on which the mother slept. no effort
had been made to clean the room--it seemed in its nature almost
hopeless of being clean; but the small waxen form from which so much
solemnity diffused itself had been composed afresh, and washed, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
neatly dressed in some fragments of white linen; and on my
handkerchief, which still covered the poor baby, a little bunch of
sweet herbs had been laid by the same rough, scarred hands, so
lightly, so tenderly!

"may heaven reward you!" we said to her. "you are a good woman."

"me, young ladies?" she returned with surprise. "hush! jenny, jenny!"

the mother had moaned in her sleep and moved. the sound of the
familiar voice seemed to calm her again. she was quiet once more.

how little i thought, when i raised my handkerchief to look upon the
tiny sleeper underneath and seemed to see a halo shine around the
child through ada's drooping hair as her pity bent her head--how
little i thought in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would come
to lie after covering the motionless and peaceful breast! i only
thought that perhaps the angel o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the child might not be all
unconscious of the woman who replaced it with so compassionate a
hand; not all unconscious of her presently, when we had taken leave,
and left her at the door, by turns looking, and listening in terror
for herself, and saying in her old soothing manner, "jenny, jenny!"




chapter ix

signs and tokens


i don't know how it is i seem to be always writing about myself. i
mean all the time to write about other people, and i try to think
about myself as little as possible, and i am sure, when i find myself
coming into the story again, i am really vexed and say, "dear, dear,
you tiresome little creature, i wish you wouldn't!" but it is all of
no use. i hope any one who may read what i write will understand that
if these pages contain a great deal about me, i can
 
 ___________________________
 
, sir."

"what are you doing here? you don't belong to london."

"no, sir. we belong to hertfordshire."

"whereabouts in hertfordshire?"

"saint albans."

"come up on the tramp?"

"we walked up yesterday. there's no work down with us at present, but
we have done no good by coming here, and shall do none, i expect."

"that's not the way to do much good," says mr. bucket, turning his
head in the direction of the unconscious figures on the ground.

"it an't indeed," replies the woman with a sigh. "jenny and me knows
it full well."

the room, though two or three feet higher than the door, is so low
that the head of the tallest of the visitors would touch the
blackened ceiling if he stood upright. it is offensive to every
sense; even the gross candle burns pale and sickly in the polluted
air. there are a couple of benches and a higher bench by way of
table. the men lie asleep where they stumbled down, but the women sit
by the candle. lying in the arms of the woman who has spoken is a
very young 
 
 ___________________________
 
out it;
and as he turns his light gently on the infant, mr. snagsby is
strangely reminded of another infant, encircled with light, that he
has seen in pictures.

"he is not three weeks old yet, sir," says the woman.

"is he your child?"

"mine."

the other woman, who was bending over it when they came in, stoops
down again and kisses it as it lies asleep.

"you seem as fond of it as if you were the mother yourself," says mr.
bucket.

"i was the mother of one like it, master, and it died."

"ah, jenny, jenny!" says the other woman to her. "better so. much
better to think of dead than alive, jenny! much better!"

"why, you an't such an unnatural woman, i hope," returns bucket
sternly, "as to wish your own child dead?"

"god knows you are right, master," she returns. "i am not. i'd stand
between it and death with my own life if i could, as true as any
pretty lady."

"then don't talk in that wrong manner," says mr. bucket, mollified
again. "why do you do it?"

"it's brought into my head, master
 
 ___________________________
 
," returns the woman, her eyes
filling with tears, "when i look down at the child lying so. if it
was never to wake no more, you'd think me mad, i should take on so. i
know that very well. i was with jenny when she lost hers--warn't i,
jenny?--and i know how she grieved. but look around you at this
place. look at them," glancing at the sleepers on the ground. "look
at the boy you're waiting for, who's gone out to do me a good turn.
think of the children that your business lays with often and often,
and that you see grow up!"

"well, well," says mr. bucket, "you train him respectable, and he'll
be a comfort to you, and look after you in your old age, you know."

"i mean to try hard," she answers, wiping her eyes. "but i have been
a-
 
 ___________________________
 
 not well with the ague, of
all the many things that'll come in his way. my master will be
against it, and he'll be beat, and see me beat, and made to fear his
home, and perhaps to stray wild. if i work for him ever so much, and
ever so hard, there's no one to help me; and if he should be turned
bad 'spite of all i could do, and the time should come when i should
sit by him in his sleep, made hard and changed, an't it likely i
should think of him as he lies in my lap now and wish he had died as
jenny's child died!"

"there, there!" says jenny. "liz, you're tired and ill. let me take
him."

in doing so, she displaces the mother's dress, but quickly readjusts
it over the wounded and bruised bosom where the baby has been lying.

"it's my dead child," says jenny, walking up and down as she nurses,
"that makes me love this child so dear, and it's my dead child that
makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its being taken
away from her now. while she thinks that, i think what fortune wo
 
 ___________________________
 
f we only get to make it
round, we shall be perfect, charley."

then i made one, and charley made one, and the pen wouldn't join
charley's neatly, but twisted it up into a knot.

"never mind, charley. we shall do it in time."

charley laid down her pen, the copy being finished, opened and shut
her cramped little hand, looked gravely at the page, half in pride
and half in doubt, and got up, and dropped me a curtsy.

"thank you, miss. if you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
the name of jenny?"

"a brickmaker's wife, charley? yes."

"she came and spoke to me when i was out a little while ago, and said
you knew her, miss. she asked me if i wasn't the young lady's little
maid--meaning you for the young lady, miss--and i said yes, miss."

"i thought she had left this neighbourhood altogether, charley."

"so she had, miss, but she's come back again to where she used to
live--she and liz. did you know another poor person of the name of
liz, miss?"

"i think i do, charley, though not by n
 
 ___________________________
 
een, miss, if emma and me had died after father," said charley,
her round eyes filling with tears.

"and she was getting medicine for him, charley?"

"she said, miss," returned charley, "how that he had once done as
much for her."

my little maid's face was so eager and her quiet hands were folded so
closely in one another as she stood looking at me that i had no great
difficulty in reading her thoughts. "well, charley," said i, "it
appears to me that you and i can do no better than go round to
jenny's and see what's the matter."

the alacrity with which charley brought my bonnet and veil, and
having dressed me, quaintly pinned herself into her warm shawl and
made herself look like a little old woman, sufficiently expressed her
readiness. so charley and i, without saying anything to any one, went
out.

it was a cold, wild night, and the trees shuddered in the wind. the
rain had been thick and heavy all day, and with little intermission
for many days. none was falling just then, however. the
 
 ___________________________
 
a low
voice, "don't mind him, ma'am. he'll soon come back to his head," and
said to him, "jo, jo, what's the matter?"

"i know wot she's come for!" cried the boy.

"who?"

"the lady there. she's come to get me to go along with her to the
berryin ground. i won't go to the berryin ground. i don't like the
name on it. she might go a-berryin me." his shivering came on again,
and as he leaned against the wall, he shook the hovel.

"he has been talking off and on about such like all day, ma'am," said
jenny softly. "why, how you stare! this is my lady, jo."

"is it?" returned the boy doubtfully, and surveying me with his arm
held out above his burning eyes. "she looks to me the t'other one. it
ain't the bonnet, nor yet it ain't the gownd, but she looks to me the
t'other one."

my little charley, with her premature experience of illness and
trouble, had pulled off her bonnet and shawl and now went quietly up
to him with a chair and sat him down in it like an old sick nurse.
except that no such atte
 
 ___________________________
 
about from
hand to hand, and had come back as she went. at first it was too
early for the boy to be received into the proper refuge, and at last
it was too late. one official sent her to another, and the other sent
her back again to the first, and so backward and forward, until it
appeared to me as if both must have been appointed for their skill in
evading their duties instead of performing them. and now, after all,
she said, breathing quickly, for she had been running and was
frightened too, "jenny, your master's on the road home, and mine's
not far behind, and the lord help the boy, for we can do no more for
him!" they put a few halfpence together and hurried them into his
hand, and so, in an oblivious, half-thankful, half-insensible way, he
shuffled out of the house.

"give me the child, my dear," said its mother to charley, "and thank
you kindly too! jenny, woman dear, good night! young lady, if my
master don't fall out with me, i'll look down by the kiln by and by,
where the boy will 
 
 ___________________________
 
 now you must
gratify it."

miss flite looked at charley for advice in this important crisis, who
said, "if you please, ma'am, you had better tell then," and therein
gratified miss flite beyond measure.

"so sagacious, our young friend," said she to me in her mysterious
way. "diminutive. but ve-ry sagacious! well, my dear, it's a pretty
anecdote. nothing more. still i think it charming. who should follow
us down the road from the coach, my dear, but a poor person in a very
ungenteel bonnet--"

"jenny, if you please, miss," said charley.

"just so!" miss flite acquiesced with the greatest suavity. "jenny.
ye-es! and what does she tell our young friend but that there has
been a lady with a veil inquiring at her cottage after my dear fitz
jarndyce's health and taking a handkerchief away with her as a little
keepsake merely because it was my amiable fitz jarndyce's! now, you
know, so very prepossessing in the lady with the veil!"

"if you please, miss," said charley, to whom i looked in some
as
 
 ___________________________
 
tonishment, "jenny says that when her baby died, you left a
handkerchief there, and that she put it away and kept it with the
baby's little things. i think, if you please, partly because it was
yours, miss, and partly because it had covered the baby."

"diminutive," whispered miss flite, making a variety of motions about
her own forehead to express intellect in charley. "but exceedingly
sagacious! and so dear! my love, she's clearer than any counsel i
ever heard!"

"yes, charley," i returned. "i remember it. well
 
 ___________________________
 
?"

"well, miss," said charley, "and that's the handkerchief the lady
took. and jenny wants you to know that she wouldn't have made away
with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady took it and
left some money instead. jenny don't know her at all, if you please,
miss!"

"why, who can she be?" said i.

"my love," miss flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with
her most mysterious look, "in my opinion--don't mention this to our
diminutive friend--she's the lord chancellor's wife. he's married,
you know. and i understand she leads him a terrible life. throws his
lordship's papers into the fire, my dear, if he won't pay the
jeweller!"

i did not think very much about this lady then, for i had an
impression that
 
 ___________________________
 
was trying to make some one hear informed
me that the two women and their husbands now lived together in
another house, made of loose rough bricks, which stood on the margin
of the piece of ground where the kilns were and where the long rows
of bricks were drying. we lost no time in repairing to this place,
which was within a few hundred yards; and as the door stood ajar, i
pushed it open.

there were only three of them sitting at breakfast, the child lying
asleep on a bed in the corner. it was jenny, the mother of the dead
child, who was absent. the other woman rose on seeing me; and the
men, though they were, as usual, sulky and silent, each gave me a
morose nod of recognition. a look passed between them when mr. bucket
followed me in, and i was surprised to see that the woman evidently
knew him.

i had asked leave to enter of course. liz (the only name by which i
knew her) rose to give me her own chair, but i sat down on a stool
near the fire, and mr. bucket took a corner of the bedstead
 
 ___________________________
 
 i was not familiar, i
became conscious of being hurried and giddy. it was very difficult to
begin, and i could not help bursting into tears.

"liz," said i, "i have come a long way in the night and through the
snow to inquire after a lady--"

"who has been here, you know," mr. bucket struck in, addressing the
whole group with a composed propitiatory face; "that's the lady the
young lady means. the lady that was here last night, you know."

"and who told you as there was anybody here?" inquired jenny's
husband, who had made a surly stop in his eating to listen and now
measured him with his eye.

"a person of the name of michael jackson, with a blue welveteen
waistcoat with a double row of mother of pearl buttons," mr. bucket
immediately answered.

"he had as good mind his own business, whoever he is," growled the
man.

"he's out of employment, i believe," said mr. bucket apologetically
for michael jackson, "and so gets talking."

the woman had not resumed her chair, but stood faltering with
 
 ___________________________
 
 her
hand upon its broken back, looking at me. i thought she would have
spoken to me privately if she had dared. she was still in this
attitude of uncertainty when her husband, who was eating with a lump
of bread and fat in one hand and his clasp-knife in the other, struck
the handle of his knife violently on the table and told her with an
oath to mind her own business at any rate and sit down.

"i should like to have seen jenny very much," said i, "for i am sure
she would have told me all she could about this lady, whom i am very
anxious indeed--you cannot think how anxious--to overtake. will jenny
be here soon? where is she?"

the woman had a great desire to answer, but the man, with another
oath, openly kicked at her foot with his heavy boot. he left it to
jenny's husband to say what he chose, and after a dogged silence the
latter turned his shaggy head towards me.

"i'm not partial to gentlefolks coming into my pla
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, as you've heerd
me say afore now, i think, miss. i let their places be, and it's
curious they can't let my place be. there'd be a pretty shine made if
i was to go a-wisitin them, i think. howsoever, i don't so much
complain of you as of some others, and i'm agreeable to make you a
civil answer, though i give notice that i'm not a-going to be drawed
like a badger. will jenny be here soon? no she won't. where is she?
she's gone up to lunnun."

"did she go last night?" i asked.

"did she go last night? ah! she went last night," he answered with a
sulky jerk of his head.

"but was she here when the lady came? and what did the lady say to
her? and where is the lady gone? i beg and pray you to be so kind as
to tell me," said i, "for i am in great distress to know."

"if my master would let me speak, and not say a word of harm--" the
woman timidly began.

"your master," 
 
 ___________________________
 
said her husband, muttering an imprecation with slow
emphasis, "will break your neck if you meddle with wot don't concern
you."

after another silence, the husband of the absent woman, turning to me
again, answered me with his usual grumbling unwillingness.

"wos jenny here when the lady come? yes, she wos here when the lady
come. wot did the lady say to her? well, i'll tell you wot the lady
said to her. she said, 'you remember me as come one time to talk to
you about the young lady as had been a-wisiting of you? you remember
me as give you somethink handsome for a handkercher wot she had
left?' ah, she remembered. so we all did. well, then, wos that young
lady up at the house now? no, she warn't up at the house now. well,
then, lookee here. the lady was upon
 
 ___________________________
 
 a journey all alone, strange as
we might think it, and could she rest herself where you're a setten
for a hour or so. yes she could, and so she did. then she went--it
might be at twenty minutes past eleven, and it might be at twenty
minutes past twelve; we ain't got no watches here to know the time
by, nor yet clocks. where did she go? i don't know where she go'd.
she went one way, and jenny went another; one went right to lunnun,
and t'other went right from it. that's all about it. ask this man. he
heerd it all, and see it all. he knows."

the other man repeated, "that's all about it."

"was the lady crying?" i inquired.

"devil a bit," returned the first man. "her shoes was the worse, and
her clothes was the worse, but she warn't--not as i see."

the woman sat with her arms crossed and her eyes upon the ground. her
husband had turned his seat a little so as to face her and kept h
 
 ___________________________
 
my asking your wife," said i, "how the
lady looked."

"come, then!" he gruffly cried to her. "you hear what she says. cut
it short and tell her."

"bad," replied the woman. "pale and exhausted. very bad."

"did she speak much?"

"not much, but her voice was hoarse."

she answered, looking all the while at her husband for leave.

"was she faint?" said i. "did she eat or drink here?"

"go on!" said the husband in answer to her look. "tell her and cut it
short."

"she had a little water, miss, and jenny fetched her some bread and
tea. but she hardly touched it."

"and when she went from here," i was proceeding, when jenny's husband
impatiently took me up.

"when she went from here, she went right away nor'ard by the high
road. ask on the road if you doubt me, and see if it warn't so. now,
there's the end. that's all about it."

i glanced at my companion, and finding that he had already risen and
was ready to depart, thanked them for what they had told me, and took
my leave. the woman looked fu
 
 ___________________________
 
and you can trust me. we've come a long way;
never mind. four horses out there for the next stage up! quick!"

there was a commotion in the yard, and a man came running out of the
stables to know if he meant up or down.

"up, i tell you! up! ain't it english? up!"

"up?" said i, astonished. "to london! are we going back?"

"miss summerson," he answered, "back. straight back as a die. you
know me. don't be afraid. i'll follow the other, by g----"

"the other?" i repeated. "who?"

"you called her jenny, didn't you? i'll follow her. bring those two
pair out here for a crown a man. wake up, some of you!"

"you will not desert this lady we are in search of; you will not
abandon her on such a night and in such a state of mind as i know her
to be in!" said i, in an agony, and grasping his hand.

"you are right, my dear, i won't. but i'll follow the other. look
alive here with them horses. send a man for'ard in the saddle to the
next stage, and let him send another for'ard again, and order four
on,
 
 ___________________________
 
ng faintly
struggled in. the gate was closed. beyond it was a burial ground--a
dreadful spot in which the night was very slowly stirring, but where
i could dimly see heaps of dishonoured graves and stones, hemmed in
by filthy houses with a few dull lights in their windows and on whose
walls a thick humidity broke out like a disease. on the step at the
gate, drenched in the fearful wet of such a place, which oozed and
splashed down everywhere, i saw, with a cry of pity and horror, a
woman lying--jenny, the mother of the dead child.

i ran forward, but they stopped me, and mr. woodcourt entreated me
with the greatest earnestness, even with tears, before i went up to
the figure to listen for an instant to what mr. bucket said. i did
so, as i thought. i did so, as i am sure.

"miss summerson, you'll understand me, if you think a moment. they
changed clothes at the cottage."

they changed clothes at the cottage. i could repeat the words in my
mind, and i knew what they meant of themselves, but i