ts as if the waters had but newly retired from the face of
the earth, and it would not be wonderful to meet a megalosaurus,
forty feet long or so, waddling like an elephantine lizard up holborn
hill. smoke lowering down from chimney-pots, making a soft black
drizzle, with flakes of soot in it as big as full-grown
snowflakes--gone into mourning, one might imagine, for the death of
the sun. dogs, undistinguishable in mire. horses, scarcely better;
splashed to their very blinkers. foot passengers, jostling one
another's umbrellas in a general infection of ill temper, and losing
their foot-hold at street-corners, where tens of thousands of other
foot passengers have been slipping and sliding since the day broke
(if this day ever broke), adding new deposits to the crust upon crust
of mud, sticking at those points tenaciously to the pavement, and
accumulating at compound interest.

fog everywhere. fog up the river, where it flows among green aits and
meadows; fog down the river, where it rolls
 
 ___________________________
 
r goat-hair and horsehair warded heads against walls of words and
making a pretence of equity with serious faces, as players might. on
such an afternoon the various solicitors in the cause, some two or
three of whom have inherited it from their fathers, who made a
fortune by it, ought to be--as are they not?--ranged in a line, in a
long matted well (but you might look in vain for truth at the bottom
of it) between the registrar's red table and the silk gowns, with
bills, cross-bills, answers, rejoinders, injunctions, affidavits,
issues, references to masters, masters' reports, mountains of costly
nonsense, piled before them. well may the court be dim, with wasting
candles here and there; well may the fog hang heavy in it, as if it
would never get out; well may the stained-glass windows lose their
colour and admit no light of day into the place; well may the
uninitiated from the streets, who peep in through the glass panes in
the door, be deterred from entrance by its owlish aspect and by
 
 ___________________________
 
er world. fair wards of court have faded into mothers and
grandmothers; a long procession of chancellors has come in and gone
out; the legion of bills in the suit have been transformed into mere
bills of mortality; there are not three jarndyces left upon the earth
perhaps since old tom jarndyce in despair blew his brains out at a
coffee-house in chancery lane; but jarndyce and jarndyce still drags
its dreary length before the court, perennially hopeless.

jarndyce and jarndyce has passed into a joke. that is the only good
that has ever come of it. it has been death to many, but it is a joke
in the profession. every master in chancery has had a reference out
of it. every chancellor was "in it," for somebody or other, when he
was counsel at the bar. good things have been said about it by
blue-nosed, bulbous-shoed old benchers in select port-wine committee
after dinner in hall. articled clerks have been in the habit of
fleshing their legal wit upon it. the last lord chancellor handled it
ne
 
 ___________________________
 
use"--cautious man mr. tulkinghorn, taking no
more responsibility than necessary--"and further, as i see you are
going to paris, i have brought them in my pocket."

(sir leicester was going to paris too, by the by, but the delight of
the fashionable intelligence was in his lady.)

mr. tulkinghorn takes out his papers, asks permission to place them
on a golden talisman of a table at my lady's elbow, puts on his
spectacles, and begins to read by the light of a shaded lamp.

"'in chancery. between john jarndyce--'"

my lady interrupts, requesting him to miss as many of the formal
horrors as he can.

mr. tulkinghorn glances over his spectacles and begins again lower
down. my lady carelessly and scornfully abstracts her attention. sir
leicester in a great chair looks at the file and appears to have a
stately liking for the legal repetitions and prolixities as ranging
among the national bulwarks. it happens that the fire is hot where my
lady sits and that the hand-screen is more beautiful than
 
 ___________________________
 
e neighbouring school where i
was a day boarder, and although they called me little esther
summerson, i knew none of them at home. all of them were older than
i, to be sure (i was the youngest there by a good deal), but there
seemed to be some other separation between us besides that, and
besides their being far more clever than i was and knowing much more
than i did. one of them in the first week of my going to the school
(i remember it very well) invited me home to a little party, to my
great joy. but my godmother wrote a stiff letter declining for me,
and i never went. i never went out at all.

it was my birthday. there were holidays at school on other
birthdays--none on mine. there were rejoicings at home on other
birthdays, as i knew from what i heard the girls relate to one
another--there were none on mine. my birthday was the most melancholy
day at home in the whole year.

i have mentioned that unless my vanity should deceive me (as i know
it may, for i may be very vain without su
 
 ___________________________
 
nd added this, "submission, self-denial, diligent work,
are the preparations for a life begun with such a shadow on it. you
are different from other children, esther, because you were not born,
like them, in common sinfulness and wrath. you are set apart."

i went up to my room, and crept to bed, and laid my doll's cheek
against mine wet with tears, and holding that solitary friend upon my
bosom, cried myself to sleep. imperfect as my understanding of my
sorrow was, i knew that i had brought no joy at any time to anybody's
heart and that i was to no one upon earth what dolly was to me.

dear, dear, to think how much time we passed alone together
afterwards, and how often i repeated to the doll the story of my
birthday and confided to her that i would try as hard as ever i could
to repair the fault i had been born with (of which i confessedly felt
guilty and yet innocent) and would strive as i grew up to be
industrious, contented, and kind-hearted and to do some good to some
one, and win 
 
 ___________________________
 
 them in a red case, and leaning back in his arm-chair,
turning the case about in his two hands, he gave my godmother a nod.
upon that, my godmother said, "you may go upstairs, esther!" and i
made him my curtsy and left him.

it must have been two years afterwards, and i was almost fourteen,
when one dreadful night my godmother and i sat at the fireside. i was
reading aloud, and she was listening. i had come down at nine o'clock
as i always did to read the bible to her, and was reading from st.
john how our saviour stooped down, writing with his finger in the
dust, when they brought the sinful woman to him.

"so when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and said
unto them, 'he that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
stone at her!'"

i was stopped by my godmother's rising, putting her hand to her head,
and crying out in an awful voice from quite another part of the book,
"'watch ye, therefore, lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. and
what i say unto you, i say
 
 ___________________________
 
wal of an offer
which i was instructed to make to miss barbary some two years ago and
which, though rejected then, was understood to be renewable under the
lamentable circumstances that have since occurred. now, if i avow
that i represent, in jarndyce and jarndyce and otherwise, a highly
humane, but at the same time singular, man, shall i compromise myself
by any stretch of my professional caution?" said mr. kenge, leaning
back in his chair again and looking calmly at us both.

he appeared to enjoy beyond everything the sound of his own voice. i
couldn't wonder at that, for it was mellow and full and gave great
importance to every word he uttered. he listened to himself with
obvious satisfaction and sometimes gently beat time to his own music
with his head or rounded a sentence with his hand. i was very much
impressed by him--even then, before i knew that he formed himself on
the model of a great lord who was his client and that he was
generally called conversation kenge.

"mr. jarndyce,
 
 ___________________________
 
ts,

   kenge and carboy

   miss esther summerson


oh, never, never, never shall i forget the emotion this letter caused
in the house! it was so tender in them to care so much for me, it was
so gracious in that father who had not forgotten me to have made my
orphan way so smooth and easy and to have inclined so many youthful
natures towards me, that i could hardly bear it. not that i would
have had them less sorry--i am afraid not; but the pleasure of it,
and the pain of it, and the pride and joy of it, and the humble
regret of it were so blended that my heart seemed almost breaking
while it was full of rapture.

the letter gave me only five days' notice of my removal. when every
minute added to the proofs of love and kindness that were given me in
those five days, and when at last the morning came and when they took
me through all the rooms that i might see them for the last time, and
when some cried, "esther, dear, say good-bye to me here at my
bedside, where you first spoke so kindl
 
 ___________________________
 
herefore, of course,
i made myself sob less and persuaded myself to be quiet by saying
very often, "esther, now you really must! this will not do!" i
cheered myself up pretty well at last, though i am afraid i was
longer about it than i ought to have been; and when i had cooled my
eyes with lavender water, it was time to watch for london.

i was quite persuaded that we were there when we were ten miles off,
and when we really were there, that we should never get there.
however, when we began to jolt upon a stone pavement, and
particularly when every other conveyance seemed to be running into
us, and we seemed to be running into every other conveyance, i began
to believe that we really were approaching the end of our journey.
very soon afterwards we stopped.

a young gentleman who had inked himself by accident addressed me from
the pavement and said, "i am from kenge and carboy's, miss, of
lincoln's inn."

"if you please, sir," said i.

he was very obliging, and as he handed me into a fly
 
 ___________________________
 
 like an entrance
to a church. and there really was a churchyard outside under some
cloisters, for i saw the gravestones from the staircase window.

this was kenge and carboy's. the young gentleman showed me through an
outer office into mr. kenge's room--there was no one in it--and
politely put an arm-chair for me by the fire. he then called my
attention to a little looking-glass hanging from a nail on one side
of the chimney-piece.

"in case you should wish to look at yourself, miss, after the
journey, as you're going before the chancellor. not that it's
requisite, i am sure," said the young gentleman civilly.

"going before the chancellor?" i said, startled for a moment.

"only a matter of form, miss," returned the young gentleman. "mr.
kenge is in court now. he left his compliments, and would you partake
of some refreshment"--there were biscuits and a decanter of wine on a
small table--"and look over the paper," which the young gentleman
gave me as he spoke. he then stirred the fire a
 
 ___________________________
 
g aside the chalk. "i have a turn for
copying from memory, you see, miss, though i can neither read nor
write."

he looked so disagreeable and his cat looked so wickedly at me, as if
i were a blood-relation of the birds upstairs, that i was quite
relieved by richard's appearing at the door and saying, "miss
summerson, i hope you are not bargaining for the sale of your hair.
don't be tempted. three sacks below are quite enough for mr. krook!"

i lost no time in wishing mr. krook good morning and joining my
friends outside, where we parted with the little old lady, who gave
us her blessing with great ceremony and renewed her assurance of
yesterday in reference to her intention of settling estates on ada
and me. before we finally turned out of those lanes, we looked back
and saw mr. krook standing at his shop-door, in his spectacles,
looking after us, with his cat upon his shoulder, and her tail
sticking up on one side of his hairy cap like a tall feather.

"quite an adventure for a morning
 
 ___________________________
 
 and others, and that they should be my
enemies--as i suppose they are--and that we should all be ruining one
another without knowing how or why and be in constant doubt and
discord all our lives. it seems very strange, as there must be right
somewhere, that an honest judge in real earnest has not been able to
find out through all these years where it is."

"ah, cousin!" said richard. "strange, indeed! all this wasteful,
wanton chess-playing is very strange. to see that composed court
yesterday jogging on so serenely and to think of the wretchedness of
the pieces on the board gave me the headache and the heartache both
together. my head ached with wondering how it happened, if men were
neither fools nor rascals; and my heart ached to think they could
possibly be either. but at all events, ada--i may call you ada?"

"of course you may, cousin richard."

"at all events, chancery will work none of its bad influences on us.
we have happily been brought together, thanks to our good kinsman,
a
 
 ___________________________
 

"is that mr. jarndyce's waggon?" said richard, calling to our
post-boy.

"yes, sir," he replied. "going to london."

we opened the notes. each was a counterpart of the other and
contained these words in a solid, plain hand.


   i look forward, my dear, to our meeting easily and
   without constraint on either side. i therefore have to
   propose that we meet as old friends and take the past for
   granted. it will be a relief to you possibly, and to me
   certainly, and so my love to you.

   john jarndyce


i had perhaps less reason to be surprised than either of my
companions, having never yet enjoyed an opportunity of thanking one
who had been my benefactor and sole earthly dependence through so
many years. i had not considered how i could thank him, my gratitude
lying too deep in my heart for that; but i now began to consider how
i could meet him without thanking him, and felt it would be very
difficult indeed.

the notes revived in richard and ada a general impression that they
bo
 
 ___________________________
 
which we wondered about, over and over again.

the roads were very heavy for the horses, but the pathway was
generally good, so we alighted and walked up all the hills, and liked
it so well that we prolonged our walk on the level ground when we got
to the top. at barnet there were other horses waiting for us, but as
they had only just been fed, we had to wait for them too, and got a
long fresh walk over a common and an old battle-field before the
carriage came up. these delays so protracted the journey that the
short day was spent and the long night had closed in before we came
to st. albans, near to which town bleak house was, we knew.

by that time we were so anxious and nervous that even richard
confessed, as we rattled over the stones of the old street, to
feeling an irrational desire to drive back again. as to ada and me,
whom he had wrapped up with great care, the night being sharp and
frosty, we trembled from head to foot. when we turned out of the
town, round a corner, and richar
 
 ___________________________
 
d told us that the post-boy, who had
for a long time sympathized with our heightened expectation, was
looking back and nodding, we both stood up in the carriage (richard
holding ada lest she should be jolted down) and gazed round upon the
open country and the starlight night for our destination. there was a
light sparkling on the top of a hill before us, and the driver,
pointing to it with his whip and crying, "that's bleak house!" put
his horses into a canter and took us forward at such a rate, uphill
though it was, that the wheels sent the road drift flying about our
heads like spray from a water-mill. presently we lost the light,
presently saw it, presently lost it, presently saw it, and tur
 
 ___________________________
 
 in a window of what seemed to be an old-fashioned
house with three peaks in the roof in front and a circular sweep
leading to the porch. a bell was rung as we drew up, and amidst the
sound of its deep voice in the still air, and the distant barking of
some dogs, and a gush of light from the opened door, and the smoking
and steaming of the heated horses, and the quickened beating of our
own hearts, we alighted in no inconsiderable confusion.

"ada, my love, esther, my dear, you are welcome. i rejoice to see
you! rick, if i had a hand to spare at present, i would give it you!"

the gentleman who said these words in a clear, bright, hospitable
voice had one of his arms round ada's waist and the other round mine,
and kissed us both in a fatherly way, and bore us across the hall
into a ruddy little room, all in a glow with a blazing fire. here he
kissed us again, and opening his arms, made us sit down side by side
on a sofa ready drawn out near the hearth. i felt that if we had been
at all d
 
 ___________________________
 
 face. it was a handsome, lively, quick
face, full of change and motion; and his hair was a silvered
iron-grey. i took him to be nearer sixty than fifty, but he was
upright, hearty, and robust. from the moment of his first speaking to
us his voice had connected itself with an association in my mind that
i could not define; but now, all at once, a something sudden in his
manner and a pleasant expression in his eyes recalled the gentleman
in the stagecoach six years ago on the memorable day of my journey to
reading. i was certain it was he. i never was so frightened in my
life as when i made the discovery, for he caught my glance, and
appearing to read my thoughts, gave such a look at the door that i
thought we had lost him.

however, i am happy to say he remained where he was, and asked me
what i thought of mrs. jellyby.

"she exerts herself very much for africa, sir," i said.

"nobly!" returned mr. jarndyce. "but you answer like ada." whom i had
not heard. "you all think something else, 
 
 ___________________________
 
so lovable that i am sure we were more delighted with
him than we could possibly have expressed in any words. he gave an
arm to ada and an arm to me, and bidding richard bring a candle, was
leading the way out when he suddenly turned us all back again.

"those little jellybys. couldn't you--didn't you--now, if it had
rained sugar-plums, or three-cornered raspberry tarts, or anything of
that sort!" said mr. jarndyce.

"oh, cousin--" ada hastily began.

"good, my pretty pet. i like cousin. cousin john, perhaps, is
better."

"then, cousin john--" ada laughingly began again.

"ha, ha! very good indeed!" said mr. jarndyce with great enjoyment.
"sounds uncommonly natural. yes, my dear?"

"it did better than that. it rained esther."

"aye?" said mr. jarndyce. "what did esther do?"

"why, cousin john," said ada, clasping her hands upon his arm and
shaking her head at me across him--for i wanted her to be
quiet--"esther was their friend directly. esther nursed them, coaxed
them to sleep, washed a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd dressed them, told them stories, kept them
quiet, bought them keepsakes"--my dear girl! i had only gone out with
peepy after he was found and given him a little, tiny horse!--"and,
cousin john, she softened poor caroline, the eldest one, so much and
was so thoughtful for me and so amiable! no, no, i won't be
contradicted, esther dear! you know, you know, it's true!"

the warm-hearted darling leaned across her cousin john and kissed me,
and then looking up in his face, boldly said, "at all events, cousin
john, i will thank you for the companion you have given me." i felt
as if she challenged him to run away. but he didn't.

"where did you say the wind was, rick?" asked mr. jarndyce.

"in the north as we came down, sir."

"you are right. there's no east in it. a mistake of mine. come,
girls, come and see your home!"

it was one of those delightfully irregular houses where you go up and
down steps out of one roo
 
 ___________________________
 
 had been brought from india nobody knew by whom or when. from
these you came on richard's room, which was part library, part
sitting-room, part bedroom, and seemed indeed a comfortable compound
of many rooms. out of that you went straight, with a little interval
of passage, to the plain room where mr. jarndyce slept, all the year
round, with his window open, his bedstead without any furniture
standing in the middle of the floor for more air, and his cold bath
gaping for him in a smaller room adjoining. out of that you came into
another passage, where there were back-stairs and where you could
hear the horses being rubbed down outside the stable and being told
to "hold up" and "get over," as they slipped about very much on the
uneven stones. or you might, if you came out at another door (every
room had at least two doors), go straight down to the hall again by
half-a-dozen steps and a low archway, wondering how you got back
there or had ever got out of it.

the furniture, old-fashioned r
 
 ___________________________
 
offee, landscape, fruit in the season, a few sheets of
bristol-board, and a little claret, and he asked no more. he was a
mere child in the world, but he didn't cry for the moon. he said to
the world, "go your several ways in peace! wear red coats, blue
coats, lawn sleeves; put pens behind your ears, wear aprons; go after
glory, holiness, commerce, trade, any object you prefer; only--let
harold skimpole live!"

all this and a great deal more he told us, not only with the
utmost brilliancy and enjoyment, but with a certain vivacious
candour--speaking of himself as if he were not at all his own affair,
as if skimpole were a third person, as if he knew that skimpole had
his singularities but still had his claims too, which were the
general business of the community and must not be slighted. he was
quite enchanting. if i felt at all confused at that early time in
endeavouring to reconcile anything he said with anything i had
thought about the duties and accountabilities of life (which i am f
 
 ___________________________
 
ce had not been neglectful of the
adjuration. mr. skimpole's general position there would have rendered
it so without the addition of what he presently said.

"it's only you, the generous creatures, whom i envy," said mr.
skimpole, addressing us, his new friends, in an impersonal manner. "i
envy you your power of doing what you do. it is what i should revel
in myself. i don't feel any vulgar gratitude to you. i almost feel as
if you ought to be grateful to me for giving you the opportunity of
enjoying the luxury of generosity. i know you like it. for anything i
can tell, i may have come into the world expressly for the purpose of
increasing your stock of happiness. i may have been born to be a
benefactor to you by sometimes giving you an opportunity of assisting
me in my little perplexities. why should i regret my incapacity for
details and worldly affairs when it leads to such pleasant
consequences? i don't regret it therefore."

of all his playful speeches (playful, yet always fully me
 
 ___________________________
 
own weaknesses about, as if he had said, "i am
a child, you know! you are designing people compared with me" (he
really made me consider myself in that light) "but i am gay and
innocent; forget your worldly arts and play with me!" the effect was
absolutely dazzling.

he was so full of feeling too and had such a delicate sentiment for
what was beautiful or tender that he could have won a heart by that
alone. in the evening, when i was preparing to make tea and ada was
touching the piano in the adjoining room and softly humming a tune to
her cousin richard, which they had happened to mention, he came and
sat down on the sofa near me and so spoke of ada that i almost loved
him.

"she is like the morning," he said. "with that golden hair, those
blue eyes, and that fresh bloom on her cheek, she is like the summer
morning. the birds here will mistake her for it. we will not call
such a lovely young creature as that, who is a joy to all mankind, an
orphan. she is the child of the universe."

mr
 
 ___________________________
 
e i should
be gone to fetch it, that we would have the pleasure of paying his
debt.

when i came back, mr. skimpole kissed my hand and seemed quite
touched. not on his own account (i was again aware of that perplexing
and extraordinary contradiction), but on ours, as if personal
considerations were impossible with him and the contemplation of our
happiness alone affected him. richard, begging me, for the greater
grace of the transaction, as he said, to settle with coavinses (as
mr. skimpole now jocularly called him), i counted out the money and
received the necessary acknowledgment. this, too, delighted mr.
skimpole.

his compliments were so delicately administered that i blushed less
than i might have done and settled with the stranger in the white
coat without making any mistakes. he put the money in his pocket and
shortly said, "well, then, i'll wish you a good evening, miss.

"my friend," said mr. skimpole, standing with his back to the fire
after giving up the sketch when it was hal
 
 ___________________________
 
as of that intense kind that he could only give
adequate expression to it by putting a long interval between each
word, and accompanying the last with a jerk that might have
dislocated his neck.

"very odd and very curious, the mental process is, in you men of
business!" said mr. skimpole thoughtfully. "thank you, my friend.
good night."

as our absence had been long enough already to seem strange
downstairs, i returned at once and found ada sitting at work by the
fireside talking to her cousin john. mr. skimpole presently appeared,
and richard shortly after him. i was sufficiently engaged during the
remainder of the evening in taking my first lesson in backgammon from
mr. jarndyce, who was very fond of the game and from whom i wished of
course to learn it as quickly as i could in order that i might be of
the very small use of being able to play when he had no better
adversary. but i thought, occasionally, when mr. skimpole played some
fragments of his own compositions or when, both at t
 
 ___________________________
 
d, what a
fine lad, what a gay, good-humoured, clever lad he was! her second
son would have been provided for at chesney wold and would have been
made steward in due season, but he took, when he was a schoolboy, to
constructing steam-engines out of saucepans and setting birds to draw
their own water with the least possible amount of labour, so
assisting them with artful contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a
thirsty canary had only, in a literal sense, to put his shoulder to
the wheel and the job was done. this propensity gave mrs. rouncewell
great uneasiness. she felt it with a mother's anguish to be a move in
the wat tyler direction, well knowing that sir leicester had that
general impression of an aptitude for any art to which smoke and a
tall chimney might be considered essential. but the doomed young
rebel (otherwise a mild youth, and very persevering), showing no sign
of grace as he got older but, on the contrary, constructing a model
of a power-loom, she was fain, with many tear
 
 ___________________________
 
ld to visit his mother, or
ever thought of him afterwards, it is certain that he only regarded
him as one of a body of some odd thousand conspirators, swarthy and
grim, who were in the habit of turning out by torchlight two or three
nights in the week for unlawful purposes.

nevertheless, mrs. rouncewell's son has, in the course of nature and
art, grown up, and established himself, and married, and called unto
him mrs. rouncewell's grandson, who, being out of his apprenticeship,
and home from a journey in far countries, whither he was sent to
enlarge his knowledge and complete his preparations for the venture
of this life, stands leaning against the chimney-piece this very day
in mrs. rouncewell's room at chesney wold.

"and, again and again, i am glad to see you, watt! and, once again, i
am glad to see you, watt!" says mrs. rouncewell. "you are a fine
young fellow. you are like your poor uncle george. ah!" mrs.
rouncewell's hands unquiet, as usual, on this reference.

"they say i am lik
 
 ___________________________
 
office, but he is
sure he may make use of mr. tulkinghorn's name if necessary."
finding, now she leaves off, that she has been making quite a long
speech, rosa is shyer than ever.

now, mr. tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place,
and besides, is supposed to have made mrs. rouncewell's will. the old
lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,
and dismisses rosa. the grandson, however, being smitten by a sudden
wish to see the house himself, proposes to join the party. the
grandmother, who is pleased that he should have that interest,
accompanies him--though to do him justice, he is exceedingly
unwilling to trouble her.

"much obliged to you, ma'am!" says mr. guppy, divesting himself of
his wet dreadnought in the hall. "us london lawyers don't often get
an out, and when we do, we like to make the most of it, you know."

the old housekeeper, with a gracious severity of deportment, waves
her hand towards the great staircase. mr. guppy and his frien
 
 ___________________________
 
ce. beyond the flower-garden was a
kitchen-garden, and then a paddock, and then a snug little rick-yard,
and then a dear little farm-yard. as to the house itself, with its
three peaks in the roof; its various-shaped windows, some so large,
some so small, and all so pretty; its trellis-work, against the
south-front for roses and honey-suckle, and its homely, comfortable,
welcoming look--it was, as ada said when she came out to meet me with
her arm through that of its master, worthy of her cousin john, a bold
thing to say, though he only pinched her dear cheek for it.

mr. skimpole was as agreeable at breakfast as he had been overnight.
there was honey on the table, and it led him into a discourse about
bees. he had no objection to honey, he said (and i should think he
had not, for he seemed to like it), but he protested against the
overweening assumptions of bees. he didn't at all see why the busy
bee should be proposed as a model to him; he supposed the bee liked
to make honey, or he wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ur esteemed friend mr. jarndyce. egbert, my eldest
(twelve), is the boy who sent out his pocket-money, to the amount of
five and threepence, to the tockahoopo indians. oswald, my second
(ten and a half), is the child who contributed two and nine-pence to
the great national smithers testimonial. francis, my third (nine),
one and sixpence halfpenny; felix, my fourth (seven), eightpence to
the superannuated widows; alfred, my youngest (five), has voluntarily
enrolled himself in the infant bonds of joy, and is pledged never,
through life, to use tobacco in any form."

we had never seen such dissatisfied children. it was not merely that
they were weazened and shrivelled--though they were certainly that
too--but they looked absolutely ferocious with discontent. at the
mention of the tockahoopo indians, i could really have supposed
egbert to be one of the most baleful members of that tribe, he gave
me such a savage frown. the face of each child, as the amount of his
contribution was mentioned, 
 
 ___________________________
 
darkened in a peculiarly vindictive
manner, but his was by far the worst. i must except, however, the
little recruit into the infant bonds of joy, who was stolidly and
evenly miserable.

"you have been visiting, i understand," said mrs. pardiggle, "at mrs.
jellyby's?"

we said yes, we had passed one night there.

"mrs. jellyby," pursued the lady, always speaking in the same
demonstrative, loud, hard tone, so that her voice impressed my fancy
as if it had a sort of spectacles on too--and i may take the
opportunity of remarking that her spectacles were made the less
engaging by her eyes being what ada called "choking eyes," meaning
very p
 
 ___________________________
 
ess in general--in short, that taste for the sort of
thing--which will render them in after life a service to their
neighbours and a satisfaction to themselves. my young family are not
frivolous; they expend the entire amount of their allowance in
subscriptions, under my direction; and they have attended as many
public meetings and listened to as many lectures, orations, and
discussions as generally fall to the lot of few grown people. alfred
(five), who, as i mentioned, has of his own election joined the
infant bonds of joy, was one of the very few children who manifested
consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of two hours
from the chairman of the evening."

alfred glowered at us as if he never could, or would, forgive the
injury of that night.

"you may have observed, miss summerson," said mrs. pardiggle, "in
some of the lists to which i have referred, in the possession of our
esteemed friend mr. jarndyce, that the names of my young family are
concluded with the name of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 out, i dare say?"

this was really such a confusing question that ada looked at me in
perfect dismay. as to the guilty nature of my own consciousness after
what i had been thinking, it must have been expressed in the colour
of my cheeks.

"found out, i mean," said mrs. pardiggle, "the prominent point in my
character. i am aware that it is so prominent as to be discoverable
immediately. i lay myself open to detection, i know. well! i freely
admit, i am a woman of business. i love hard work; i enjoy hard work.
the excitement does me good. i am so accustomed and inured to hard
work that i don't know what fatigue is."

we murmured that it was very astonishing and very gratifying, or
something to that effect. i don't think we knew what it was either,
but this is what our politeness expressed.

"i do not understand what it is to be tired; you cannot tire me if
you try!" said mrs. pardiggle. "the quantity of exertion (which is no
exertion to me), the amount of business (which i regard as nothi
 
 ___________________________
 
,
then! now! who are you! you wouldn't like it, i think? what does she
make a sham for, and pretend to give me money, and take it away
again? why do you call it my allowance, and never let me spend it?"
these exasperating questions so inflamed his mind and the minds of
oswald and francis that they all pinched me at once, and in a
dreadfully expert way--screwing up such little pieces of my arms that
i could hardly forbear crying out. felix, at the same time, stamped
upon my toes. and the bond of joy, who on account of always having
the whole of his little income anticipated stood in fact pledged to
abstain from cakes as well as tobacco, so swelled with grief and rage
when we passed a pastry-cook's shop that he terrified me by becoming
purple. i never underwent so much, both in body and mind, in the
course of a walk with young people as from these unnaturally
constrained children when they paid me the compliment of being
natural.

i was glad when we came to the brickmaker's house, though i
 
 ___________________________
 
end," said mrs. pardiggle, seating herself on one stool
and knocking down another. "we are all here."

"because i thought there warn't enough of you, perhaps?" said the
man, with his pipe between his lips as he looked round upon us.

the young man and the girl both laughed. two friends of the young
man, whom we had attracted to the doorway and who stood there with
their hands in their pockets, echoed the laugh noisily.

"you can't tire me, good people," said mrs. pardiggle to these
latter. "i enjoy hard work, and the harder you make mine, the better
i like it."

"then make it easy for her!" growled the man upon the floor. "i wants
it done, and over. i wants a end of these liberties took with my
place. i wants an end of being drawed like a badger. now you're
a-going to poll-pry and question according to custom--i know what
you're a-going to be up to. well! you haven't got no occasion to be
up to it. i'll save you the trouble. is my daughter a-washin? yes,
she is a-washin. look at the wate
 
 ___________________________
 
the world, and he is now the heartiest
and sturdiest man. he is a tremendous fellow."

"in stature, sir?" asked richard.

"pretty well, rick, in that respect," said mr. jarndyce; "being some
ten years older than i and a couple of inches taller, with his head
thrown back like an old soldier, his stalwart chest squared, his
hands like a clean blacksmith's, and his lungs! there's no simile for
his lungs. talking, laughing, or snoring, they make the beams of the
house shake."

as mr. jarndyce sat enjoying the image of his friend boythorn, we
observed the favourable omen that there was not the least indication
of any change in the wind.

"but it's the inside of the man, the warm heart of the man, the
passion of the man, the fresh blood of the man, rick--and ada, and
little cobweb too, for you are all interested in a visitor--that i
speak of," he pursued. "his language is as sounding as his voice. he
is always in extremes, perpetually in the superlative degree. in his
condemnation he is all fe
 
 ___________________________
 
so far, i hope?" said mr. jarndyce.

"by my life and honour, yes!" cried the visitor. "i wouldn't be
guilty of the audacious insolence of keeping a lady of the house
waiting all this time for any earthly consideration. i would
infinitely rather destroy myself--infinitely rather!"

talking thus, they went upstairs, and presently we heard him in his
bedroom thundering "ha, ha, ha!" and again "ha, ha, ha!" until the
flattest echo in the neighbourhood seemed to catch the contagion and
to laugh as enjoyingly as he did or as we did when we heard him
laugh.

we all conceived a prepossession in his favour, for there was a
sterling quality in this laugh, and in his vigorous, healthy voice,
and in the roundness and fullness with which he uttered every word he
spoke, and in the very fury of his superlatives, which seemed to go
off like blank cannons and hurt nothing. but we were hardly prepared
to have it so confirmed by his appearance when mr. jarndyce presented
him. he was not only a very handsom
 
 ___________________________
 
 batter. ha, ha,
ha!"

to hear him say all this with unimaginable energy, one might have
thought him the angriest of mankind. to see him at the very same
time, looking at the bird now perched upon his thumb and softly
smoothing its feathers with his forefinger, one might have thought
him the gentlest. to hear him laugh and see the broad good nature of
his face then, one might have supposed that he had not a care in the
world, or a dispute, or a dislike, but that his whole existence was a
summer joke.

"no, no," he said, "no closing up of my paths by any dedlock! though
i willingly confess," here he softened in a moment, "that lady
dedlock is the most accomplished lady in the world, to whom i would
do any homage that a plain gentleman, and no baronet with a head
seven hundred years thick, may. a man who joined his regiment at
twenty and within a week challenged the most imperious and
presumptuous coxcomb of a commanding officer that ever drew the
breath of life through a tight waist--and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ferential cough. "it is a person's name. here it is, you
see, sir! forty-two folio. given out wednesday night, eight o'clock;
brought in thursday morning, half after nine."

the tail of mr. snagsby's eye becomes conscious of the head of mrs.
snagsby looking in at the shop-door to know what he means by
deserting his tea. mr. snagsby addresses an explanatory cough to mrs.
snagsby, as who should say, "my dear, a customer!"

"half after nine, sir," repeats mr. snagsby. "our law-writers, who
live by job-work, are a queer lot; and this may not be his name, but
it's the name he goes by. i remember now, sir, that he gives it in a
written advertisement he sticks up down at the rule office, and the
king's bench office, and the judges' chambers, and so forth. you know
the kind of document, sir--wanting employ?"

mr. tulkinghorn glances through the little window at the back of
coavinses', the sheriff's officer's, where lights shine in coavinses'
windows. coavinses' coffee-room is at the back, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the entries in the book still lying open. is evidently
curious.

"you will find that the place is rough, sir," says mr. snagsby,
walking deferentially in the road and leaving the narrow pavement to
the lawyer; "and the party is very rough. but they're a wild lot in
general, sir. the advantage of this particular man is that he never
wants sleep. he'll go at it right on end if you want him to, as long
as ever you like."

it is quite dark now, and the gas-lamps have acquired their full
effect. jostling against clerks going to post the day's letters, and
against counsel and attorneys going home to dinner, and against
plaintiffs and defendants and suitors of all sorts, and against the
general crowd, in whose way the forensic wisdom of ages has
interposed a million of obstacles to the transaction of the commonest
business of life; diving through law and equity, and through that
kindred mystery, the street mud, which is made of nobody knows what
and collects about us nobody knows whence or 
 
 ___________________________
 
pecimen, and likewise of the address. my
little woman hasn't a good ear for names," proceeds mr. snagsby after
consulting his cough of consideration behind his hand, "and she
considered nemo equally the same as nimrod. in consequence of which,
she got into a habit of saying to me at meals, 'mr. snagsby, you
haven't found nimrod any work yet!' or 'mr. snagsby, why didn't you
give that eight and thirty chancery folio in jarndyce to nimrod?' or
such like. and that is the way he gradually fell into job-work at our
place; and that is the most i know of him except that he was a quick
hand, and a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him
out, say, five and forty folio on the wednesday night, you would have
it brought in on the thursday morning. all of which--" mr. snagsby
concludes by politely motioning with his hat towards the bed, as much
as to add, "i have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm if he
were in a condition to do it."

"hadn't you better see," says mr. tulkin
 
 ___________________________
 
 be allowed to go
about some children being timid (and if doubted hoping mrs. perkins
may be brought forard for she is here and will do credit to her
husband and herself and family). has seen the plaintive wexed and
worrited by the children (for children they will ever be and you
cannot expect them specially if of playful dispositions to be
methoozellers which you was not yourself). on accounts of this and
his dark looks has often dreamed as she see him take a pick-axe from
his pocket and split johnny's head (which the child knows not fear
and has repeatually called after him close at his eels). never
however see the plaintive take a pick-axe or any other wepping far
from it. has seen him hurry away when run and called after as if not
partial to children and never see him speak to neither child nor
grown person at any time (excepting the boy that sweeps the crossing
down the lane over the way round the corner which if he was here
would tell you that he has been seen a-speaking to him fre
 
 ___________________________
 
quent).

says the coroner, is that boy here? says the beadle, no, sir, he is
not here. says the coroner, go and fetch him then. in the absence of
the active and intelligent, the coroner converses with mr.
tulkinghorn.

oh! here's the boy, gentlemen!

here he is, very muddy, very hoarse, very ragged. now, boy! but stop
a minute. caution. this boy must be put through a few preliminary
paces.

name, jo. nothing else that he knows on. don't know that everybody
has two names. never heerd of sich a think. don't know that jo is
short for a longer name. thinks it long enough for him. he don't find
no fault with it. spell it? no. he can't spell it. no father, no
mother, no friends. never been to school. what's home? knows a
broom's a broom, and knows it's wicked to tell a lie. don't recollect
who told him about the broom or about the lie, but knows both. can't
exactly say what'll be done to him art
 
 ___________________________
 
is crossing, the man
turned to look at him, and came back, and having questioned him and
found that he had not a friend in the world, said, "neither have i.
not one!" and gave him the price of a supper and a night's lodging.
that the man had often spoken to him since and asked him whether he
slept sound at night, and how he bore cold and hunger, and whether he
ever wished to die, and similar strange questions. that when the man
had no money, he would say in passing, "i am as poor as you to-day,
jo," but that when he had any, he had always (as the boy most
heartily believes) been glad to give him some.

"he was wery good to me," says the boy, wiping his eyes with his
wretched sleeve. "wen i see him a-layin' so stritched out just now, i
wished he could have heerd me tell him so. he wos wery good to me, he
wos!"

as he shuffles downstairs, mr. snagsby, lying in wait for him, puts a
half-crown in his hand. "if you ever see me coming past your crossing
with my little woman--i mean a lady--" s
 
 ___________________________
 
oisoned air deposits its
witch-ointment slimy to the touch! it is well that you should call to
every passerby, "look here!"

with the night comes a slouching figure through the tunnel-court to
the outside of the iron gate. it holds the gate with its hands and
looks in between the bars, stands looking in for a little while.

it then, with an old broom it carries, softly sweeps the step and
makes the archway clean. it does so very busily and trimly, looks in
again a little while, and so departs.

jo, is it thou? well, well! though a rejected witness, who "can't
exactly say" what will be done to him in greater hands than men's,
thou art not quite in outer darkness. there is something like a
distant ray of light in thy muttered reason for this: "he wos wery
good to me, he wos!"




chapter xii

on the watch


it has left off raining down in lincolnshire at last, and chesney
wold has taken heart. mrs. rouncewell is full of hospitable cares,
for sir leicester and my lady are coming home from p
 
 ___________________________
 
 a good
grandson.

"more and most, my dear," returns the housekeeper with dignity, "are
words it's not my place to use--nor so much as to hear--applied to
any drawback on my lady."

"i beg your pardon, grandmother. but she is proud, is she not?"

"if she is, she has reason to be. the dedlock family have always
reason to be."

"well," says watt, "it's to be hoped they line out of their
prayer-books a certain passage for the common people about pride and
vainglory. forgive me, grandmother! only a joke!"

"sir leicester and lady dedlock, my dear, are not fit subjects for
joking."

"sir leicester is no joke by any means," says watt, "and i humbly ask
his pardon. i suppose, grandmother, that even with the family and
their guests down here, there is no objection to my prolonging my
stay at the dedlock arms for a day or two, as any other traveller
might?"

"surely, none in the world, child."

"i am glad of that," says watt, "because i have an inexpressible
desire to extend my knowledge of this 
 
 ___________________________
 
he moment of her
arriving at the house! ha, ha, ha! "and do you know how pretty you
are, child?" "no, my lady." you are right there! "and how old are
you, child! and take care they do not spoil you by flattery, child!"
oh, how droll! it is the best thing altogether.

in short, it is such an admirable thing that mademoiselle hortense
can't forget it; but at meals for days afterwards, even among her
countrywomen and others attached in like capacity to the troop of
visitors, relapses into silent enjoyment of the joke--an enjoyment
expressed, in her own convivial manner, by an additional tightness of
face, thin elongation of compressed lips, and sidewise look, which
intense appreciation of humour is frequently reflected in my lady's
mirrors when my lady is not among them.

all the mirrors in the house are brought into action now, many of
them after a long blank. they reflect handsome faces, simpering
faces, youthful faces, faces of threescore and ten that will not
submit to be old; the entir
 
 ___________________________
 
ould unaccountably lose faith in a bad shilling after finding it
out! who would make the vulgar very picturesque and faithful by
putting back the hands upon the clock of time and cancelling a few
hundred years of history.

there are also ladies and gentlemen of another fashion, not so new,
but very elegant, who have agreed to put a smooth glaze on the world
and to keep down all its realities. for whom everything must be
languid and pretty. who have found out the perpetual stoppage. who
are to rejoice at nothing and be sorry for nothing. who are not to be
disturbed by ideas. on whom even the fine arts, attending in powder
and walking backward like the lord chamberlain, must array themselves
in the milliners' and tailors' patterns of past generations and be
particularly careful not to be in earnest or to receive any impress
from the moving age.

then there is my lord boodle, of considerable reputation with his
party, who has known what office is and who tells sir leicester
dedlock with muc
 
 ___________________________
 
inet is not what it formerly was. he perceives with astonishment
that supposing the present government to be overthrown, the limited
choice of the crown, in the formation of a new ministry, would lie
between lord coodle and sir thomas doodle--supposing it to be
impossible for the duke of foodle to act with goodle, which may be
assumed to be the case in consequence of the breach arising out of
that affair with hoodle. then, giving the home department and the
leadership of the house of commons to joodle, the exchequer to
koodle, the colonies to loodle, and the foreign office to moodle,
what are you to do with noodle? you can't offer him the presidency of
the council; that is reserved for poodle. you can't put him in the
woods and forests; that is hardly good enough for quoodle. what
follows? that the country is shipwrecked, lost, and gone to pieces
(as is made manifest to the patriotism of sir leicester dedlock)
because you can't provide for noodle!

on the other hand, the right honourable
 
 ___________________________
 
s
often ended in this or whether richard's was a solitary case.

mr. jarndyce took great pains to talk with him seriously and to put
it to his good sense not to deceive himself in so important a matter.
richard was a little grave after these interviews, but invariably
told ada and me that it was all right, and then began to talk about
something else.

"by heaven!" cried mr. boythorn, who interested himself strongly in
the subject--though i need not say that, for he could do nothing
weakly; "i rejoice to find a young gentleman of spirit and gallantry
devoting himself to that noble profession! the more spirit there is
in it, the better for mankind and the worse for those mercenary
task-masters and low tricksters who delight in putting that
illustrious art at a disadvantage in the world. by all that is base
and despicable," cried mr. boythorn, "the treatment of surgeons
aboard ship is such that i would submit the legs--both legs--of every
member of the admiralty board to a compound fracture
 
 ___________________________
 
 and render it a
transportable offence in any qualified practitioner to set them if
the system were not wholly changed in eight and forty hours!"

"wouldn't you give them a week?" asked mr. jarndyce.

"no!" cried mr. boythorn firmly. "not on any consideration! eight and
forty hours! as to corporations, parishes, vestry-boards, and similar
gatherings of jolter-headed clods who assemble to exchange such
speeches that, by heaven, they ought to be worked in quicksilver
mines for the short remainder of their miserable existence, if it
were only to prevent their detestable english from contaminating a
language spoken in the presence of the sun--as to those fellows, who
meanly take advantage of the ardour of gentlemen in the pursuit of
knowledge to recompense the inestimable services of the best years of
their lives, their long study, and their expensi
 
 ___________________________
 
n't! pray don't!" cried ada, very much startled by the
idea of my doing so.

"now, i wonder who it can be about?" said i, pretending to consider.

"it's about--" said ada in a whisper. "it's about--my cousin
richard!"

"well, my own!" said i, kissing her bright hair, which was all i
could see. "and what about him?"

"oh, esther, you would never guess!"

it was so pretty to have her clinging to me in that way, hiding her
face, and to know that she was not crying in sorrow but in a little
glow of joy, and pride, and hope, that i would not help her just yet.

"he says--i know it's very foolish, we are both so young--but he
says," with a burst of tears, "that he loves me dearly, esther."

"does he indeed?" said i. "i never heard of such a thing! why, my pet
of pets, i could have told you that weeks and weeks ago!"

to see ada lift up her flushed face in joyful surprise, and hold me
round the neck, and laugh, and cry, and blush, was so pleasant!

"why, my darling," said i, "what a goose you m
 
 ___________________________
 
, you don't think it wrong of me, do you?"
returned ada. she might have coaxed me to say no if i had been the
hardest-hearted duenna in the world. not being that yet, i said no
very freely.

"and now," said i, "i know the worst of it."

"oh, that's not quite the worst of it, esther dear!" cried ada,
holding me tighter and laying down her face again upon my breast.

"no?" said i. "not even that?"

"no, not even that!" said ada, shaking her head.

"why, you never mean to say--" i was beginning in joke.

but ada, looking up and smiling through her tears, cried, "yes, i do!
you know, you know i do!" and then sobbed out, "with all my heart i
do! with all my whole heart, esther!"

i told her, laughing, why i had known that, too, just as well as i
had known the other! and we sat before the fire, and i had all the
talking to myself for a little while (though there was not much of
it); and ada was soon quiet and happy.

"do you think my cousin john knows, dear dame durden?" she asked.

"unless my
 
 ___________________________
 
 cousin john is blind, my pet," said i, "i should think my
cousin john knows pretty well as much as we know."

"we want to speak to him before richard goes," said ada timidly, "and
we wanted you to advise us, and to tell him so. perhaps you wouldn't
mind richard's coming in, dame durden?"

"oh! richard is outside, is he, my dear?" said i.

"i am not quite certain," returned ada with a bashful simplicity that
would have won my heart if she had not won it long before, "but i
think he's waiting at the door."

there he was, of course. they brought a chair on either 
 
 ___________________________
 
side of me,
and put me between them, and really seemed to have fallen in love
with me instead of one another, they were so confiding, and so
trustful, and so fond of me. they went on in their own wild way for a
little while--i never stopped them; i enjoyed it too much myself--and
then we gradually fell to considering how young they were, and how
there must be a lapse of several years before this early love could
come to anything, and how it could come to happiness only if it were
real and lasting and inspired them with a steady resolution to do
their duty to each other, with constancy, fortitude, and
perseverance, each always for the other's sake. well! richard said
that he would work his fingers to the bone for ada, and ada said that
she woul
 
 ___________________________
 
d work her fingers to the bone for richard, and they called
me all sorts of endearing and sensible names, and we sat there,
advising and talking, half the night. finally, before we parted, i
gave them my promise to speak to their cousin john to-morrow.

so, when to-morrow came, i went to my guardian after breakfast, in
the room that was our town-substitute for the growlery, and told him
that i had it in trust to tell him something.

"well, little woman," said he, shutting up his book, "if you have
accepted the trust, there can be no harm in it."

"i hope not, guardian," said i. "i can guarantee that there is no
secrecy in it. for it only happened yesterday."

"aye? and what is it, esther?"

"guardian," said i, "you remember the h
 
 ___________________________
 
our manhood will excuse me,
rick!)--don't be ashamed still to confide in me, for there will be
nothing monstrous or uncommon in it. i am only your friend and
distant kinsman. i have no power over you whatever. but i wish and
hope to retain your confidence if i do nothing to forfeit it."

"i am very sure, sir," returned richard, "that i speak for ada too
when i say that you have the strongest power over us both--rooted in
respect, gratitude, and affection--strengthening every day."

"dear cousin john," said ada, on his shoulder, "my father's place can
never be empty again. all the love and duty i could ever have
rendered to him is transferred to you."

"come!" said mr. jarndyce. "now for our assumption. now we lift our
eyes up and look hopefully at the distance! rick, the world is before
you; and it is most probable that as you enter it, so it will receive
you. trust in nothing but in providence and your own efforts. never
separate the two, like the heathen waggoner. constancy in love is 
 
 ___________________________
 
 home with me. love her, rick, in your active life, no less
than in her home when you revisit it, and all will go well.
otherwise, all will go ill. that's the end of my preaching. i think
you and ada had better take a walk."

ada tenderly embraced him, and richard heartily shook hands with him,
and then the cousins went out of the room, looking back again
directly, though, to say that they would wait for me.

the door stood open, and we both followed them with our eyes as they
passed down the adjoining room, on which the sun was shining, and out
at its farther end. richard with his head bent, and her hand drawn
through his arm, was talking to her very earnestly; and she looked up
in his face, listening, and seemed to see nothing else. so young, so
beautiful, so full of hope and promise, they went on lightly through
the sunlight as their own happy thoughts might then be traversing the
years to come and making them all years of brightness. so they passed
away into the shadow and were gone.
 
 ___________________________
 
e great wall of china. he went away in high spirits. ada and i,
prepared to miss him very much, commenced our quieter career.

on our arrival in london, we had called with mr. jarndyce at mrs.
jellyby's but had not been so fortunate as to find her at home. it
appeared that she had gone somewhere to a tea-drinking and had taken
miss jellyby with her. besides the tea-drinking, there was to be some
considerable speech-making and letter-writing on the general merits
of the cultivation of coffee, conjointly with natives, at the
settlement of borrioboola-gha. all this involved, no doubt,
sufficient active exercise of pen and ink to make her daughter's part
in the proceedings anything but a holiday.

it being now beyond the time appointed for mrs. jellyby's return, we
called again. she was in town, but not at home, having gone to mile
end directly after breakfast on some borrioboolan business, arising
out of a society called the east london branch aid ramification. as i
had not seen peepy on th
 
 ___________________________
 
 going there again. as i trusted that i might have
sufficient influence with miss jellyby to prevent her taking any very
rash step if i fully accepted the confidence she was so willing to
place in me, poor girl, i proposed that she and i and peepy should go
to the academy and afterwards meet my guardian and ada at miss
flite's, whose name i now learnt for the first time. this was on
condition that miss jellyby and peepy should come back with us to
dinner. the last article of the agreement being joyfully acceded to
by both, we smartened peepy up a little with the assistance of a few
pins, some soap and water, and a hair-brush, and went out, bending
our steps towards newman street, which was very near.

i found the academy established in a sufficiently dingy house at the
corner of an archway, with busts in all the staircase windows. in the
same house there were also established, as i gathered from the plates
on the door, a drawing-master, a coal-merchant (there was, certainly,
no room for 
 
 ___________________________
 
tre of the room, where miss jellyby's lover,
now engaged with single pupils, was undergoing greater drudgery than
ever.

"my amiable child," murmured mr. turveydrop, adjusting his cravat.

"your son is indefatigable," said i.

"it is my reward," said mr. turveydrop, "to hear you say so. in some
respects, he treads in the footsteps of his sainted mother. she was a
devoted creature. but wooman, lovely wooman," said mr. turveydrop
with very disagreeable gallantry, "what a sex you are!"

i rose and joined miss jellyby, who was by this time putting on her
bonnet. the time allotted to a lesson having fully elapsed, there was
a general putting on of bonnets. when miss jellyby and the
unfortunate prince found an opportunity to become betrothed i don't
know, but they certainly found none on this occasion to exchange a
dozen words.

"my dear," said mr. turveydrop benignly to his son, "do you know the
hour?"

"no, father." the son had no watch. the father had a handsome gold
one, which he pulled ou
 
 ___________________________
 
oo, but on the
whole i hope i am better-tempered than i was and more forgiving to
ma."

the poor girl, trying so hard, said it from her heart, and touched
mine. "caddy, my love," i replied, "i begin to have a great affection
for you, and i hope we shall become friends."

"oh, do you?" cried caddy. "how happy that would make me!"

"my dear caddy," said i, "let us be friends from this time, and let
us often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right
way through them." caddy was overjoyed. i said everything i could in
my old-fashioned way to comfort and encourage her, and i would not
have objected to old mr. turveydrop that day for any smaller
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

by this time we were come to mr. krook's, whose private door stood
open. there was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room to
let on the second floor. it reminded caddy to tell me as we proceeded
upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an inquest and
that 
 
 ___________________________
 
y
guardian with his elbow and looked close up into his face with his
spectacled eyes. "it's one of her strange ways that she'll never tell
the names of these birds if she can help it, though she named 'em
all." this was in a whisper. "shall i run 'em over, flite?" he asked
aloud, winking at us and pointing at her as she turned away,
affecting to sweep the grate.

"if you like," she answered hurriedly.

the old man, looking up at the cages after another look at us, went
through the list.

"hope, joy, youth, peace, rest, life, dust, ashes, waste, want, ruin,
despair, madness, death, cunning, folly, words, wigs, rags,
sheepskin, plunder, precedent, jargon, gammon, and spinach. that's
the whole collection," said the old man, "all cooped up together, by
my noble and learned brother."

"this is a bitter wind!" muttered my guardian.

"when my noble and learned brother gives his judgment, they're to be
let go free," said krook, winking at us again. "and then," he added,
whispering and grinning, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 all such excitements. he seemed to project those two
shining knobs of temples of his into everything that went on and to
brush his hair farther and farther back, until the very roots were
almost ready to fly out of his head in inappeasable philanthropy. all
objects were alike to him, but he was always particularly ready for
anything in the way of a testimonial to any one. his great power
seemed to be his power of indiscriminate admiration. he would sit for
any length of time, with the utmost enjoyment, bathing his temples in
the light of any order of luminary. having first seen him perfectly
swallowed up in admiration of mrs. jellyby, i had supposed her to be
the absorbing object of his devotion. i soon discovered my mistake
and found him to be train-bearer and organ-blower to a whole
procession of people.

mrs. pardiggle came one day for a subscription to something, and with
her, mr. quale. whatever mrs. pardiggle said, mr. quale repeated to
us; and just as he had drawn mrs. jellyby ou
 
 ___________________________
 
 too
vehement--like a bull who has made up his mind to consider every
colour scarlet. but i grant a sledge-hammering sort of merit in him!"

i should have been surprised if those two could have thought very
highly of one another, mr. boythorn attaching so much importance to
many things and mr. skimpole caring so little for anything. besides
which, i had noticed mr. boythorn more than once on the point of
breaking out into some strong opinion when mr. skimpole was referred
to. of course i merely joined ada in saying that we had been greatly
pleased with him.

"he has invited me," said mr. skimpole; "and if a child may trust
himself in such hands--which the present child is encouraged to do,
with the united tenderness of two angels to guard him--i shall go. he
proposes to frank me down and back again. i suppose it will cost
money? shillings perhaps? or pounds? or something of that sort? by
the by, coavinses. you remember our friend coavinses, miss
summerson?"

he asked me as the subject ar
 
 ___________________________
 
 ourselves upon them. there was
no harm in his trade. he maintained his children. one would like to
know more about this."

"oh! coavinses?" cried mr. skimpole, at length perceiving what he
meant. "nothing easier. a walk to coavinses' headquarters, and you
can know what you will."

mr. jarndyce nodded to us, who were only waiting for the signal.
"come! we will walk that way, my dears. why not that way as soon as
another!" we were quickly ready and went out. mr. skimpole went with
us and quite enjoyed the expedition. it was so new and so refreshing,
he said, for him to want coavinses instead of coavinses wanting him!

he took us, first, to cursitor street, chancery lane, where there was
a house with barred windows, which he called coavinses' castle. on
our going into the entry and ringing a bell, a very hideous boy came
out of a sort of office and looked at us over a spiked wicket.

"who did you want?" said the boy, fitting two of the spikes into his
chin.

"there was a follower, or an of
 
 ___________________________
 
mr. gridley gave his consent
gruff--but gave it. he was always gruff with him, but he has been
kind to the children since. a person is never known till a person is
proved."

"have many people been kind to the children?" asked mr. jarndyce.

"upon the whole, not so bad, sir," said mrs. blinder; "but certainly
not so many as would have been if their father's calling had been
different. mr. coavins gave a guinea, and the follerers made up a
little purse. some neighbours in the yard that had always joked and
tapped their shoulders when he went by came forward with a little
subscription, and--in general--not so bad. similarly with charlotte.
some people won't employ her because she was a follerer's child; some
people that do employ her cast it at her; some make a merit of having
her to work for them, with that and all her draw-backs upon her, and
perhaps pay her less and put upon her more. but she's patienter than
others would be, and is clever too, and always willing, up to the
full mark of 
 
 ___________________________
 
idley, putting down the child and going up to him as if
he meant to strike him, "do you know anything of courts of equity?"

"perhaps i do, to my sorrow."

"to your sorrow?" said the man, pausing in his wrath, "if so, i beg
your pardon. i am not polite, i know. i beg your pardon! sir," with
renewed violence, "i have been dragged for five and twenty years over
burning iron, and i have lost the habit of treading upon velvet. go
into the court of chancery yonder and ask what is one of the standing
jokes that brighten up their business sometimes, and they will tell
you that the best joke they have is the man from shropshire. i," he
said, beating one hand on the other passionately, "am the man from
shropshire."

"i believe i and my family have also had the honour of furnishing
some entertainment in the same grave place," said my guardian
composedly. "you may have heard my name--jarndyce."

"mr. jarndyce," said gridley with a rough sort of salutation, "you
bear your wrongs more quietly than i 
 
 ___________________________
 
was then stopped for another two years
while the master (may his head rot off!) inquired whether i was my
father's son, about which there was no dispute at all with any mortal
creature. he then found out that there were not defendants
enough--remember, there were only seventeen as yet!--but that we must
have another who had been left out and must begin all over again. the
costs at that time--before the thing was begun!--were three times the
legacy. my brother would have given up the legacy, and joyful, to
escape more costs. my whole estate, left to me in that will of my
father's, has gone in costs. the suit, still undecided, has fallen
into rack, and ruin, and despair, with everything else--and here i
stand, this day! now, mr. jarndyce, in your suit there are thousands
and thousands involved, where in mine there are hundreds. is mine
less hard to bear or is it harder to bear, when my whole living was
in it and has been thus shamefully sucked away?"

mr. jarndyce said that he condoled wit
 
 ___________________________
 
es disconsolate at the hall-window; and he mentioned last night to
another mercury of his acquaintance, also accustomed to good society,
that if that sort of thing was to last--which it couldn't, for a man
of his spirits couldn't bear it, and a man of his figure couldn't be
expected to bear it--there would be no resource for him, upon his
honour, but to cut his throat!

what connexion can there be between the place in lincolnshire, the
house in town, the mercury in powder, and the whereabout of jo the
outlaw with the broom, who had that distant ray of light upon him
when he swept the churchyard-step? what connexion can there have been
between many people in the innumerable histories of this world who
from opposite sides of great gulfs have, nevertheless, been very
curiously brought together!

jo sweeps his crossing all day long, unconscious of the link, if any
link there be. he sums up his mental condition when asked a question
by replying that he "don't know nothink." he knows that it's
 
 ___________________________
 
 hard to
keep the mud off the crossing in dirty weather, and harder still to
live by doing it. nobody taught him even that much; he found it out.

jo lives--that is to say, jo has not yet died--in a ruinous place
known to the like of him by the name of tom-all-alone's. it is a
black, dilapidated street, avoided by all decent people, where the
crazy houses were seized upon, when their decay was far advanced, by
some bold vagrants who after establishing their own possession took
to letting them out in lodgings. now, these tumbling tenements
contain, by night, a swarm of misery. as on the ruined human wretch
vermin parasites appear, so these ruined shelters have bred a 
 
 ___________________________
 
lar lodgings among the rubbish. as several
more houses are nearly ready to go, the next crash in tom-all-alone's
may be expected to be a good one.

this desirable property is in chancery, of course. it would be an
insult to the discernment of any man with half an eye to tell him so.
whether "tom" is the popular representative of the original plaintiff
or defendant in jarndyce and jarndyce, or whether tom lived here when
the suit had laid the street waste, all alone, until other settlers
came to join him, or whether the traditional title is a comprehensive
name for a retreat cut off from honest company and put out of the
pale of hope, perhaps nobody knows. certainly jo don't know.

"for i don't," says jo, "i don't know nothink."

it must be a strange state to be like jo! to shuffle through the
streets, unfamiliar with the shapes, and in utter darkness as to the
meaning, of those mysterious symbols, so abundant over the shops, and
at the corners of streets, and on the doors, and in the win
 
 ___________________________
 
dows! to
see people read, and to see people write, and to see the postmen
deliver letters, and not to have the least idea of all that
language--to be, to every scrap of it, stone blind and dumb! it must
be very puzzling to see the good company going to the churches on
sundays, with their books in their hands, and to think (for perhaps
jo does think at odd times) what does it all mean, and if it means
anything to anybody, how comes it that it means nothing to me? to be
hustled, and jostled, and moved on; and really to feel that it would
appear to be perfectly true that i have no business here, or there,
or anywhere; and yet to be perplexed by the consideration that i am
here somehow, too, and everybody overlooked me until i became the
creature that i am! it must be a strange state, not merely to be told
that i am scarcely human (as in the case of my offering myself for a
witness), but to feel it of my own knowledge all my life! to see the
horses, dogs, and cattle go by me an
 
 ___________________________
 
d to know that in ignorance i
belong to them and not to the superior beings in my shape, whose
delicacy i offend! jo's ideas of a criminal trial, or a judge, or a
bishop, or a government, or that inestimable jewel to him (if he only
knew it) the constitution, should be strange! his whole material and
immaterial life is wonderfully strange; his death, the strangest
thing of all.

jo comes out of tom-all-alone's, meeting the tardy morning which is
always late in getting down there, and munches his dirty bit of bread
as he comes along. his way lying through many streets, and the houses
not yet being open, he sits down to breakfast on the door-step of the
society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts and gives
it a brush when he has finished as an acknowledgment of the
accommodation. he admires the size of the edifice and wonders what
it's all about. he has no id
 
 ___________________________
 
ea, poor wretch, of the spiritual
destitution of a coral reef in the pacific or what it costs to look
up the precious souls among the coco-nuts and bread-fruit.

he goes to his crossing and begins to lay it out for the day. the
town awakes; the great tee-totum is set up for its daily spin and
whirl; all that unaccountable reading and writing, which has been
suspended for a few hours, recommences. jo and the other lower
animals get on in the unintelligible mess as they can. it is
market-day. the blinded oxen, over-goaded, over-driven, never guided,
run into wrong places and are beaten out, and plunge red-eyed and
foaming at stone walls, and often sorely hurt the innocent, and often
sorely hurt themselves. very like jo and his order; very, very like!

a band of music comes and plays. jo listens to it. so does a dog--a
drover's dog, waiting for his master outside a butcher's shop, and
evident
 
 ___________________________
 
f. he seems perplexed respecting three
or four, can't remember where he left them, looks up and down the
street as half expecting to see them astray, suddenly pricks up his
ears and remembers all about it. a thoroughly vagabond dog,
accustomed to low company and public-houses; a terrific dog to sheep,
ready at a whistle to scamper over their backs and tear out mouthfuls
of their wool; but an educated, improved, developed dog who has been
taught his duties and knows how to discharge them. he and jo listen
to the music, probably with much the same amount of animal
satisfaction; likewise as to awakened association, aspiration, or
regret, melancholy or joyful reference to things beyond the senses,
they are probably upon a par. but, otherwise, how far above the human
listener is the brute!

turn that dog's descendants wild, like jo, and in a very few years
they will so degenerate that they will lose even their bark--but not
their bite.

the day changes as it wears itself away and becomes dark
 
 ___________________________
 
 and drizzly.
jo fights it out at his crossing among the mud and wheels, the
horses, whips, and umbrellas, and gets but a scanty sum to pay for
the unsavoury shelter of tom-all-alone's. twilight comes on; gas
begins to start up in the shops; the lamplighter, with his ladder,
runs along the margin of the pavement. a wretched evening is
beginning to close in.

in his chambers mr. tulkinghorn sits meditating an application to the
nearest magistrate to-morrow morning for a warrant. gridley, a
disappointed suitor, h
 
 ___________________________
 
as been here to-day and has been alarming. we
are not to be put in bodily fear, and that ill-conditioned fellow
shall be held to bail again. from the ceiling, foreshortened
allegory, in the person of one impossible roman upside down, points
with the arm of samson (out of joint, and an odd one) obtrusively
toward the window. why should mr. tulkinghorn, for such no reason,
look out of window? is the hand not always pointing there? so he does
not look out of window.

and if he did, what would it be to see a woman going by? there are
women enough in the world, mr. tulkinghorn thinks--too many; they are
at the bottom of all that goes wrong in it, though, for the matter of
that, they create business for lawyers. what would it be to see a
woman going by, even though she 
 
 ___________________________
 
istent. she should be an upper servant by
her attire, yet in her air and step, though both are hurried and
assumed--as far as she can assume in the muddy streets, which she
treads with an unaccustomed foot--she is a lady. her face is veiled,
and still she sufficiently betrays herself to make more than one of
those who pass her look round sharply.

she never turns her head. lady or servant, she has a purpose in her
and can follow it. she never turns her head until she comes to the
crossing where jo plies with his broom. he crosses with her and begs.
still, she does not turn her head until she has landed on the other
side. then she slightly beckons to him and says, "come here!"

jo follows her a pace or two into a quiet court.

"are you the boy i've read of in the papers?" she asked behind her
veil.

"i don't know," says jo, staring moodily at the veil, "nothink about
no papers. i don't know nothink about nothink at all."

"were you examined at an inquest?"

"i don't know nothink about no-
 
 ___________________________
 
-where i was took by the beadle, do
you mean?" says jo. "was the boy's name at the inkwhich jo?"

"yes."

"that's me!" says jo.

"come farther up."

"you mean about the man?" says jo, following. "him as wos dead?"

"hush! speak in a whisper! yes. did he look, when he was living, so
very ill and poor?"

"oh, jist!" says jo.

"did he look like--not like you?" says the woman with abhorrence.

"oh, not so bad as me," says jo. "i'm a reg'lar one i am! you didn't
know him, did you?"

"how dare you ask me if i knew him?"

"no offence, my lady," says jo with much humility, for even he has
got at the suspicion of her being a lady.

"i am not a lady. i am a servant."

"you are a jolly servant!" says jo without the least idea of saying
anything offensive, merely as a tribute of admiration.

"listen and be silent. don't talk to me, and stand farther from me!
can you show me all those places that were spoken of in the accou
 
 ___________________________
 
nt i
read? the place he wrote for, the place he died at, the place where
you were taken to, and the place where he was buried? do you know the
place where he was buried?"

jo answers with a nod, having also nodded as each other place was
mentioned.

"go before me and show me all those dreadful places. stop opposite to
each, and don't speak to me unless i speak to you. don't look back.
do what i want, and i will pay you well."

jo attends closely while the words are being spoken; tells them off
on his broom-handle, finding them rather hard; pauses to consider
their meaning; considers it satisfactory; and nods his ragged head.

"i'm fly," says jo. "but fen larks, you know. stow hooking it!"

"what does the horrible creature mean?" exclaims the servant,
recoiling from him.

"stow cutting away, you know!" says jo.

"i don't understand you. go on before! i will give you more money
than you ever had in your life."

jo screws 
 
 ___________________________
 
up his mouth into a whistle, gives his ragged head a rub,
takes his broom under his arm, and leads the way, passing deftly with
his bare feet over the hard stones and through the mud and mire.

cook's court. jo stops. a pause.

"who lives here?"

"him wot give him his writing and give me half a bull," says jo in a
whisper without looking over his shoulder.

"go on to the next."

krook's house. jo stops again. a longer pause.

"who lives here?"

"he lived here," jo answers as before.

after a silence he is asked, "in which room?"

"in the back room up there. you can see the winder from this corner.
up there! that's where i see him stritched out. this is the
public-ouse where i was took to."

"go on to the next!"

it is a longer walk to the next, but jo, relieved of his first
suspicions, sticks to the forms imposed upon him and does not look
round. by many devious ways, reeking with offence of many kinds, they
come to the little tunnel of a court, and to t
 
 ___________________________
 
he gas-lamp (lighted
now), and to the iron gate.

"he was put there," says jo, holding to the bars and looking in.

"where? oh, what a scene of horror!"

"there!" says jo, pointing. "over yinder. among them piles of bones,
and close to that there kitchin winder! they put him wery nigh the
top. they was obliged to stamp upon it to git it in. i could unkiver
it for you with my broom if the gate was open. that's why they locks
it, i s'pose," giving it a shake. "it's always locked. look at the
rat!" cries jo, excited. "hi! look! there he goes! ho! into the
ground!"

the servant shrinks into a corner, into a corner of that hideous
archway, with its deadly stains cont
 
 ___________________________
 
aminating her dress; and putting
out her two hands and passionately telling him to keep away from her,
for he is loathsome to her, so remains for some moments. jo stands
staring and is still staring when she recovers herself.

"is this place of abomination consecrated ground?"

"i don't know nothink of consequential ground," says jo, still
staring.

"is it blessed?"

"which?" says jo, in the last degree amazed.

"is it blessed?"

"i'm blest if i know," says jo, staring more than ever; "but i
shouldn't think it warn't. blest?" repeats jo, something troubled in
his mind. "it an't done it much good if it is. blest? i should think
it was t'othered myself. but i don't know nothink!"

the servant takes as little heed of what he says as she seems to take
of what she has said herself. she draws off her glove to get some
money from her purse. jo silently notices how white and small her
hand is and what a jolly servant she must be to wear such sparkling
rings.
 
 ___________________________
 


she drops a piece of money in his hand without touching it, and
shuddering as their hands approach. "now," she adds, "show me the
spot again!"

jo thrusts the handle of his broom between the bars of the gate, and
with his utmost power of elaboration, points it out. at length,
looking aside to see if he has made himself intelligible, he finds
that he is alone.

his first proceeding is to hold the piece of money to the gas-light
and to be overpowered at finding that it is yellow--gold. his next is
to give it a one-sided bite at the edge as a test of its quality.
his next, to put it in his mouth for safety and to sweep the
step and passage w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith great care. his job done, he sets off for
tom-all-alone's, stopping in the light of innumerable gas-lamps to
produce the piece of gold and give it another one-sided bite as a
reassurance of its being genuine.

the mercury in powder is in no want of society to-night, for my lady
goes to a grand dinner and three or four balls. sir leicester is
fidgety down at chesney wold, with no better company than the gout;
he complains to mrs. rouncewell that the rain makes such a monotonous
pattering on the terrace that he can
 
 ___________________________
 
 never
heard them called the young gentlemen, my dears, and probably would
not understand allusions to their pipe-claying their weekly accounts,
but it is otherwise with me, for blue water has been a second home to
me, and i have been quite a sailor. again, with professor dingo."

"a man of european reputation," murmured mr. badger.

"when i lost my dear first and became the wife of my dear second,"
said mrs. badger, speaking of her former husbands as if they were
parts of a charade, "i still enjoyed opportunities of observing
youth. the class attendant on professor dingo's lectures was a large
one, and it became my pride, as the wife of an eminent scientific man
seeking herself in science the utmost consolation it could impart, to
throw our house open to the students as a kind of scientific
exchange. every tuesday evening there was lemonade and a mixed
biscuit for all who chose to partake of those refreshments. and there
was science to an unlimited extent."

"remarkable assemblies those
 
 ___________________________
 
 advantages, has had the rare advantage of being formed by
two such very distinguished (i will even say illustrious) public men
as captain swosser of the royal navy and professor dingo. the
conclusion at which i have arrived is--in short, is mrs. badger's
conclusion."

"it was a maxim of captain swosser's," said mrs. badger, "speaking in
his figurative naval manner, that when you make pitch hot, you cannot
make it too hot; and that if you only have to swab a plank, you
should swab it as if davy jones were after you. it appears to me that
this maxim is applicable to the medical as well as to the nautical
profession.

"to all professions," observed mr. badger. "it was admirably said by
captain swosser. beautifully said."

"people objected to professor dingo when we were staying in the north
of devon after our marriage," said mrs. badger, "that he disfigured
some of the houses and other buildings by chipping off fragments of
those edifices with his little geological hammer. but the professo
 
 ___________________________
 
, i went in and found my
darling (as i knew she would be) prepared to consider him thoroughly
right in whatever he said.

"and how do you get on, richard?" said i. i always sat down on the
other side of him. he made quite a sister of me.

"oh! well enough!" said richard.

"he can't say better than that, esther, can he?" cried my pet
triumphantly.

i tried to look at my pet in the wisest manner, but of course i
couldn't.

"well enough?" i repeated.

"yes," said richard, "well enough. it's rather jog-trotty and
humdrum. but it'll do as well as anything else!"

"oh! my dear richard!" i remonstrated.

"what's the matter?" said richard.

"do as well as anything else!"

"i don't think there's any harm in that, dame durden," said ada,
looking so confidingly at me across him; "because if it will do as
well as anything else, it will do very well, i hope."

"oh, yes, i hope so," returned richard, carelessly tossing his hair
from his forehead. "after all, it may be only a kind of probation
till our
 
 ___________________________
 
re here yesterday, richard," said i, "and they
seemed disposed to think that you had no great liking for the
profession."

"did they though?" said richard. "oh! well, that rather alters the
case, because i had no idea that they thought so, and i should not
have liked to disappoint or inconvenience them. the fact is, i don't
care much about it. but, oh, it don't matter! it'll do as well as
anything else!"

"you hear him, ada!" said i.

"the fact is," richard proceeded, half thoughtfully and half
jocosely, "it is not quite in my way. i don't take to it. and i get
too much of mrs. bayham badger's first and second."

"i am sure that's very natural!" cried ada, quite delighted. "the
very thing we both said yesterday, esther!"

"then," pursued richard, "it's monotonous, and to-day is too like
yesterday, and to-morrow is too like to-day."

"but i am afraid," said i, "this is an objection to all kinds of
application--to life itself, except under some very uncommon
circumstances."

"do you think 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd to have entered into articles with him on the
spot. submitting, however, with a good grace to the caution that we
had shown to be so necessary, he contented himself with sitting down
among us in his lightest spirits and talking as if his one unvarying
purpose in life from childhood had been that one which now held
possession of him. my guardian was very kind and cordial with him,
but rather grave, enough so to cause ada, when he had departed and we
were going upstairs to bed, to say, "cousin john, i hope you don't
think the worse of richard?"

"no, my love," said he.

"because it was very natural that richard should be mistaken in such
a difficult case. it is not uncommon."

"no, no, my love," said he. "don't look unhappy."

"oh, i am not unhappy, cousin john!" said ada, smiling cheerfully,
with her hand upon his shoulder, where she had put it in bidding him
good night. "but i should be a little so if you thought at all the
worse of richard."

"my dear," said mr. jarndyce, "i should t
 
 ___________________________
 
hink the worse of him only
if you were ever in the least unhappy through his means. i should be
more disposed to quarrel with myself even then, than with poor rick,
for i brought you together. but, tut, all this is nothing! he has
time before him, and the race to run. i think the worse of him? not
i, my loving cousin! and not you, i swear!"

"no, indeed, cousin john," said ada, "i am sure i could not--i am
sure i would not--think any ill of richard if the whole world did. i
could, and i would, think better of him then than at any other time!"

so quietly and honestly she said it, with her hands upon his
shoulders--both hands now--and looking up into his face, like the
picture of truth!

"i think," said my guardian, thoughtfully regarding her, "i think it
must be somewhere written that the virtues of the mothers shall
occasionally be visited on the childr
 
 ___________________________
 
ich time prince would be waiting
for her at the corner, sat chatting with me and ada in the window,
every now and then handing me the flowers again or trying how they
looked against my hair. at last, when she was going, she took me into
my room and put them in my dress.

"for me?" said i, surprised.

"for you," said caddy with a kiss. "they were left behind by
somebody."

"left behind?"

"at poor miss flite's," said caddy. "somebody who has been very good
to her was hurrying away an hour ago to join a ship and left these
flowers behind. no, no! don't take them out. let the pretty little
things lie here," said caddy, adjusting them with a careful hand,
"because i was present myself, and i shouldn't wonder if somebody
left them on purpose!"

"do they look like that sort of thing?" said ada, coming laughingly
behind me and clasping me merrily round the waist. "oh, yes, indeed
they do, dame durden! they look very, very like that sort of thing.
oh, very like it indeed, my dear!"




chapter x
 
 ___________________________
 
.

while these affairs were in abeyance, our visit to mr. boythorn's was
postponed. at length, richard having taken possession of his lodging,
there was nothing to prevent our departure. he could have gone with
us at that time of the year very well, but he was in the full novelty
of his new position and was making most energetic attempts to unravel
the mysteries of the fatal suit. consequently we went without him,
and my darling was delighted to praise him for being so busy.

we made a pleasant journey down into lincolnshire by the coach and
had an entertaining companion in mr. skimpole. his furniture had been
all cleared off, it appeared, by the person who took possession of it
on his blue-eyed daughter's birthday, but he seemed quite relieved to
think that it was gone. chairs and table, he said, were wearisome
objects; they were monotonous ideas, they had no variety of
expression, they looked you out of countenance, and you looked them
out of countenance. how pleasant, then, to be boun
 
 ___________________________
 
fer if i give you time?'
'my good fellow,' said i, 'i have no idea of time; but you say you
are a man of business, and whatever you can suggest to be done in a
business-like way with pen, and ink, and paper--and wafers--i am
ready to do. don't pay yourself at another man's expense (which is
foolish), but be business-like!' however, he wouldn't be, and there
was an end of it."

if these were some of the inconveniences of mr. skimpole's childhood,
it assuredly possessed its advantages too. on the journey he had a
very good appetite for such refreshment as came in our way (including
a basket of choice hothouse peaches), but never thought of paying for
anything. so when the coachman came round for his fee, he pleasantly
asked him what he considered a very good fee indeed, now--a liberal
one--and on his replying half a crown for a single passenger, said it
was little enough too, all things considered, and left mr. jarndyce
to give it him.

it was delightful weather. the green corn waved so be
 
 ___________________________
 
autifully, the
larks sang so joyfully, the hedges were so full of wild flowers, the
trees were so thickly out in leaf, the bean-fields, with a light wind
blowing over them, filled the air with such a delicious fragrance!
late in the afternoon we came to the market-town where we were to
alight from the coach--a dull little town with a church-spire, and a
marketplace, and a market-cross, and one intensely sunny street, and
a pond with an old horse cooling his legs in it, and a very few men
sleepily lying and standing about in n
 
 ___________________________
 
arrow little bits of shade.
after the rustling of the leaves and the waving of the corn all along
the road, it looked as still, as hot, as motionless a little town as
england could produce.

at the inn we found mr. boythorn on horseback, waiting with an open
carriage to take us to his house, which was a few miles off. he was
overjoyed to see us and dismounted with great alacrity.

"by heaven!" said he after giving us a courteous greeting. "this a
most infamous coach. it is the most flagrant example of an abominable
public vehicle that ever encumbered the face of the earth. it is
twenty-five minutes after its time this afternoon. the coachman ought
to be put to death!"

"is he after his time?" said mr. skimpole, to whom he happened to
address himself. "you know my infirmity."

"twenty-five minutes! twenty-six minutes!" rep
 
 ___________________________
 
ally resemble my godmother's? it might be that it did, a
little; but the expression was so different, and the stern decision
which had worn into my godmother's face, like weather into rocks, was
so completely wanting in the face before me that it could not be that
resemblance which had struck me. neither did i know the loftiness and
haughtiness of lady dedlock's face, at all, in any one. and yet i--i,
little esther summerson, the child who lived a life apart and on
whose birthday there was no rejoicing--seemed to arise before my own
eyes, evoked out of the past by some power in this fashionable lady,
whom i not only entertained no fancy that i had ever seen, but whom i
perfectly well knew i had never seen until that hour.

it made me tremble so to be thrown into this unaccountable agitation
that i was conscious of being distressed even by the observation of
the french maid, though i knew she had been looking watchfully here,
and there, and everywhere, from the moment of her coming into t
 
 ___________________________
 
 wanted to grovel, is very much in a
perspiration about the head, and never speaks without first putting
up his great hand, as delivering a token to his hearers that he is
going to edify them.

"my friends," says mr. chadband, "peace be on this house! on the
master thereof, on the mistress thereof, on the young maidens, and on
the young men! my friends, why do i wish for peace? what is peace? is
it war? no. is it strife? no. is it lovely, and gentle, and
beautiful, and pleasant, and serene, and joyful? oh, yes! therefore,
my friends, i wish for peace, upon you and upon yours."

in consequence of mrs. snagsby looking deeply edified, mr. snagsby
thinks it expedient on the whole to say amen, which is well received.

"now, my friends," proceeds mr. chadband, "since i am upon this
theme--"

guster presents herself. mrs. snagsby, in a spectral bass voice and
without removing her eyes from chadband, says with dreadful
distinctness, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says chadband, "since i am upon 
 
 ___________________________
 
 snagsby, as
who should say, "you hear this apostle!" and while mr. chadband glows
with humility and train oil, mrs. chadband pays the money. it is mr.
chadband's habit--it is the head and front of his pretensions
indeed--to keep this sort of debtor and creditor account in the
smallest items and to post it publicly on the most trivial occasions.

"my friends," says chadband, "eightpence is not much; it might justly
have been one and fourpence; it might justly have been half a crown.
o let us be joyful, joyful! o let us be joyful!"

with which remark, which appears from its sound to be an extract in
verse, mr. chadband stalks to the table, and before taking a chair,
lifts up his admonitory hand.

"my friends," says he, "what is this which we now behold as being
spread before us? refreshment. do we need refreshment then, my
friends? we do. and why do we need refreshment, my friends? because
we are but mortal, because we are but sinful, because we are but of
the earth, because we are not of
 
 ___________________________
 
ort work of
you!" says the constable, giving him a passionless shake. "my
instructions are that you are to move on. i have told you so five
hundred times."

"but where?" cries the boy.

"well! really, constable, you know," says mr. snagsby wistfully, and
coughing behind his hand his cough of great perplexity and doubt,
"really, that does seem a question. where, you know?"

"my instructions don't go to that," replies the constable. "my
instructions are that this boy is to move on."

do you hear, jo? it is nothing to you or to any one else that the
great lights of the parliamentary sky have failed for some few years
in this business to set you the example of moving on. the one grand
recipe remains for you--the profound philosophical prescription--the
be-all and the end-all of your strange existence upon earth. move on!
you are by no means to move off, jo, for the great lights can't at
all agree about that. move on!

mr. snagsby says nothing to this effect, says nothing at all indeed,
but c
 
 ___________________________
 
 the whole household are assembled.

"the simple question is, sir," says the constable, "whether you know
this boy. he says you do."

mrs. snagsby, from her elevation, instantly cries out, "no he don't!"

"my lit-tle woman!" says mr. snagsby, looking up the staircase. "my
love, permit me! pray have a moment's patience, my dear. i do know
something of this lad, and in what i know of him, i can't say that
there's any harm; perhaps on the contrary, constable." to whom the
law-stationer relates his joful and woeful experience, suppressing
the half-crown fact.

"well!" says the constable, "so far, it seems, he had grounds for
what he said. when i took him into custody up in holborn, he said you
knew him. upon that, a young man who was in the crowd said he was
acquainted with you, and you were a respectable housekeeper, and if
i'd call and make the inquiry, he'd appear. the young man don't seem
inclined to keep his word, but--oh! here is the young man!"

enter mr. guppy, who nods to mr. snagsb
 
 ___________________________
 
 with the
chivalry of clerkship to the ladies on the stairs.

"i was strolling away from the office just now when i found this row
going on," says mr. guppy to the law-stationer, "and as your name was
mentioned, i thought it was right the thing should be looked into."

"it was very good-natured of you, sir," says mr. snagsby, "and i am
obliged to you." and mr. snagsby again relates his experience, again
suppressing the half-crown fact.

"now, i know where you live," says the constable, then, to jo. "you
live down in tom-all-alone's. that's a nice innocent place to live
in, ain't it?"

"i can't go and live in no nicer place, sir," replies jo. "they
wouldn't have nothink to say to me if i wos to go to a nice innocent
place fur to live. who ud go and let a nice innocent lodging to such
a reg'lar one as me!"

"you are very poor, ain't you?" says the constable.

"yes, i am indeed, sir, wery poor in gin'ral," replies jo. "i leave
you to judge now! i shook these two half-crowns out of him," say
 
 ___________________________
 
s the
constable, producing them to the company, "in only putting my hand
upon him!"

"they're wot's left, mr. snagsby," says jo, "out of a sov-ring as wos
give me by a lady in a wale as sed she wos a servant and as come to
my crossin one night and asked to be showd this 'ere ouse and the
ouse wot him as you giv the writin to died at, and the berrin-ground
wot he's berrid in. she ses to me she ses 'are you the boy at the
inkwhich?' she ses. i ses 'yes' i ses. she ses to me she ses 'can you
show me all them places?' i ses 'yes i can' i ses. and she ses to me
'do it' and i dun it and she giv me a sov'ring and hooked it. an
 
 ___________________________
 
d i
an't had much of the sov'ring neither," says jo, with dirty tears,
"fur i had to pay five bob, down in tom-all-alone's, afore they'd
square it fur to give me change, and then a young man he thieved
another five while i was asleep and another boy he thieved ninepence
and the landlord he stood drains round with a lot more on it."

"you don't expect anybody to believe this, about the lady and the
sovereign, do you?" says the constable, eyeing him aside with
ineffable disdain.

"i don't know as i do, sir," replies jo. "i don't expect nothink at

 
 ___________________________
 
all, sir, much, but that's the true hist'ry on it."

"you see what he is!" the constable observes to the audience. "well,
mr. snagsby, if i don't lock him up this time, will you engage for
his moving on?"

"no!" cries mrs. snagsby from the stairs.

"my little woman!" pleads her husband. "constable, i have no doubt
he'll move on. you know you really must do it," says mr. snagsby.

"i'm everyways agreeable, sir," says the hapless jo.

"do it, then," observes the constable. "you know what you have got to
do. do it! and recollect you won't get off so easy next time. catch
hold of your money. now, the sooner you're five mile off, the better
for all parties."

with this farewell hint and pointing generally to the setting sun as
a likely place to move on to, the constable bids his auditors good
afternoon and makes the echoes of cook's court perform slow music for
him as he walks away on the shady side, carrying his iron-bound h
 
 ___________________________
 
at
in his hand for a little ventilation.

now, jo's improbable story concerning the lady and the sovereign has
awakened more or less the curiosity of all the company. mr. guppy,
who has an inquiring mind in matters of evidence and who has
been suffering severely from the lassitude of the long vacation,
takes that interest in the case that he enters on a regular
cross-examination of the witness, which is found so interesting by
the ladies that mrs. snagsby politely invites him to step upstairs
and drink a cup of tea, if he will excuse the disar
 
 ___________________________
 
ranged state of
the tea-table, consequent on their previous exertions. mr. guppy
yielding his assent to this proposal, jo is requested to follow into
the drawing-room doorway, where mr. guppy takes him in hand as a
witness, patting him into this shape, that shape, and the other shape
like a butterman dealing with so much butter, and worrying him
according to the best models. nor is the examination unlike many such
model displays, both in respect of its eliciting nothing and of its
being lengthy, for mr. guppy is sensible of his talent, and mrs.
snagsby feels not only that it gratifies her inquisitive disposition,

 
 ___________________________
 
ays mr. guppy.

"before i married my present husband," says mrs. chadband.

"was you a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy, transferring
his cross-examination.

"no."

"not a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy.

mrs. chadband shakes her head.

"perhaps you were acquainted with somebody who was a party in
something, ma'am?" says mr. guppy, who likes nothing better than to
model his conversation on forensic principles.

"not exactly that, either," replies mrs. chadband, humouring the joke
with a hard-favoured smile.

"not exactly that, either!" repeats mr. guppy. "very good. pray,
ma'am, was it a lady of your acquaintance who had some transactions
(we will not at present say what transactions) with kenge and
carboy's office, or was it a gentleman of your acquaintance? take
time, ma'am. we shall come to it presently. man or woman, ma'am?"

"neither," says mrs. chadband as before.

"oh! a child!" says mr. guppy, throwing on the admiring mrs. snagsby
the regular acute professiona
 
 ___________________________
 
rtainly not the case so far as he was concerned) "of the
comforts which have been provided for us. may this house live upon
the fatness of the land; may corn and wine be plentiful therein; may
it grow, may it thrive, may it prosper, may it advance, may it
proceed, may it press forward! but, my friends, have we partaken of
anything else? we have. my friends, of what else have we partaken? of
spiritual profit? yes. from whence have we derived that spiritual
profit? my young friend, stand forth!"

jo, thus apostrophized, gives a slouch backward, and another slouch
forward, and another slouch to each side, and confronts the eloquent
chadband with evident doubts of his intentions.

"my young friend," says chadband, "you are to us a pearl, you are to
us a diamond, you are to us a gem, you are to us a jewel. and why, my
young friend?"

"i don't know," replies jo. "i don't know nothink."

"my young friend," says chadband, "it is because you know nothing
that you are to us a gem and jewel. for wh
 
 ___________________________
 
you, my young
friend? are you a beast of the field? no. a bird of the air? no. a
fish of the sea or river? no. you are a human boy, my young friend. a
human boy. o glorious to be a human boy! and why glorious, my young
friend? because you are capable of receiving the lessons of wisdom,
because you are capable of profiting by this discourse which i now
deliver for your good, because you are not a stick, or a staff, or a
stock, or a stone, or a post, or a pillar.

   o running stream of sparkling joy
   to be a soaring human boy!

and do you cool yourself in that stream now, my young friend? no.
why do you not cool yourself in that stream now? because you are in a
state of darkness, because you are in a state of obscurity, because
you are in a state of sinfulness, because you are in a state of
bondage. my young friend, what is bondage? let us, in a spirit of
love, inquire."

at this threatening stage of the discourse, jo, who seems to have
been gradually going out of his mind, smears his r
 
 ___________________________
 
es
her belief that he is a limb of the arch-fiend.

"my friends," says mr. chadband with his persecuted chin folding
itself into its fat smile again as he looks round, "it is right that
i should be humbled, it is right that i should be tried, it is right
that i should be mortified, it is right that i should be corrected. i
stumbled, on sabbath last, when i thought with pride of my three
hours' improving. the account is now favourably balanced: my creditor
has accepted a composition. o let us be joyful, joyful! o let us be
joyful!"

great sensation on the part of mrs. snagsby.

"my friends," says chadband, looking round him in conclusion, "i will
not proceed with my young friend now. will you come to-morrow, my
young friend, and inquire of this good lady where i am to be found to
deliver a discourse unto you, and will you come like the thirsty
swallow upon the next day, and upon the day after that, and upon the
day after that, and upon many pleasant days, to hear discourses?"
(this with a
 
 ___________________________
 
 cow-like lightness.)

jo, whose immediate object seems to be to get away on any terms,
gives a shuffling nod. mr. guppy then throws him a penny, and mrs.
snagsby calls to guster to see him safely out of the house. but
before he goes downstairs, mr. snagsby loads him with some broken
meats from the table, which he carries away, hugging in his arms.

so, mr. chadband--of whom the persecutors say that it is no wonder he
should go on for any length of time uttering such abominable
nonsense, but that the wonder rather is th
 
 ___________________________
 
at he should ever leave
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life
until he invests a little capital of supper in the oil-trade. jo
moves on, through the long vacation, down to blackfriars bridge,
where he finds a baking stony corner wherein to settle to his repast.

and there he sits, munching and gnawing, and looking up at the great
cross on the summit of st. paul's cathedral, glittering above a
red-and-violet-tinted cloud of smoke. from the boy's face one might
suppose that sacred emblem to be, in his eyes, the crowning confusion
of the great, confused city--so golden, so high up, so far out of his
reach. there he sits, 
 
 ___________________________
 
plays the deepest games of
chess without any adversary.

it is a source of much gratification to mr. guppy, therefore, to find
the new-comer constantly poring over the papers in jarndyce and
jarndyce, for he well knows that nothing but confusion and failure
can come of that. his satisfaction communicates itself to a third
saunterer through the long vacation in kenge and carboy's office, to
wit, young smallweed.

whether young smallweed (metaphorically called small and eke chick
weed, as it were jocularly to express a fledgling) was ever a boy is
much doubted in lincoln's inn. he is now something under fifteen and
an old limb of the law. he is facetiously understood to entertain a
passion for a lady at a cigar-shop in the neighbourhood of chancery
lane and for her sake to have broken off a contract with another
lady, to whom he had been engaged some years. he is a town-made
article, of small stature and weazen features, but may be perceived
from a considerable distance by means of his ver
 
 ___________________________
 
e and reclines his head upon the window-sill in a
state of hopeless languor.

while thus looking out into the shade of old square, lincoln's inn,
surveying the intolerable bricks and mortar, mr. guppy becomes
conscious of a manly whisker emerging from the cloistered walk below
and turning itself up in the direction of his face. at the same time,
a low whistle is wafted through the inn and a suppressed voice cries,
"hip! gup-py!"

"why, you don't mean it!" says mr. guppy, aroused. "small! here's
jobling!" small's head looks out of window too and nods to jobling.

"where have you sprung up from?" inquires mr. guppy.

"from the market-gardens down by deptford. i can't stand it any
longer. i must enlist. i say! i wish you'd lend me half a crown. upon
my soul, i'm hungry."

jobling looks hungry and also has the appearance of having run to
seed in the market-gardens down by deptford.

"i say! just throw out half a crown if you have got one to spare. i
want to get some dinner."

"will you come 
 
 ___________________________
 
and dine with me?" says mr. guppy, throwing out the
coin, which mr. jobling catches neatly.

"how long should i have to hold out?" says jobling.

"not half an hour. i am only waiting here till the enemy goes,
returns mr. guppy, butting inward with his head.

"what enemy?"

"a new one. going to be articled. will you wait?"

"can you give a fellow anything to read in the meantime?" says mr.
jobling.

smallweed suggests the law list. but mr. jobling declares with much
earnestness that he "can't stand it."

"you shall have the paper," says mr. guppy. "he shall bring it down.
but you had better not be seen about here. sit on our staircase and
read. it's a quiet place."

jobling nods intelligence and acquiescence. the sagacious smallweed
supplies him with the newspaper and occasionally drops his eye upon
him from the landing as a precaution against his becoming disgusted
with waiting and making an untimely departure. at last the enemy
re
 
 ___________________________
 
treats, and then smallweed fetches mr. jobling up.

"well, and how are you?" says mr. guppy, shaking hands with him.

"so, so. how are you?"

mr. guppy replying that he is not much to boast of, mr. jobling
ventures on the question, "how is she?" this mr. guppy resents as a
liberty, retorting, "jobling, there are chords in the human mind--"
jobling begs pardon.

"any subject but that!" says mr. guppy with a gloomy enjoyment of his
injury. "for there are chords, jobling--"

mr. jobling begs pardon again.

during this short colloquy, the active smallweed, who is of the
dinner party, has written in legal characters on a slip of paper,
"return immediately." this notification to all whom it may concern,
he inserts in the letter-box, and then putting on the tall hat at the
angle of inclination at which mr. guppy wears his, informs his patron
that they may now make themselves scarce.

accordingly they betake themselves to a neighbouring dining-house, of
the class known among i
 
 ___________________________
 
sh
wisdom. if he ever lay in a cradle, it seems as if he must have lain
there in a tail-coat. he has an old, old eye, has smallweed; and he
drinks and smokes in a monkeyish way; and his neck is stiff in his
collar; and he is never to be taken in; and he knows all about it,
whatever it is. in short, in his bringing up he has been so nursed by
law and equity that he has become a kind of fossil imp, to account
for whose terrestrial existence it is reported at the public offices
that his father was john doe and his mother the only female member of
the roe family, also that his first long-clothes were made from a
blue bag.

into the dining-house, unaffected by the seductive show in the window
of artificially whitened cauliflowers and poultry, verdant baskets of
peas, coolly blooming cucumbers, and joints ready for the spit, mr.
smallweed leads the way. they know him there and defer to him. he has
his favourite box, he bespeaks all the papers, he is down upon bald
patriarchs, who keep them mor
 
 ___________________________
 
e than ten minutes afterwards. it is of
no use trying him with anything less than a full-sized "bread" or
proposing to him any joint in cut unless it is in the very best cut.
in the matter of gravy he is adamant.

conscious of his elfin power and submitting to his dread experience,
mr. guppy consults him in the choice of that day's banquet, turning
an appealing look towards him as the waitress repeats the catalogue
of viands and saying "what do you take, chick?" chick, out of the
profundity of his artfulness, preferring "veal and ham and french
beans--and don't you forget the stuffing, polly" (with an unearthly
cock of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s venerable eye), mr. guppy and mr. jobling give the like
order. three pint pots of half-and-half are superadded. quickly the
waitress returns bearing what is apparently a model of the tower of
babel but what is really a pile of plates and flat tin dish-covers.
mr. smallweed, approving of what is set before him, conveys
intelligent benignity into his ancient eye and winks upon her. then,
amid a constant coming in, and going out, and running about, and a
clatter of crockery, and a rumbling up and down of the machine which
brings the 
 
 ___________________________
 
nice cuts from the kitchen, and a shrill crying for more
nice cuts down the speaking-pipe, and a shrill reckoning of the cost
of nice cuts that have been disposed of, and a general flush and
steam of hot joints, cut and uncut, and a considerably heated
atmosphere in which the soiled knives and tablecloths seem to break
out spontaneously into eruptions of grease and blotches of beer, the
legal triumvirate appease their appetites.

mr. jobling is buttoned up closer than mere adornment might require.
his hat presents at the rims a peculiar appearance of a glistening
nature, as if it had been a favourite snail-promenade. the same
phenomenon is visible on some parts of his coat, and particularly at
the seams. he has the faded appearance of a gentleman in embarrassed
circumstances; even his light whiskers droop with something of a
shabby air.

his appetite is so vigorous that it suggests spare living for some
little time back. he ma
 
 ___________________________
 
kes such a speedy end of his plate of veal and
ham, bringing it to a close while his companions are yet midway in
theirs, that mr. guppy proposes another. "thank you, guppy," says mr.
jobling, "i really don't know but what i will take another."

another being brought, he falls to with great goodwill.

mr. guppy takes silent notice of him at intervals until he is half
way through this second plate and stops to take an enjoying pull at
his pint pot of half-and-half (also renewed) and stretches out his
legs and rubs his hands. beholding him in which glow of contentment,
mr. guppy says, "you are a man again, tony!"

"well, not quite yet," says mr. jobling. "say, just born."

"will you take any other vegetables? grass? peas? summer cabbage?"

"thank you, guppy," says mr. jobling. "i really don't know but what i
will take summer cabbage."

order given; with the sarcastic addition (from mr. smallweed) of
"without slugs
 
 ___________________________
 
, polly!" and cabbage produced.

"i am growing up, guppy," says mr. jobling, plying his knife and fork
with a relishing steadiness.

"glad to hear it."

"in fact, i have just turned into my teens," says mr. jobling.

he says no more until he has performed his task, which he achieves as
messrs. guppy and smallweed finish theirs, thus getting over the
ground in excellent style and beating those two gentlemen easily by a
veal and ham and a cabbage.

"now, small," says mr. guppy, "what would you recommend about
pastry?"

"marrow puddings," says mr. smallweed instantly.

"aye, aye!" cries mr. jobling with an arch look. "you're there, are
you? thank you, mr. guppy, i don't know but what i will take a marro
 
 ___________________________
 
w
pudding."

three marrow puddings being produced, mr. jobling adds in a pleasant
humour that he is coming of age fast. to these succeed, by command of
mr. smallweed, "three cheshires," and to those "three small rums."
this apex of the entertainment happily reached, mr. jobling puts up
his legs on the carpeted seat (having his own side of the box to
himself), leans against the wall, and says, "i am grown up now,
guppy. i have arrived at maturity."

"what do you think, now," says mr. guppy, "about--you don't mind
smallweed?"

"not the least in the world. i have the pleasure of drinking his good
health."

"sir, to you!" says mr. smallweed.

"i was saying, what do you think now," pursues mr. guppy, "of
enlisting?"

"why, what i may think after dinner," returns mr. j
 
 ___________________________
 
obling, "is one
thing, my dear guppy, and what i may think before dinner is another
thing. still, even after dinner, i ask myself the question, what am i
to do? how am i to live? ill fo manger, you know," says mr. jobling,
pronouncing that word as if he meant a necessary fixture in an
english stable. "ill fo manger. that's the french saying, and
mangering is as necessary to me as it is to a frenchman. or more so."

mr. smallweed is decidedly of opinion "much more so."

"if any man had told me," pursues jobling, "even so lately as when
you and i had the frisk down in lincolnshire, guppy, and drove over
to see that house at castle wold--"

mr. smallweed corrects him--chesney wold.

"chesney wold. (i thank my 
 
 ___________________________
 
honourable friend for that cheer.) if any
man had told me then that i should be as hard up at the present time
as i literally find myself, i should have--well, i should have
pitched into him," says mr. jobling, taking a little rum-and-water
with an air of desperate resignation; "i should have let fly at his
head."

"still, tony, you were on the wrong side of the post then,"
remonstrates mr. guppy. "you were talking about nothing else in the
gig."

"guppy," says mr. jobling, "i will not deny it. i was on the wrong
side of the post. but i trusted to things coming round."

that very popular trust in flat things coming round! not in their
being beaten round, or worked round, but in their "coming" round! as
though a lunatic should trust in the world's "coming" triangular!

"i had confident expectations that things would come round and be all
square," says mr. jobling with some vagueness of expression and
perhaps of meaning too. "but i was disappointed. they never
 
 ___________________________
 
n. and of any
new professional connexion too, for if i was to give a reference
to-morrow, it would be mentioned and would sew me up. then what's a
fellow to do? i have been keeping out of the way and living cheap
down about the market-gardens, but what's the use of living cheap
when you have got no money? you might as well live dear."

"better," mr. smallweed thinks.

"certainly. it's the fashionable way; and fashion and whiskers have
been my weaknesses, and i don't care who knows it," says mr. jobling.
"they are great weaknesses--damme, sir, they are great. well,"
proceeds mr. jobling after a defiant visit to his rum-and-water,
"what can a fellow do, i ask you, but enlist?"

mr. guppy comes more fully into the conversation to state what, in
his opinion, a fellow can do. his manner is the gravely impressive
manner of a man who has not committed himself in life otherwise than
as he has become the victim of a tender sorrow of the heart.

"jobling," says mr. guppy, "myself and our mutual fr
 
 ___________________________
 
iend smallweed--"

mr. smallweed modestly observes, "gentlemen both!" and drinks.

"--have had a little conversation on this matter more than once since
you--"

"say, got the sack!" cries mr. jobling bitterly. "say it, guppy. you
mean it."

"no-o-o! left the inn," mr. smallweed delicately suggests.

"since you left the inn, jobling," says mr. guppy; "and i have
mentioned to our mutual friend smallweed a plan i have lately thought
of proposing. you know snagsby the stationer?"

"i know there is such a stationer," returns mr. jobling. "he was not
ours, and i am not acquainted with him."

"he is ours, jobling, and i am acquainted with him," mr. guppy
retorts. "well, sir! i have lately become better acquainted with him
through some accidental circumstances that have made me a visitor of
his in private life. those circums
 
 ___________________________
 
tances it is not necessary to offer
in argument. they may--or they may not--have some reference to a
subject which may--or may not--have cast its shadow on my existence."

as it is mr. guppy's perplexing way with boastful misery to tempt his
particular friends into this subject, and the moment they touch it,
to turn on them with that trenchant severity about the chords in the
human mind, both mr. jobling and mr. smallweed decline the pitfall by
remaining silent.

"such things may be," repeats mr. guppy, "or they may not be. they
are no part of the case. it is enough to mention that both mr. and
mrs. snagsby are very willing to oblige me and that snagsby has, in
busy times, a good deal of copying work to give out. he has all
tulkinghorn's, and an excellent business besides. i believe if our
mutual friend smallweed were put into the box, he could prove this?"

mr. smallweed nods and appears 
 
 ___________________________
 
greedy to be sworn.

"now, gentlemen of the jury," says mr. guppy, "--i mean, now,
jobling--you may say this is a poor prospect of a living. granted.
but it's better than nothing, and better than enlistment. you want
time. there must be time for these late affairs to blow over. you
might live through it on much worse terms than by writing for
snagsby."

mr. jobling is about to interrupt when the sagacious smallweed checks
him with a dry cough and the words, "hem! shakspeare!"

"there are two branches to this subject, jobling," says mr. guppy.
"that is the first. i come to the second. you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane. come, jobling," says mr. guppy in his
encouraging cross-examination-tone, "i think you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane?"

"i know him by sight," says mr. jobling.

"you know him by sight. very well. and you kno
 
 ___________________________
 
w little flite?"

"everybody knows her," says mr. jobling.

"everybody knows her. very well. now it has been one of my duties of
late to pay flite a certain weekly allowance, deducting from it the
amount of her weekly rent, which i have paid (in consequence of
instructions i have received) to krook himself, regularly in her
presence. this has brought me into communication with krook and into
a knowledge of his house and his habits. i know he has a room to let.
you may live there at a very low charge under any name you like, as
quietly as if you w
 
 ___________________________
 
ere a hundred miles off. he'll ask no questions
and would accept you as a tenant at a word from me--before the clock
strikes, if you chose. and i tell you another thing, jobling," says
mr. guppy, who has suddenly lowered his voice and become familiar
again, "he's an extraordinary old chap--always rummaging among a
litter of papers and grubbing away at teaching himself to read and
write, without getting on a bit, as it seems to me. he is a most
extraordinary old chap, sir. i don't know but what it might be worth
a fellow's while to look him up a bit."

"you don't mean--" mr. jobling begins.

"i mean," returns mr. guppy, shrugging his shoulders with becoming
modesty
 
 ___________________________
 
d as this, so deep, so sly, and secret
(though i don't believe he is ever sober), i never came across. now,
he must be precious old, you know, and he has not a soul about him,
and he is reported to be immensely rich; and whether he is a
smuggler, or a receiver, or an unlicensed pawnbroker, or a
money-lender--all of which i have thought likely at different
times--it might pay you to knock up a sort of knowledge of him. i
don't see why you shouldn't go in for it, when everything else
suits."

mr. jobling, mr. guppy, and mr. smallweed all lean their elbows on
the table and their chins upon their hands, and look at the ceiling.
after a time, they all drink, slowly lean back, put their hands in
their pockets, and look at one another.

"if i had the energy i once possessed, tony!" says mr. guppy with a
sigh. "but there are chords in the human mind--"

expressing the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum-and-water,
mr. guppy concludes by resigning the adventure to tony jobling and
informin
 
 ___________________________
 
g him that during the vacation and while things are slack,
his purse, "as far as three or four or even five pound goes," will be
at his disposal. "for never shall it be said," mr. guppy adds with
emphasis, "that william guppy turned his back upon his friend!"

the latter part of the proposal is so directly to the purpose that
mr. jobling says with emotion, "guppy, my trump, your fist!" mr.
guppy presents it, saying, "jobling, my boy, there it is!" mr.
jobling returns, "guppy, we have been pals now for some years!" mr.
guppy replies, "jobling, we have."

they then shake hands, and mr. jobling adds in a feeling manner,
"thank you, guppy, i don't know but what i will take another glass
for old acquaintance sake."

"krook's last lodger died there," observes mr. guppy in an incidental
way.

"did he though!" says mr. jobling.

"there was a verdict. accidental death. you don't mind that?"

"no," says mr. jobling, "i don't mind it; but he might as well
 
 ___________________________
 
 have
died somewhere else. it's devilish odd that he need go and die at my
place!" mr. jobling quite resents this liberty, several times
returning to it with such remarks as, "there are places enough to die
in, i should think!" or, "he wouldn't have liked my dying at his
place, i dare say!"

however, the compact being virtually made, mr. guppy proposes to
dispatch the trusty smallweed to ascertain if mr. krook is at home,
as in that case they may complete the negotiation without delay. mr.
jobling approving, smallweed puts himself under the tall hat and
conveys it out of the dining-rooms in the guppy manner. he soon
returns with the intelligence that mr. krook is at home and that he
has seen him through the shop-door, sitting in the back premises,
sleeping "like one o'clock."

"then i'll pay," says mr. guppy, "and we'll go and see him. small,
what will it be?"

mr. smallweed, compelling the attendance of the waitress with one
hitch of his eyelash, instantly replies as follows: "four
 
 ___________________________
 
 sovereign, polly, and eighteenpence out!"

not at all excited by these stupendous calculations, smallweed
dismisses his friends with a cool nod and remains behind to take a
little admiring notice of polly, as opportunity may serve, and to
read the daily papers, which are so very large in proportion to
himself, shorn of his hat, that when he holds up the times to run his
eye over the columns, he seems to have retired for the night and to
have disappeared under the bedclothes.

mr. guppy and mr. jobling repair to the rag and bottle shop, where
they find krook still sleeping like one o'clock, that is to say,
breathing stertorously with his chin upon his breast and quite
insensible to any external sounds or even to gentle shaking. on the
table beside him, among the usual lumber, stand an empty gin-bottle
and a glass. the unwholesome air is so stained with this liquor that
even the green eyes of the cat upon her shelf, as they open and shut
and glimmer on the visitors, look drunk.

"hold up 
 
 ___________________________
 
here!" says mr. guppy, giving the relaxed figure of the old
man another shake. "mr. krook! halloa, sir!"

but it would seem as easy to wake a bundle of old clothes with a
spirituous heat smouldering in it. "did you ever see such a stupor as
he falls into, between drink and sleep?" says mr. guppy.

"if this is his regular sleep," returns jobling, rather alarmed,
"it'll last a long time one of these days, i am thinking."

"it's always more like a fit than a nap," says mr. guppy, shaking him
again. "halloa, your lordship! why, he might be robbed fifty times
over! open your eyes!"

after much ado, he opens them, but without appearing to see his
visitors or any other objects. though he crosses one leg on another,
and folds his hands, and several times closes and opens his parched
lips, he seems to all intents and purposes as insensibl
 
 ___________________________
 
apital, is capable of producing. with these magnificent
portraits, unworthily confined in a band-box during his seclusion
among the market-gardens, he decorates his apartment; and as the
galaxy gallery of british beauty wears every variety of fancy dress,
plays every variety of musical instrument, fondles every variety of
dog, ogles every variety of prospect, and is backed up by every
variety of flower-pot and balustrade, the result is very imposing.

but fashion is mr. weevle's, as it was tony jobling's, weakness. to
borrow yesterday's paper from the sol's arms of an evening and read
about the brilliant and distinguished meteors that are shooting
across the fashionable sky in every direction is unspeakable
consolation to him. to know what member of what brilliant and
distinguished circle accomplished the brilliant and distinguished
feat of joining it yesterday or contemplates the no less brilliant
and distinguished feat of leaving it to-morrow gives him a thrill of
joy. to be informed w
 
 ___________________________
 
of
evening have fallen on the court. at those times, when he is not
visited by mr. guppy or by a small light in his likeness quenched in
a dark hat, he comes out of his dull room--where he has inherited the
deal wilderness of desk bespattered with a rain of ink--and talks to
krook or is "very free," as they call it in the court, commendingly,
with any one disposed for conversation. wherefore, mrs. piper, who
leads the court, is impelled to offer two remarks to mrs. perkins:
firstly, that if her johnny was to have whiskers, she could wish 'em
to be identically like that young man's; and secondly, "mark my
words, mrs. perkins, ma'am, and don't you be surprised, lord bless
you, if that young man comes in at last for old krook's money!"




chapter xxi

the smallweed family


in a rather ill-favoured and ill-savoured neighbourhood, though one
of its rising grounds bears the name of mount pleasant, the elfin
smallweed, christened bartholomew and known on the domestic hearth as
bart, passes th
 
 ___________________________
 
 a breeze from the country that has lost its way
takes fright and makes a blind hurry to rush out again, it flings as
much dust in the eyes of allegory as the law--or mr. tulkinghorn, one
of its trustiest representatives--may scatter, on occasion, in the
eyes of the laity.

in his lowering magazine of dust, the universal article into which
his papers and himself, and all his clients, and all things of earth,
animate and inanimate, are resolving, mr. tulkinghorn sits at one of
the open windows enjoying a bottle of old port. though a hard-grained
man, close, dry, and silent, he can enjoy old wine with the best. he
has a priceless bin of port in some artful cellar under the fields,
which is one of his many secrets. when he dines alone in chambers, as
he has dined to-day, and has his bit of fish and his steak or chicken
brought in from the coffee-house, he descends with a candle to the
echoing regions below the deserted mansion, and heralded by a remote
reverberation of thundering doors, com
 
 ___________________________
 
es gravely back encircled by an
earthy atmosphere and carrying a bottle from which he pours a radiant
nectar, two score and ten years old, that blushes in the glass to
find itself so famous and fills the whole room with the fragrance of
southern grapes.

mr. tulkinghorn, sitting in the twilight by the open window, enjoys
his wine. as if it whispered to him of its fifty years of silence and
seclusion, it shuts him up the closer. more impenetrable than ever,
he sits, and drinks, and mellows as it were in secrecy, pondering at
that twilight hour on all the mysteries he knows, associated with
darkening woods in the country, and vast blank shut-up houses in
town, and perhaps sparing a thought or two for himself, and his
family history, and his money, and his will--all a mystery to every
one--and that one bachelor 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir? but i am not surprised to hear it, i am sure. it
might be--any age almost." after rendering this general tribute to
the port, mr. snagsby in his modesty coughs an apology behind his
hand for drinking anything so precious.

"will you run over, once again, what the boy said?" asks mr.
tulkinghorn, putting his hands into the pockets of his rusty
smallclothes and leaning quietly back in his chair.

"with pleasure, sir."

then, with fidelity, though with some prolixity, the law-stationer
repeats jo's statement made to the assembled guests at his house. on
coming to the end of his narrative, he gives a great start and breaks
off with, "dear me, sir, i wasn't aware there was any other gentleman
present!"

mr. snagsby is dismayed to see, standing with an attentive face
between himself and the lawyer at a little distance from the table, a
person with a hat and stick in his hand who was not there when he
himself came in and has not since entered by the door or by either of
the windows. there i
 
 ___________________________
 
eal objection to accompany mr. bucket to the
place in question," pursues the lawyer, "i shall feel obliged to you
if you will do so."

in a moment's hesitation on the part of mr. snagsby, bucket dips down
to the bottom of his mind.

"don't you be afraid of hurting the boy," he says. "you won't do
that. it's all right as far as the boy's concerned. we shall only
bring him here to ask him a question or so i want to put to him, and
he'll be paid for his trouble and sent away again. it'll be a good
job for him. i promise you, as a man, that you shall see the boy sent
away all right. don't you be afraid of hurting him; you an't going to
do that."

"very well, mr. tulkinghorn!" cries mr. snagsby cheerfully. and
reassured, "since that's the case--"

"yes! and lookee here, mr. snagsby," resumes bucket, taking him aside
by the arm, tapping him familiarly on the breast, and speaking in a
confidential tone. "you're a man of the world, you know, and a man of
business, and a man of sense. that's what
 
 ___________________________
 
ses, darby?" mr. bucket coolly asks as he
turns his bull's-eye on a line of stinking ruins.

darby replies that "all them are," and further that in all, for
months and months, the people "have been down by dozens" and have
been carried out dead and dying "like sheep with the rot." bucket
observing to mr. snagsby as they go on again that he looks a little
poorly, mr. snagsby answers that he feels as if he couldn't breathe
the dreadful air.

there is inquiry made at various houses for a boy named jo. as few
people are known in tom-all-alone's by any christian sign, there is
much reference to mr. snagsby whether he means carrots, or the
colonel, or gallows, or young chisel, or terrier tip, or lanky, or
the brick. mr. snagsby describes over and over again. there are
conflicting opinions respecting the original of his picture. some
think it must be carrots, some say the brick. the colonel is
produced, but is not at all near the thing. whenever mr. snagsby and
his conductors are stationary, th
 
 ___________________________
 
e crowd flows round, and from its
squalid depths obsequious advice heaves up to mr. bucket. whenever
they move, and the angry bull's-eyes glare, it fades away and flits
about them up the alleys, and in the ruins, and behind the walls, as
before.

at last there is a lair found out where toughy, or the tough subject,
lays him down at night; and it is thought that the tough subject may
be jo. comparison of notes between mr. snagsby and the proprietress
of the house--a drunken face tied up in a black bundle, and flaring
out of a heap of rags on the floor of a dog-hutch which is her
private apartment--leads to the establishment of this conclusion.
toughy has gone to the doctor's to get a bottle of stuff for a sick
woman but will be here anon.

"and who have we got here to-night?" says mr. bucket, opening another
door and glaring in with his bull's-eye. "two drunken men, eh? and
two w
 
 ___________________________
 
's my dead child that
makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its being taken
away from her now. while she thinks that, i think what fortune would
i give to have my darling back. but we mean the same thing, if we
knew how to say it, us two mothers does in our poor hearts!"

as mr. snagsby blows his nose and coughs his cough of sympathy, a
step is heard without. mr. bucket throws his light into the doorway
and says to mr. snagsby, "now, what do you say to toughy? will he
do?"

"that's jo," says mr. snagsby.

jo stands amazed in the disk of light, like a ragged figure in a
magic-lantern, trembling to think that he has offended against the
law in not having moved on far enough. mr. snagsby, however, giving
him the consolatory assurance, "it's only a job you will be paid for,
jo," he recovers; and on being taken outside by mr. bucket for a
little private confabulation, tells his tale satisfactorily, though
out of breath.

"i have squared it with the lad," says mr. bucket, returnin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, "and
it's all right. now, mr. snagsby, we're ready for you."

first, jo has to complete his errand of good nature by handing over
the physic he has been to get, which he delivers with the laconic
verbal direction that "it's to be all took d'rectly." secondly, mr.
snagsby has to lay upon the table half a crown, his usual panacea for
an immense variety of afflictions. thirdly, mr. bucket has to take jo
by the arm a little above the elbow and walk him on before him,
without which observance neither the tough subject nor any other
subject could be professionally conducted to lincoln's inn fields.
these arrangements completed, they give the women good night and come
out once more into black and foul tom-all-alone's.

by the noisome ways through which they descended into that pit, they
gradually emerge from it, the crowd flitting, and whistling, and
skulking about them until they come to the verg
 
 ___________________________
 
cket and that there is no need to ring. for a man
so expert in most things of that kind, bucket takes time to open the
door and makes some noise too. it may be that he sounds a note of
preparation.

howbeit, they come at last into the hall, where a lamp is burning,
and so into mr. tulkinghorn's usual room--the room where he drank his
old wine to-night. he is not there, but his two old-fashioned
candlesticks are, and the room is tolerably light.

mr. bucket, still having his professional hold of jo and appearing to
mr. snagsby to possess an unlimited number of eyes, makes a little
way into this room, when jo starts and stops.

"what's the matter?" says bucket in a whisper.

"there she is!" cries jo.

"who!"

"the lady!"

a female figure, closely veiled, stands in the middle of the room,
where the light falls upon it. it is quite still and silent. the
front of the figure is towards them, but it takes no notice of their
entrance and remains like a statue.

"now, tell me," says bucket aloud,
 
 ___________________________
 
 "how you know that to be the
lady."

"i know the wale," replies jo, staring, "and the bonnet, and the
gownd."

"be quite sure of what you say, tough," returns bucket, narrowly
observant of him. "look again."

"i am a-looking as hard as ever i can look," says jo with starting
eyes, "and that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the gownd."

"what about those rings you told me of?" asks bucket.

"a-sparkling all over here," says jo, rubbing the fingers of his left
hand on the knuckles of his right without taking his eyes from the
figure.

the figure removes the right-hand glove and shows the hand.

"now, what do you say to that?" asks bucket.

jo shakes his head. "not rings a bit like them. not a hand like
that."

"what are you talking of?" says bucket, evidently pleased though, and
well pleased too.

"hand was a deal whiter, a deal delicater, and a deal smaller,"
returns jo.

"why, you'll tell me i'm my own mother next,"
 
 ___________________________
 
 says mr. bucket. "do
you recollect the lady's voice?"

"i think i does," says jo.

the figure speaks. "was it at all like this? i will speak as long as
you like if you are not sure. was it this voice, or at all like this
voice?"

jo looks aghast at mr. bucket. "not a bit!"

"then, what," retorts that worthy, pointing to the figure, "did you
say it was the lady for?"

"cos," says jo with a perplexed stare but without being at all shaken
in his certainty, "cos that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the
gownd. it is her and it an't her. it an't her hand, nor yet her
rings, nor yet her woice. but that there's the wale, the bonnet, and
the gownd, and they're wore the same way wot she wore 'em, and it's
her height wot she wos, and she giv me a sov'ring and hooked it."

"well!" says mr. bucket slightly, "we haven't got much good out of
you. but, however, here's five shillings fo
 
 ___________________________
 
ce has a pupil over the way, esther," said caddy, "and got the
key for us. so if you will walk round and round here with me, we can
lock ourselves in and i can tell you comfortably what i wanted to see
your dear good face about."

"very well, my dear," said i. "nothing could be better." so caddy,
after affectionately squeezing the dear good face as she called it,
locked the gate, and took my arm, and we began to walk round the
garden very cosily.

"you see, esther," said caddy, who thoroughly enjoyed a little
confidence, "after you spoke to me about its being wrong to marry
without ma's knowledge, or even to keep ma long in the dark
respecting our engagement--though i don't believe ma cares much for
me, i must say--i thought it right to mention your opinions to
prince. in the first place because i want to profit by everything you
tell me, and in the second place because i have no secrets from
prince."

"i hope he approved, caddy?"

"oh, my dear! i assure you he would approve of anything 
 
 ___________________________
 
you could
say. you have no idea what an opinion he has of you!"

"indeed!"

"esther, it's enough to make anybody but me jealous," said caddy,
laughing and shaking her head; "but it only makes me joyful, for you
are the first friend i ever had, and the best friend i ever can have,
and nobody can respect and love you too much to please me."

"upon my word, caddy," said i, "you are in the general conspiracy to
keep me in a good humour. well, my dear?"

"well! i am going to tell you," replied caddy, crossing her hands
confidentially upon my arm. "so we talked a good deal about it, and
so i said to prince, 'prince, as miss summerson--'"

"i hope you didn't say 'miss summerson'?"

"no. i didn't
 
 ___________________________
 
his hat and gloves, as
a model of deportment, on the sofa in his private apartment--the only
comfortable room in the house. he appeared to have dressed at his
leisure in the intervals of a light collation, and his dressing-case,
brushes, and so forth, all of quite an elegant kind, lay about.

"father, miss summerson; miss jellyby."

"charmed! enchanted!" said mr. turveydrop, rising with his
high-shouldered bow. "permit me!" handing chairs. "be seated!"
kissing the tips of his left fingers. "overjoyed!" shutting his eyes
and rolling. "my little retreat is made a paradise." recomposing
himself on the sofa like the second gentleman in europe.

"again you find us, miss summerson," said he, "using our little arts
to polish, polish! again the sex stimulates us and rewards us by the
condescension of its lovely presence. it is much in these times (and
we have made an awfully degenerating business of it since the days of
his royal highness the prince regent--my patron, if i may presume to
say so)
 
 ___________________________
 
rtment really
was, why that was all for the best too, and who would wish them to be
wiser? i did not wish them to be any wiser and indeed was half
ashamed of not entirely believing in him myself. and i looked up at
the stars, and thought about travellers in distant countries and the
stars they saw, and hoped i might always be so blest and happy as to
be useful to some one in my small way.

they were so glad to see me when i got home, as they always were,
that i could have sat down and cried for joy if that had not been a
method of making myself disagreeable. everybody in the house, from
the lowest to the highest, showed me such a bright face of welcome,
and spoke so cheerily, and was so happy to do anything for me, that i
suppose there never was such a fortunate little creature in the
world.

we got into such a chatty state that night, through ada and my
guardian drawing me out to tell them all about caddy, that i went on
prose, prose, prosing for a length of time. at last i got up to my
 
 ___________________________
 
ith
his love, and it was all done for the love of you. me and tom was to
be sure to remember it."

charley dried her eyes and entered on her functions, going in her
matronly little way about and about the room and folding up
everything she could lay her hands upon. presently charley came
creeping back to my side and said, "oh, don't cry, if you please,
miss."

and i said again, "i can't help it, charley."

and charley said again, "no, miss, nor i can't help it." and so,
after all, i did cry for joy indeed, and so did she.




chapter xxiv

an appeal case


as soon as richard and i had held the conversation of which i have
given an account, richard communicated the state of his mind to mr.
jarndyce. i doubt if my guardian were altogether taken by surprise
when he received the representation, though it caused him much
uneasiness and disappointment. he and richard were often closeted
together, late at night and early in the morning, and passed whole
days in london, and had innumerable appoi
 
 ___________________________
 
 elicit from richard himself sweeping assurances
that everything was going on capitally and that it really was all
right at last, our anxiety was not much relieved by him.

we learnt, however, as the time went on, that a new application was
made to the lord chancellor on richard's behalf as an infant and a
ward, and i don't know what, and that there was a quantity of
talking, and that the lord chancellor described him in open court as
a vexatious and capricious infant, and that the matter was adjourned
and readjourned, and referred, and reported on, and petitioned about
until richard began to doubt (as he told us) whether, if he entered
the army at all, it would not be as a veteran of seventy or eighty
years of age. at last an appointment was made for him to see the lord
chancellor again in his private room, and there the lord chancellor
very seriously reproved him for trifling with time and not knowing
his mind--"a pretty good joke, i think," said richard, "from that
quarter!"--and at l
 
 ___________________________
 
 exercise.

thus, vacation succeeded term, and term succeeded vacation. we
sometimes heard of jarndyce and jarndyce as being in the paper or out
of the paper, or as being to be mentioned, or as being to be spoken
to; and it came on, and it went off. richard, who was now in a
professor's house in london, was able to be with us less frequently
than before; my guardian still maintained the same reserve; and so
time passed until the commission was obtained and richard received
directions with it to join a regiment in ireland.

he arrived post-haste with the intelligence one evening, and had a
long conference with my guardian. upwards of an hour elapsed before
my guardian put his head into the room where ada and i were sitting
and said, "come in, my dears!" we went in and found richard, whom we
had last seen in high spirits, leaning on the chimney-piece looking
mortified and angry.

"rick and i, ada," said mr. jarndyce, "are not quite of one mind.
come, come, rick, put a brighter face upon it
 
 ___________________________
 
r, "that it's
quite natural in you to think so, but i don't think so. i must do my
duty, rick, or you could never care for me in cool blood; and i hope
you will always care for me, cool and hot."

ada had turned so pale that he made her sit down in his reading-chair
and sat beside her.

"it's nothing, my dear," he said, "it's nothing. rick and i have only
had a friendly difference, which we must state to you, for you are
the theme. now you are afraid of what's coming."

"i am not indeed, cousin john," replied ada with a smile, "if it is
to come from you."

"thank you, my dear. do you give me a minute's calm attention,
without looking at rick. and, little woman, do you likewise. my dear
girl," putting his hand on hers as it lay on the side of the
easy-chair, "you recollect the talk we had, we four when the little
woman told me of a little love affair?"

"it is not likely that either richard or i can ever forget your
kindness that day, cousin john."

"i can never forget it," said richard.

 
 ___________________________
 
r of you or to esther," said
mr. jarndyce, "until now, in order that we might be open as the day,
and all on equal terms. i now affectionately advise, i now most
earnestly entreat, you two to part as you came here. leave all else
to time, truth, and steadfastness. if you do otherwise, you will do
wrong, and you will have made me do wrong in ever bringing you
together."

a long silence succeeded.

"cousin richard," said ada then, raising her blue eyes tenderly to
his face, "after what our cousin john has said, i think no choice is
left us. your mind may be quite at ease about me, for you will leave
me here under his care and will be sure that i can have nothing to
wish for--quite sure if i guide myself by his advice. i--i don't
doubt, cousin richard," said ada, a little confused, "that you are
very fond of me, and i--i don't think you will fall in love with
anybody else. but i should like you to consider well about it too, as
i should like you to be in all things very happy. you may trust
 
 ___________________________
 
iles, and bags and bags full of papers.

i think it came on "for further directions"--about some bill of
costs, to the best of my understanding, which was confused enough.
but i counted twenty-three gentlemen in wigs who said they were "in
it," and none of them appeared to understand it much better than i.
they chatted about it with the lord chancellor, and contradicted and
explained among themselves, and some of them said it was this way,
and some of them said it was that way, and some of them jocosely
proposed to read huge volumes of affidavits, and there was more
buzzing and laughing, and everybody concerned was in a state of idle
entertainment, and nothing could be made of it by anybody. after an
hour or so of this, and a good many speeches being begun and cut
short, it was "referred back for the present," as mr. kenge said, and
the papers were bundled up again before the clerks had finished
bringing them in.

i glanced at richard on the termination of these hopeless proceedings
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
n!"




chapter xxv

mrs. snagsby sees it all


there is disquietude in cook's court, cursitor street. black
suspicion hides in that peaceful region. the mass of cook's courtiers
are in their usual state of mind, no better and no worse; but mr.
snagsby is changed, and his little woman knows it.

for tom-all-alone's and lincoln's inn fields persist in harnessing
themselves, a pair of ungovernable coursers, to the chariot of mr.
snagsby's imagination; and mr. bucket drives; and the passengers are
jo and mr. tulkinghorn; and the complete equipage whirls though the
law-stationery business at wild speed all round the clock. even in
the little front kitchen where the family meals are taken, it rattles
away at a smoking pace from the dinner-table, when mr. snagsby pauses
in carving the first slice of the leg of mutton baked with potatoes
and stares at the kitchen wall.

mr. snagsby cannot make out what it is that he has had to do with.
something is wrong somewhere, but what something, what may 
 
 ___________________________
 
es, the savoury
preparations for the oil trade come, the evening comes. comes mr.
snagsby in his black coat; come the chadbands; come (when the gorging
vessel is replete) the 'prentices and guster, to be edified; comes at
last, with his slouching head, and his shuffle backward, and his
shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, and his shuffle to the
left, and his bit of fur cap in his muddy hand, which he picks as if
it were some mangy bird he had caught and was plucking before eating
raw, jo, the very, very tough subject mr. chadband is to improve.

mrs. snagsby screws a watchful glance on jo as he is brought into the
little drawing-room by guster. he looks at mr. snagsby the moment he
comes in. aha! why does he look at mr. snagsby? mr. snagsby looks at
him. why should he do that, but that mrs. snagsby sees it all? why
else should that look pass between them, why else should mr. snagsby
be confused and cough a signal cough behind his hand? it is as clear
as crystal that mr. snagsby
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"peace, my friends," says chadband, rising and wiping the oily
exudations from his reverend visage. "peace be with us! my friends,
why with us? because," with his fat smile, "it cannot be against us,
because it must be for us; because it is not hardening, because it is
softening; because it does not make war like the hawk, but comes home
unto us like the dove. therefore, my friends, peace be with us! my
human boy, come forward!"

stretching forth his flabby paw, mr. chadband lays the same on jo's
arm and considers where to station him. jo, very doubtful of his
reverend friend's intentions and not at all clear but that something
practical and painful is going to be done to him, mutters, "you let
me alone. i never said nothink to you. you let me alone."

"no, my young friend," says chadband smoothly, "i will not let you
alone. and why? because i am a harvest-labourer, because i am a
toiler and a moiler, because you are delivered over unto me and are
become as a precious instrument in my
 
 ___________________________
 
 hands. my friends, may i so
employ this instrument as to use it to your advantage, to your
profit, to your gain, to your welfare, to your enrichment! my young
friend, sit upon this stool."

jo, apparently possessed by an impression that the reverend gentleman
wants to cut his hair, shields his head with both arms and is got
into the required position with great difficulty and every possible
manifestation of reluctance.

when he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, mr. chadband, retiring
behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, "my friends!"
this is the signal for a general settlement of the audience. the
'prentices giggle internally and nudge each other. guster falls int
 
 ___________________________
 
, the windows of his soul, and searches the whole
tenement, he were other than the man he is. he cowers and droops.

"or, my juvenile friends," says chadband, descending to the level of
their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his
greasily meek smile of coming a long way downstairs for the purpose,
"if the master of this house was to go forth into the city and there
see an eel, and was to come back, and was to call unto him the
mistress of this house, and was to say, 'sarah, rejoice with me, for
i have seen an elephant!' would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby in tears.

"or put it, my juvenile friends, that he saw an elephant, and
returning said 'lo, the city is barren, i have seen but an eel,'
would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby sobbing loudly.

"or put it, my juvenile friends," said chadband, stimulated by the
sound, "that the unnatural parents of this slumbering heathen--for
parents he had, my juvenile friends, beyond a doubt--after casting
him forth to the wolves a
 
 ___________________________
 
o that cook's
court re-echoes with her shrieks. finally, becoming cataleptic, she
has to be carried up the narrow staircase like a grand piano. after
unspeakable suffering, productive of the utmost consternation, she is
pronounced, by expresses from the bedroom, free from pain, though
much exhausted, in which state of affairs mr. snagsby, trampled and
crushed in the piano-forte removal, and extremely timid and feeble,
ventures to come out from behind the door in the drawing-room.

all this time jo has been standing on the spot where he woke up, ever
picking his cap and putting bits of fur in his mouth. he spits them
out with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in his nature to
be an unimprovable reprobate and that it's no good his trying to keep
awake, for he won't never know nothink. though it may be, jo, that
there is a history so interesting and affecting even to minds as near
the brutes as thine, recording deeds done on this earth for common
men, that if the chadbands, removing
 
 ___________________________
 
 their own persons from the
light, would but show it thee in simple reverence, would but leave it
unimproved, would but regard it as being eloquent enough without
their modest aid--it might hold thee awake, and thou might learn from
it yet!

jo never heard of any such book. its compilers and the reverend
chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the reverend
chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear him
talk for five minutes. "it an't no good my waiting here no longer,"
thinks jo. "mr. snagsby an't a-going to say nothink to me to-night."
and downstairs he shuffles.

but downstairs is the charitable guster, holding by the handrail of
the kitchen stairs and warding off a fit, as yet doubtfully, the same
h
 
 ___________________________
 
aving been induced by mrs. snagsby's screaming. she has her own
supper of bread and cheese to hand to jo, with whom she ventures to
interchange a word or so for the first time.

"here's something to eat, poor boy," says guster.

"thank'ee, mum," says jo.

"are you hungry?"

"jist!" says jo.

"what's gone of your father and your mother, eh?"

jo stops in the middle of a bite and looks petrified. for this orphan
charge of the christian saint whose shrine was at tooting has patted
him on the shoulder, and it is the first time in his life that any
decent hand has been so laid upon him.

"i never know'd nothink about 'em," says jo.

"no more didn't i of mine," cries guster. she is repressing symptoms
favourable to the fit when she seems to take alarm at something and
vanishes down the stairs.

"jo," whispers the law-stationer softly as the
 
 ___________________________
 
 boy lingers on the
step.

"here i am, mr. snagsby!"

"i didn't know you were gone--there's another half-crown, jo. it was
quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other night when
we were out together. it would breed trouble. you can't be too quiet,
jo."

"i am fly, master!"

and so, good night.

a ghostly shade, frilled and night-capped, follows the law-stationer
to the room he came from and glides higher up. and henceforth he
begins, go where he will, to be attended by another shadow than his
own, hardly less constant than his own, hardly less quiet than his
own. and into whatsoever atmosphere of secrecy his own shadow may
pass, let all concerned in the secrecy beware! for the watchful mrs.
snagsby is there too--bone of his bone, flesh of h
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, mr. george, i think my friend
would consider the young gentleman good for something yet?" says
grandfather smallweed, turning up his velvet cap and scratching his
ear like a monkey.

mr. george, who has put aside his pipe and sits with an arm on his
chair-back, beats a tattoo on the ground with his right foot as if he
were not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation has
taken.

"but to pass from one subject to another," resumes mr. smallweed.
"'to promote the conversation,' as a joker might say. to pass, mr.
george, from the ensign to the captain."

"what are you up to, now?" asks mr. george, pausing with a frown in
stroking the recollection of his moustache. "what captain?"

"our captain. the captain we know of. captain hawdon."

"oh! that's it, is it?" says mr. george with a low whistle as he sees
both grandfather and granddaughter looking hard at him. "you are
there! well? what about it? come, i won't be smothered any more.
speak!"

"my dear friend," returns the old ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 applied--judy, shake me
up a little!--i was applied to yesterday about the captain, and my
opinion still is that the captain is not dead."

"bosh!" observes mr. george.

"what was your remark, my dear friend?" inquires the old man with his
hand to his ear.

"bosh!"

"ho!" says grandfather smallweed. "mr. george, of my opinion you can
judge for yourself according to the questions asked of me and the
reasons given for asking 'em. now, what do you think the lawyer
making the inquiries wants?"

"a job," says mr. george.

"nothing of the kind!"

"can't be a lawyer, then," says mr. george, folding his arms with an
air of confirmed resolution.

"my dear friend, he is a lawyer, and a famous one. he wants to see
some fragment in captain hawdon's writing. he don't want to keep it.
he only wants to see it and compare it with a writing in his
possession."

"well?"

"well, mr. george. happening to remember the advertisement concerning
captain hawdon and any information that could be given respecting
 
 ___________________________
 
s him there; and the fair judy
takes her place beside him, and the chair embellishes the roof, and
mr. george takes the vacant place upon the box.

mr. george is quite confounded by the spectacle he beholds from time
to time as he peeps into the cab through the window behind him, where
the grim judy is always motionless, and the old gentleman with his
cap over one eye is always sliding off the seat into the straw and
looking upward at him out of his other eye with a helpless expression
of being jolted in the back.




chapter xxvii

more old soldiers than one


mr. george has not far to ride with folded arms upon the box, for
their destination is lincoln's inn fields. when the driver stops his
horses, mr. george alights, and looking in at the window, says,
"what, mr. tulkinghorn's your man, is he?"

"yes, my dear friend. do you know him, mr. george?"

"why, i have heard of him--seen him too, i think. but i don't know
him, and he don't know me."

there ensues the carrying of mr. smallweed
 
 ___________________________
 
y, and so economically dressed
(though substantially) that the only article of ornament of which she
stands possessed appear's to be her wedding-ring, around which her
finger has grown to be so large since it was put on that it will
never come off again until it shall mingle with mrs. bagnet's dust.

"mrs. bagnet," says the trooper, "i am on my parole with you. mat
will get no harm from me. you may trust me so far."

"well, i think i may. but the very looks of you are unsettling," mrs.
bagnet rejoins. "ah, george, george! if you had only settled down and
married joe pouch's widow when he died in north america, she'd have
combed your hair for you."

"it was a chance for me, certainly," returns the trooper half
laughingly, half seriously, "but i shall never settle down into a
respectable man now. joe pouch's widow might have done me good--there
was something in her, and something of her--but i couldn't make up my
mind to it. if i had had the luck to meet with such a wife as mat
found!"

mr
 
 ___________________________
 
. "what
college could you leave--in another quarter of the world--with
nothing but a grey cloak and an umbrella--to make its way home to
europe? the old girl would do it to-morrow. did it once!"

"you are right," says mr. george.

"what college," pursues bagnet, "could you set up in life--with two
penn'orth of white lime--a penn'orth of fuller's earth--a ha'porth of
sand--and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money? that's
what the old girl started on. in the present business."

"i am rejoiced to hear it's thriving, mat."

"the old girl," says mr. bagnet, acquiescing, "saves. has a stocking
somewhere. with money in it. i never saw it. but i know she's got it.
wait till the greens is off her mind. then she'll set you up."

"she is a treasure!" exclaims mr. george.

"she's more. but i never own to it before her. discipline must be
maintained. it was the old girl that brought out my musical
abilities. i should have been in the artillery now but for the old
girl. six years i hammered
 
 ___________________________
 
rouble or responsibility. in a well-regulated
body politic this natural desire on the part of a spirited young
gentleman so highly connected would be speedily recognized, but
somehow william buffy found when he came in that these were not times
in which he could manage that little matter either, and this was the
second indication sir leicester dedlock had conveyed to him that the
country was going to pieces.

the rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages and
capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have
done well enough in life if they could have overcome their
cousinship; as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, and
lounge in purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite as
much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be
how to dispose of them.

in this society, and where not, my lady dedlock reigns supreme.
beautiful, elegant, accomplished, and powerful in her little world
(for the world of fashion does not 
 
 ___________________________
 
he sharp rain beats, the windows
rattle, and the chimneys growl. mists hide in the avenues, veil the
points of view, and move in funeral-wise across the rising grounds.
on all the house there is a cold, blank smell like the smell of a
little church, though something dryer, suggesting that the dead and
buried dedlocks walk there in the long nights and leave the flavour
of their graves behind them.

but the house in town, which is rarely in the same mind as chesney
wold at the same time, seldom rejoicing when it rejoices or mourning
when it mourns, excepting when a dedlock dies--the house in town
shines out awakened. as warm and bright as so much state may be, as
delicately redolent of pleasant scents that bear no trace of winter
as hothouse flowers can make it, soft and hushed so that the ticking
of the clocks and the crisp burning of the fires alone disturb the
stillness in the rooms, it seems to wrap those chilled bones of sir
leicester's in rainbow-coloured wool. and sir leicester is g
 
 ___________________________
 
at fire in the library,
condescendingly perusing the backs of his books or honouring the fine
arts with a glance of approbation. for he has his pictures, ancient
and modern. some of the fancy ball school in which art occasionally
condescends to become a master, which would be best catalogued like
the miscellaneous articles in a sale. as "three high-backed chairs, a
table and cover, long-necked bottle (containing wine), one flask, one
spanish female's costume, three-quarter face portrait of miss jogg
the model, and a suit of armour containing don quixote." or "one
stone terrace (cracked), one gondola in distance, one venetian
senator's dress complete, richly embroidered white satin costume with
profile portrait of miss jogg the model, one scimitar superbly
mounted in gold with jewelled handle, elaborate moorish dress (very
rare), and othello."

mr. tulkinghorn comes and goes pretty often, there being estate
business to do, leases to be renewed, and so on. he sees my lady
pretty often, too
 
 ___________________________
 
n outfit for borrioboola, ma would know all about it and
would be quite excited. being what it is, she neither knows nor
cares."

caddy was not at all deficient in natural affection for her mother,
but mentioned this with tears as an undeniable fact, which i am
afraid it was. we were sorry for the poor dear girl and found so much
to admire in the good disposition which had survived under such
discouragement that we both at once (i mean ada and i) proposed a
little scheme that made her perfectly joyful. this was her staying
with us for three weeks, my staying with her for one, and our all
three contriving and cutting out, and repairing, and sewing, and
saving, and doing the very best we could think of to make the most of
her stock. my guardian being as pleased with the idea as caddy was,
we took her home next day to arrange the matter and brought her out
again in triumph with her boxes and all the purchases that could be
squeezed out of a ten-pound note, which mr. jellyby had found in the
 
 ___________________________
 
ening a little now and then, partly with the smart and partly
with vexation at being able to do no better, but she soon got over
that and began to improve rapidly. so day after day she, and my
darling, and my little maid charley, and a milliner out of the town,
and i, sat hard at work, as pleasantly as possible.

over and above this, caddy was very anxious "to learn housekeeping,"
as she said. now, mercy upon us! the idea of her learning
housekeeping of a person of my vast experience was such a joke that i
laughed, and coloured up, and fell into a comical confusion when she
proposed it. however, i said, "caddy, i am sure you are very welcome
to learn anything that you can learn of me, my dear," and i showed
her all my books and methods and all my fidgety ways. you would have
supposed that i was showing her some wonderful inventions, by her
study of them; and if you had seen her, whenever i jingled my
housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, certainly you might have
thought that there nev
 
 ___________________________
 
oung hand had made, they so wrinkled, and shrivelled, and
tottering, it so plump and round. yet charley was uncommonly expert
at other things and had as nimble little fingers as i ever watched.

"well, charley," said i, looking over a copy of the letter o in which
it was represented as square, triangular, pear-shaped, and collapsed
in all kinds of ways, "we are improving. if we only get to make it
round, we shall be perfect, charley."

then i made one, and charley made one, and the pen wouldn't join
charley's neatly, but twisted it up into a knot.

"never mind, charley. we shall do it in time."

charley laid down her pen, the copy being finished, opened and shut
her cramped little hand, looked gravely at the page, half in pride
and half in doubt, and got up, and dropped me a curtsy.

"thank you, miss. if you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
the name of jenny?"

"a brickmaker's wife, charley? yes."

"she came and spoke to me when i was out a little while ago, and said
you knew 
 
 ___________________________
 
glimpse of you, miss--all she wanted,
she said--but you were away. that was when she saw me. she saw me
a-going about, miss," said charley with a short laugh of the greatest
delight and pride, "and she thought i looked like your maid!"

"did she though, really, charley?"

"yes, miss!" said charley. "really and truly." and charley, with
another short laugh of the purest glee, made her eyes very round
again and looked as serious as became my maid. i was never tired of
seeing charley in the full enjoyment of that great dignity, standing
before me with her youthful face and figure, and her steady manner,
and her childish exultation breaking through it now and then in the
pleasantest way.

"and where did you see her, charley?" said i.

my little maid's countenance fell as she replied, "by the doctor's
shop, miss." for charley wore her black frock yet.

i asked if the brickmaker's wife were ill, but charley said no. it
was some one else. some one in her cottage who had tramped down to
saint al
 
 ___________________________
 
 the moment of our going in. the boy staggered up instantly and
stared at me with a remarkable expression of surprise and terror.

his action was so quick and my being the cause of it was so evident
that i stood still instead of advancing nearer.

"i won't go no more to the berryin ground," muttered the boy; "i
ain't a-going there, so i tell you!"

i lifted my veil and spoke to the woman. she said to me in a low
voice, "don't mind him, ma'am. he'll soon come back to his head," and
said to him, "jo, jo, what's the matter?"

"i know wot she's come for!" cried the boy.

"who?"

"the lady there. she's come to get me to go along with her to the
berryin ground. i won't go to the berryin ground. i don't like the
name on it. she might go a-berryin me." his shivering came on again,
and as he leaned against the wall, he shook the hovel.

"he has been talking off and on about such like all day, ma'am," said
jenny softly. "why, how you stare! this is my lady, jo."

"is it?" returned the boy doubtful
 
 ___________________________
 
 you any good," said i. "what is the
matter with you?"

"i'm a-being froze," returned the boy hoarsely, with his haggard gaze
wandering about me, "and then burnt up, and then froze, and then
burnt up, ever so many times in a hour. and my head's all sleepy, and
all a-going mad-like--and i'm so dry--and my bones isn't half so much
bones as pain.

"when did he come here?" i asked the woman.

"this morning, ma'am, i found him at the corner of the town. i had
known him up in london yonder. hadn't i, jo?"

"tom-all-alone's," the boy replied.

whenever he fixed his attention or his eyes, it was only for a very
little while. he soon began to droop his head again, and roll it
heavily, and speak as if he were half awake.

"when did he come from london?" i asked.

"i come from london yes'day," said the boy himself, now flushed and
hot. "i'm a-going somewheres."

"where is he going?" i asked.

"somewheres," repeated the boy in a louder tone. "i have been moved
on, and moved on, more nor ever i was a
 
 ___________________________
 
 like, and again in the morning!" she
hurried off, and presently we passed her hushing and singing to her
child at her own door and looking anxiously along the road for her
drunken husband.

i was afraid of staying then to speak to either woman, lest i should
bring her into trouble. but i said to charley that we must not leave
the boy to die. charley, who knew what to do much better than i did,
and whose quickness equalled her presence of mind, glided on before
me, and presently we came up with jo, just short of the brick-kiln.

i think he must have begun his journey with some small bundle under
his arm and must have had it stolen or lost it. for he still carried
his wretched fragment of fur cap like a bundle, though he went
bare-headed through the rain, which now fell fast. he stopped when we
called to him and again showed a dread of me when i came up, standing
with his lustrous eyes fixed upon me, and even arrested in his
shivering fit.

i asked him to come with us, and we would take c
 
 ___________________________
 
my dear jarndyce, i observed a bottle of cooling medicine in his
pocket, and it's impossible for him to do better than take it. you
can tell them to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he
sleeps and to keep it moderately cool and him moderately warm. but it
is mere impertinence in me to offer any recommendation. miss
summerson has such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for the
administration of detail that she knows all about it."

we went back into the hall and explained to jo what we proposed to
do, which charley explained to him again and which he received with
the languid unconcern i had already noticed, wearily looking on at
what was done as if it were for somebody else. the servants
compassionating his miserable state and being very anxious to help,
we soon got the loft-room ready; and some of the men about the house
carried him across the wet yard, well wrapped up. it was pleasant to
observe how kind they were to him and how there appeared to be a
general impre
 
 ___________________________
 
er was charged to deliver at
day-light in the morning, that he seemed easier and inclined to
sleep. they had fastened his door on the outside, he said, in case of
his being delirious, but had so arranged that he could not make any
noise without being heard.

ada being in our room with a cold, mr. skimpole was left alone all
this time and entertained himself by playing snatches of pathetic
airs and sometimes singing to them (as we heard at a distance) with
great expression and feeling. when we rejoined him in the
drawing-room he said he would give us a little ballad which had come
into his head "apropos of our young friend," and he sang one about a
peasant boy,

   "thrown on the wide world, doomed to wander and roam,
    bereft of his parents, bereft of a home."

quite exquisitely. it was a song that always made him cry, he told
us.

he was extremely gay all the rest of the evening, for he absolutely
chirped--those were his delighted words--when he thought by what a
happy talent for busi
 
 ___________________________
 
othesis
that every one is either robbing or being robbed.

it is a close night, though the damp cold is searching too, and there
is a laggard mist a little way up in the air. it is a fine steaming
night to turn the slaughter-houses, the unwholesome trades, the
sewerage, bad water, and burial-grounds to account, and give the
registrar of deaths some extra business. it may be something in the
air--there is plenty in it--or it may be something in himself that is
in fault; but mr. weevle, otherwise jobling, is very ill at ease. he
comes and goes between his own room and the open street door twenty
times an hour. he has been doing so ever since it fell dark. since
the chancellor shut up his shop, which he did very early to-night,
mr. weevle has been down and up, and down and up (with a cheap tight
velvet skull-cap on his head, making his whiskers look out of all
proportion), oftener than before.

it is no phenomenon that mr. snagsby should be ill at ease too, for
he always is so, more or less
 
 ___________________________
 
ou go to bed?" the stationer
inquires.

"why, there's not much air to be got here; and what there is, is not
very freshening," weevle answers, glancing up and down the court.

"very true, sir. don't you observe," says mr. snagsby, pausing to
sniff and taste the air a little, "don't you observe, mr. weevle,
that you're--not to put too fine a point upon it--that you're rather
greasy here, sir?"

"why, i have noticed myself that there is a queer kind of flavour in
the place to-night," mr. weevle rejoins. "i suppose it's chops at the
sol's arms."

"chops, do you think? oh! chops, eh?" mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes
again. "well, sir, i suppose it is. but i should say their cook at
the sol wanted a little looking after. she has been burning 'em, sir!
and i don't think"--mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes again and then
spits and wipes his mouth--"i don't think--not to put too fine a
point upon it--that they were quite fresh when they were shown the
gridiron."

"that's very likely. it's a tainting s
 
 ___________________________
 
is
he) very lightly indeed. when they are shut into the back room, they
speak low.

"i thought you had gone to jericho at least instead of coming here,"
says tony.

"why, i said about ten."

"you said about ten," tony repeats. "yes, so you did say about ten.
but according to my count, it's ten times ten--it's a hundred
o'clock. i never had such a night in my life!"

"what has been the matter?"

"that's it!" says tony. "nothing has been the matter. but here have i
been stewing and fuming in this jolly old crib till i have had the
horrors falling on me as thick as hail. there's a blessed-looking
candle!" says tony, pointing to the heavily burning taper on his
table with a great cabbage head and a long winding-sheet.

"that's easily improved," mr. guppy observes as he takes the snuffers
in hand.

"is it?" returns his friend. "not so easily as you think. it has been
smouldering like that ever since it was lighted."

"why, what's the matter with you, tony?" inquires mr. guppy, looking
at him,
 
 ___________________________
 
less be
remembered that some time back a painful sensation was created in the
public mind by a case of mysterious death from opium occurring in the
first floor of the house occupied as a rag, bottle, and general
marine store shop, by an eccentric individual of intemperate habits,
far advanced in life, named krook; and how, by a remarkable
coincidence, krook was examined at the inquest, which it may be
recollected was held on that occasion at the sol's arms, a
well-conducted tavern immediately adjoining the premises in question
on the west side and licensed to a highly respectable landlord, mr.
james george bogsby. now do they show (in as many words as possible)
how during some hours of yesterday evening a very peculiar smell was
observed by the inhabitants of the court, in which the tragical
occurrence which forms the subject of that present account
transpired; and which odour was at one time so powerful that mr.
swills, a comic vocalist professionally engaged by mr. j. g. bogsby,
has hi
 
 ___________________________
 
mself stated to our reporter that he mentioned to miss m.
melvilleson, a lady of some pretensions to musical ability, likewise
engaged by mr. j. g. bogsby to sing at a series of concerts called
harmonic assemblies, or meetings, which it would appear are held at
the sol's arms under mr. bogsby's direction pursuant to the act of
george the second, that he (mr. swills) found his voice seriously
affected by the impure state of the atmosphere, his jocose expression
at the time being that he was like an empty post-office, for he
hadn't a single note in him. how this account of mr. swills is
entirely corroborated by two intelligent married females residing in
the same court and known respectively by the names of mrs. piper and
mrs. perkins, both of whom observed the foetid effluvia and regarded
them as being emitted from the premises in the occupation of krook,
the unfortunate deceased. all this and a great deal more the two
gentlemen who hav
 
 ___________________________
 
ns off its gas nor shuts
its door all night, for any kind of public excitement makes good for
the sol and causes the court to stand in need of comfort. the house
has not done so much in the stomachic article of cloves or in
brandy-and-water warm since the inquest. the moment the pot-boy heard
what had happened, he rolled up his shirt-sleeves tight to his
shoulders and said, "there'll be a run upon us!" in the first outcry,
young piper dashed off for the fire-engines and returned in triumph
at a jolting gallop perched up aloft on the phoenix and holding on to
that fabulous creature with all his might in the midst of helmets and
torches. one helmet remains behind after careful investigation of all
chinks and crannies and slowly paces up and down before the house in
company with one of the two policemen who have likewise been left in
charge thereof. to this trio everybody in the court possessed of
sixpence has an insatiate desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid
form.

mr. weevle and his 
 
 ___________________________
 
," says mrs. snagsby.

"my love, you know these two gentlemen?"

"yes!" says mrs. snagsby, and in a rigid manner acknowledges their
presence, still fixing mr. snagsby with her eye.

the devoted mr. snagsby cannot bear this treatment. he takes mrs.
snagsby by the hand and leads her aside to an adjacent cask.

"my little woman, why do you look at me in that way? pray don't do
it."

"i can't help my looks," says mrs. snagsby, "and if i could i
wouldn't."

mr. snagsby, with his cough of meekness, rejoins, "wouldn't you
really, my dear?" and meditates. then coughs his cough of trouble and
says, "this is a dreadful mystery, my love!" still fearfully
disconcerted by mrs. snagsby's eye.

"it is," returns mrs. snagsby, shaking her head, "a dreadful
mystery."

"my little woman," urges mr. snagsby in a piteous manner, "don't for
goodness' sake speak to me with that bitter expression and look at me
in that searching way! i beg and entreat of you not to do it. good
lord, you don't suppose that i woul
 
 ___________________________
 
r blowing up with a bang."

this supposititious phenomenon is so very disagreeable to mr. guppy
that his voice quakes as he says in a moral way, "tony, i should have
thought that what we went through last night would have been a lesson
to you never to be personal any more as long as you lived." to which
mr. weevle returns, "william, i should have thought it would have
been a lesson to you never to conspire any more as long as you
lived." to which mr. guppy says, "who's conspiring?" to which mr.
jobling replies, "why, you are!" to which mr. guppy retorts, "no, i
am not." to which mr. jobling retorts again, "yes, you are!" to which
mr. guppy retorts, "who says so?" to which mr. jobling retorts, "i
say so!" to which mr. guppy retorts, "oh, indeed?" to which mr.
jobling retorts, "yes, indeed!" and both being now in a heated state,
they walk on silently for a while to cool down again.

"tony," says mr. guppy then, "if you heard your friend out instead of
flying at him, you wouldn't fall into 
 
 ___________________________
 
our being able to find
out what he really had got stored up there, don't weigh with you at
all against last night, tony, if i understand you?" says mr. guppy,
biting his thumb with the appetite of vexation.

"certainly not. talk in that cool way of a fellow's living there?"
cries mr. weevle indignantly. "go and live there yourself."

"oh! i, tony!" says mr. guppy, soothing him. "i have never lived
there and couldn't get a lodging there now, whereas you have got
one."

"you are welcome to it," rejoins his friend, "and--ugh!--you may make
yourself at home in it."

"then you really and truly at this point," says mr. guppy, "give up
the whole thing, if i understand you, tony?"

"you never," returns tony with a most convincing steadfastness, "said
a truer word in all your life. i do!"

while they are so conversing, a hackney-coach drives into the square,
on the box of which vehicle a very tall hat makes itself manifest to
the public. inside the coach, and consequently not so manifest to the
m
 
 ___________________________
 
chmen who
would investigate the subject; and further, of the corroborative
testimony of monsieur le cat, a rather celebrated french surgeon once
upon a time, who had the unpoliteness to live in a house where such a
case occurred and even to write an account of it--still they regard
the late mr. krook's obstinacy in going out of the world by any such
by-way as wholly unjustifiable and personally offensive. the less the
court understands of all this, the more the court likes it, and the
greater enjoyment it has in the stock in trade of the sol's arms.
then there comes the artist of a picture newspaper, with a foreground
and figures ready drawn for anything from a wreck on the cornish
coast to a review in hyde park or a meeting in manchester, and in
mrs. perkins' own room, memorable evermore, he then and there throws
in upon the block mr. krook's house, as large as life; in fact,
considerably larger, making a very temple of it. similarly, being
permitted to look in at the door of the fatal 
 
 ___________________________
 
face, and he scrapes his one eyebrow with the handle of the
brush.

"attention, phil! listen to this."

"steady, commander, steady."

"'sir. allow me to remind you (though there is no legal necessity for
my doing so, as you are aware) that the bill at two months' date
drawn on yourself by mr. matthew bagnet, and by you accepted, for the
sum of ninety-seven pounds four shillings and ninepence, will become
due to-morrow, when you will please be prepared to take up the same
on presentation. yours, joshua smallweed.' what do you make of that,
phil?"

"mischief, guv'ner."

"why?"

"i think," replies phil after pensively tracing out a cross-wrinkle
in his forehead with the brush-handle, "that mischeevious
consequences is always meant when money's asked for."

"lookye, phil," says the trooper, sitting on the table. "first and
last, i have paid, i may say, half as much again as this principal in
interest and one thing and another."

phil intimates by sidling back a pace or two, with a very
unacc
 
 ___________________________
 
ountable wrench of his wry face, that he does not regard the
transaction as being made more promising by this incident.

"and lookye further, phil," says the trooper, staying his premature
conclusions with a wave of his hand. "there has always been an
understanding that this bill was to be what they call renewed. and it
has been renewed no end of times. what do you say now?"

"i say that i think the times is come to a end at last."

"you do? humph! i am much of the same mind myself."

"joshua smallweed is him that was brought here in a chair?"

"the same."

"guv'ner," says phil with exceeding gravity, "he's a leech in his
dispositions, he's a screw and a wice in his actions, a snake in his
twistings, and a lobster in his claws."

having thus expressively uttered his sentiments, mr. squod, after
waiting a little to ascertain if any further remark be expected of
him, gets back by his usual series of movements to the target he has
in hand and vigorously signifies through his former
 
 ___________________________
 
 into its prow, or beak, resembling a little model
of a fanlight over a street door or one of the oval glasses out of a
pair of spectacles, which ornamental object has not that tenacious
capacity of sticking to its post that might be desired in an article
long associated with the british army. the old girl's umbrella is of
a flabby habit of waist and seems to be in need of stays--an
appearance that is possibly referable to its having served through a
series of years at home as a cupboard and on journeys as a carpet
bag. she never puts it up, having the greatest reliance on her
well-proved cloak with its capacious hood, but generally uses the
instrument as a wand with which to point out joints of meat or
bunches of greens in marketing or to arrest the attention of
tradesmen by a friendly poke. without her market-basket, which is a
sort of wicker well with two flapping lids, she never stirs abroad.
attended by these her trusty companions, therefore, her honest
sunburnt face looking cheeril
 
 ___________________________
 
y out of a rough straw bonnet, mrs.
bagnet now arrives, fresh-coloured and bright, in george's shooting
gallery.

"well, george, old fellow," says she, "and how do you do, this
sunshiny morning?"

giving him a friendly shake of the hand, mrs. bagnet draws a long
breath after her walk and sits down to enjoy a rest. having a
faculty, matured on the tops of baggage-waggons and in other such
positions, of resting easily anywhere, she perches on a rough bench,
unties her bonnet-strings, pushes back her bonnet, crosses her arms,
and looks perfectly comfortable.

mr. bagnet in the meantime has shaken hands with his old comrade and
with phil, on whom mrs. bagnet likewise bestows a good-humoured nod
and smile.

"now, george," said mrs. bagnet briskly, "here we are, lignum and
myself"--she often speaks of
 
 ___________________________
 
in anybody's
way, i fully believe, that i rolled the least good to. but it's
impossible for an old vagabond comrade to like your wife and family
better than i like 'em, mat, and i trust you'll look upon me as
forgivingly as you can. don't think i've kept anything from you. i
haven't had the letter more than a quarter of an hour."

"old girl," murmurs mr. bagnet after a short silence, "will you tell
him my opinion?"

"oh! why didn't he marry," mrs. bagnet answers, half laughing and
half crying, "joe pouch's widder in north america? then he wouldn't
have got himself into these troubles."

"the old girl," says mr. bagnet, "puts it correct--why didn't you?"

"well, she has a better husband by this time, i hope," returns the
trooper. "anyhow, here i stand, this present day, not married to joe
pouch's widder. what shall i do? you see all i have got about me.
it's not mine; it's yours. give the word, and i'll sell off every
morsel. if i could have hoped it would have brought in nearly the sum
w
 
 ___________________________
 
 i'm a
harum-scarum sort of a good-for-nought that more kicks than halfpence
come natural to, why he's a steady family man, don't you see? now,
mr. smallweed," says the trooper, gaining confidence as he proceeds
in his soldierly mode of doing business, "although you and i are good
friends enough in a certain sort of a way, i am well aware that i
can't ask you to let my friend bagnet off entirely."

"oh, dear, you are too modest. you can ask me anything, mr. george."
(there is an ogreish kind of jocularity in grandfather smallweed
to-day.)

"and you can refuse, you mean, eh? or not you so much, perhaps, as
your friend in the city? ha ha ha!"

"ha ha ha!" echoes grandfather smallweed. in such a very hard manner
and with eyes so particularly green that mr. bagnet's natural gravity
is much deepened by the contemplation of that venerable man.

"come!" says the sanguine george. "i am glad to find we can be
pleasant, because i want to arrange this pleasantly. here's my friend
bagnet, and here a
 
 ___________________________
 
lity,
"let 'em come in then!" they pass into the great room with the
painted ceiling and find him standing before the fire.

"now, you men, what do you want? sergeant, i told you the last time i
saw you that i don't desire your company here."

sergeant replies--dashed within the last few minutes as to his usual
manner of speech, and even as to his usual carriage--that he has
received this letter, has been to mr. smallweed about it, and has
been referred there.

"i have nothing to say to you," rejoins mr. tulkinghorn. "if you get
into debt, you must pay your debts or take the consequences. you have
no occasion to come here to learn that, i suppose?"

sergeant is sorry to say that he is not prepared with the money.

"very well! then the other man--this man, if this is he--must pay it
for you."

sergeant is sorry to add that the other man is not prepared with the
money either.

"very well! then you must pay it between you or you must both be sued
for it and both suffer. you have had the mon
 
 ___________________________
 
acquaintance, she winks off the light infantry and leaves him to
deploy at leisure on the open ground of the domestic hearth.

but he does not. he remains in close order, clouded and depressed.
during the lengthy cleaning up and pattening process, when he and mr.
bagnet are supplied with their pipes, he is no better than he was at
dinner. he forgets to smoke, looks at the fire and ponders, lets his
pipe out, fills the breast of mr. bagnet with perturbation and dismay
by showing that he has no enjoyment of tobacco.

therefore when mrs. bagnet at last appears, rosy from the
invigorating pail, and sits down to her work, mr. bagnet growls, "old
girl!" and winks monitions to her to find out what's the matter.

"why, george!" says mrs. bagnet, quietly threading her needle. "how
low you are!"

"am i? not good company? well, i am afraid i am not."

"he ain't at all like bluffy, mother!" cries little malta.

"because he ain't well, i think, mother," adds quebec.

"sure that's a bad sign not to be
 
 ___________________________
 
afflictions we
might be the better able to alleviate their intensity.

the repose that succeeded, the long delicious sleep, the blissful
rest, when in my weakness i was too calm to have any care for myself
and could have heard (or so i think now) that i was dying, with no
other emotion than with a pitying love for those i left behind--this
state can be perhaps more widely understood. i was in this state when
i first shrunk from the light as it twinkled on me once more, and
knew with a boundless joy for which no words are rapturous enough
that i should see again.

i had heard my ada crying at the door, day and night; i had heard her
calling to me that i was cruel and did not love her; i had heard her
praying and imploring to be let in to nurse and comfort me and to
leave my bedside no more; but i had only said, when i could speak,
"never, my sweet girl, never!" and i had over and over again reminded
charley that she was to keep my darling from the room whether i lived
or died. charley had
 
 ___________________________
 
d be as happy in my weakness as ever i had been in my
strength.

by and by my strength began to be restored. instead of lying, with so
strange a calmness, watching what was done for me, as if it were done
for some one else whom i was quietly sorry for, i helped it a little,
and so on to a little more and much more, until i became useful to
myself, and interested, and attached to life again.

how well i remember the pleasant afternoon when i was raised in bed
with pillows for the first time to enjoy a great tea-drinking with
charley! the little creature--sent into the world, surely, to
minister to the weak and sick--was so happy, and so busy, and stopped
so often in her preparations to lay her head upon my bosom, and
fondle me, and cry with joyful tears she was so glad, she was so
glad, that i was obliged to say, "charley, if you go on in this way,
i must lie down again, my darling, for i am weaker than i thought i
was!" so charley became as quiet as a mouse and took her bright face
here 
 
 ___________________________
 
o the next room; and i heard her sob there.

i had thought of this very often. i was now certain of it. i could
thank god that it was not a shock to me now. i called charley back,
and when she came--at first pretending to smile, but as she drew
nearer to me, looking grieved--i took her in my arms and said, "it
matters very little, charley. i hope i can do without my old face
very well."

i was presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great
chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room, leaning on
charley. the mirror was gone from its usual place in that room too,
but what i had to bear was none the harder to bear for that.

my guardian had throughout been earnest to visit me, and there was
now no good reason why i should deny myself that happiness. he came
one morning, and when he first came in, could only hold me in his
embrace and say, "my dear, dear girl!" i had long known--who could
know better?--what a deep fountain of affection and generosity his
heart was; a
 
 ___________________________
 
ll looks to it, and hankers
after it, and finds his whole world treacherous and hollow. well,
well, well! enough of this, my dear!"

he had supported me, as at first, all this time, and his tenderness
was so precious to me that i leaned my head upon his shoulder and
loved him as if he had been my father. i resolved in my own mind in
this little pause, by some means, to see richard when i grew strong
and try to set him right.

"there are better subjects than these," said my guardian, "for such a
joyful time as the time of our dear girl's recovery. and i had a
commission to broach one of them as soon as i should begin to talk.
when shall ada come to see you, my love?"

i had been thinking of that too. a little in connexion with the
absent mirrors, but not much, for i knew my loving girl would be
changed by no change in my looks.

"dear guardian," said i, "as i have shut her out so long--though
indeed, indeed, she is like the light to me--"

"i know it well, dame durden, well."

he was so g
 
 ___________________________
 
ite to come out by the coach and share
my early dinner. when my guardian left me, i turned my face away upon
my couch and prayed to be forgiven if i, surrounded by such
blessings, had magnified to myself the little trial that i had to
undergo. the childish prayer of that old birthday when i had aspired
to be industrious, contented, and true-hearted and to do good to some
one and win some love to myself if i could came back into my mind
with a reproachful sense of all the happiness i had since enjoyed and
all the affectionate hearts that had been turned towards me. if i
were weak now, what had i profited by those mercies? i repeated the
old childish prayer in its old childish words and found that its old
peace had not departed from it.

my guardian now came every day. in a week or so more i could walk
about our rooms and hold long talks with ada from behind the
window-curtain. yet i never saw her, for i had not as yet the courage
to look at the dear face, though i could have done so easil
 
 ___________________________
 
 my attention was diverted
by my visitor, who was cold after her ride and looked hungry and who,
our dinner being brought in, required some little assistance in
arraying herself with great satisfaction in a pitiable old scarf and
a much-worn and often-mended pair of gloves, which she had brought
down in a paper parcel. i had to preside, too, over the
entertainment, consisting of a dish of fish, a roast fowl, a
sweetbread, vegetables, pudding, and madeira; and it was so pleasant
to see how she enjoyed it, and with what state and ceremony she did
honour to it, that i was soon thinking of nothing else.

when we had finished and had our little dessert before us,
embellished by the hands of my dear, who would yield the
superintendence of everything prepared for me to no one, miss flite
was so very chatty and happy that i thought i would lead her to her
own history, as she was always pleased to talk about herself. i began
by saying "you have attended on the lord chancellor many years, miss
fli
 
 ___________________________
 
te gone from me and that i freely released him from his
bondage to one whom he had never seen!

oh, it was so much better as it was! with a great pang mercifully
spared me, i could take back to my heart my childish prayer to be all
he had so brightly shown himself; and there was nothing to be undone:
no chain for me to break or for him to drag; and i could go, please
god, my lowly way along the path of duty, and he could go his nobler
way upon its broader road; and though we were apart upon the journey,
i might aspire to meet him, unselfishly, innocently, better far than
he had thought me when i found some favour in his eyes, at the
journey's end.




chapter xxxvi

chesney wold


charley and i did not set off alone upon our expedition into
lincolnshire. my guardian had made up his mind not to lose sight of
me until i was safe in mr. boythorn's house, so he accompanied us,
and we were two days upon the road. i found every breath of air, and
every scent, and every flower and leaf and blad
 
 ___________________________
 
ut she would come trotting after me with a basket, her cheerful
face shining with a lecture on the importance of frequent
nourishment. then there was a pony expressly for my riding, a chubby
pony with a short neck and a mane all over his eyes who could
canter--when he would--so easily and quietly that he was a treasure.
in a very few days he would come to me in the paddock when i called
him, and eat out of my hand, and follow me about. we arrived at such
a capital understanding that when he was jogging with me lazily, and
rather obstinately, down some shady lane, if i patted his neck and
said, "stubbs, i am surprised you don't canter when you know how much
i like it; and i think you might oblige me, for you are only getting
stupid and going to sleep," he would give his head a comical shake or
two and set off directly, while charley would stand still and laugh
with such enjoyment that her laughter was like music. i don't know
who had given stubbs his name, but it seemed to belong to him a
 
 ___________________________
 
ove and
admiration stood in her bright eyes, "he's a dear good fellow, miss;
but he can't write yet--he's going to learn of me--and i wouldn't
shame him for the world!" why, what had i to fear, i thought, when
there was this nobility in the soul of a labouring man's daughter!

the air blew as freshly and revivingly upon me as it had ever blown,
and the healthy colour came into my new face as it had come into my
old one. charley was wonderful to see, she was so radiant and so
rosy; and we both enjoyed the whole day and slept soundly the whole
night.

there was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of chesney wold
where a seat had been erected commanding a lovely view. the wood had
been cleared and opened to improve this point of sight, and the
bright sunny landscape beyond was so beautiful that i rested there at
least once every day. a picturesque part of the hall, called the
ghost's walk, was seen to advantage from this higher ground; and the
startling name, and the old legend in th
 
 ___________________________
 
hat my warning feet were haunting it even then. seized with an
augmented terror of myself which turned me cold, i ran from myself
and everything, retraced the way by which i had come, and never
paused until i had gained the lodge-gate, and the park lay sullen and
black behind me.

not before i was alone in my own room for the night and had again
been dejected and unhappy there did i begin to know how wrong and
thankless this state was. but from my darling who was coming on the
morrow, i found a joyful letter, full of such loving anticipation
that i must have been of marble if it had not moved me; from my
guardian, too, i found another letter, asking me to tell dame durden,
if i should see that little woman anywhere, that they had moped most
pitiably without her, that the housekeeping was going to rack and
ruin, that nobody else could manage the keys, and that everybody in
and about the house declared it was not the same house and was
becoming rebellious for her return. two such letters t
 
 ___________________________
 
e candles were lighted, charley, appearing with a very
important air behind ada's chair, beckoned me mysteriously out of the
room.

"oh! if you please, miss," said charley in a whisper, with her eyes
at their roundest and largest. "you're wanted at the dedlock arms."

"why, charley," said i, "who can possibly want me at the
public-house?"

"i don't know, miss," returned charley, putting her head forward and
folding her hands tight upon the band of her little apron, which she
always did in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or confidential,
"but it's a gentleman, miss, and his compliments, and will you please
to come without saying anything about it."

"whose compliments, charley?"

"his'n, miss," returned charley, whose grammatical education was
advancing, but not very rapidly.

"and how do you come to be the messenger, charley?"

"i am not the messenger, if you please, miss," returned my little
maid. "it was w. grubble, miss."

"and who is w. grubble, charley?"

"mister grubble, miss,
 
 ___________________________
 
" returned charley. "don't you know, miss? the
dedlock arms, by w. grubble," which charley delivered as if she were
slowly spelling out the sign.

"aye? the landlord, charley?"

"yes, miss. if you please, miss, his wife is a beautiful woman, but
she broke her ankle, and it never joined. and her brother's the
sawyer that was put in the cage, miss, and they expect he'll drink
himself to death entirely on beer," said charley.

not knowing what might be the matter, and being easily apprehensive
now, i thought it best to go to this place by myself. i bade charley
be quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl, and having put them
on, went away down the little hilly street, where i was as much at
home as in mr. boythorn's garden.

mr. grubble was standing in his shirt-sleeves at
 
 ___________________________
 
ise and pleasure of
his brotherly greeting i could scarcely find breath to tell him that
ada was well.

"answering my very thoughts--always the same dear girl!" said
richard, leading me to a chair and seating himself beside me.

i put my veil up, but not quite.

"always the same dear girl!" said richard just as heartily as before.

i put up my veil altogether, and laying my hand on richard's sleeve
and looking in his face, told him how much i thanked him for his kind
welcome and how greatly i rejoiced to see him, the more so because of
the determination i had made in my illness, which i now conveyed to
him.

"my love," said richard, "there is no one with whom i have a greater
wish to talk than you, for i want you to understand me."

"and i want you, richard," said i, shaking my head, "to understand
some one else."

"since you refer so immediately to john jarndyce," said richard, "--i
suppose you mean him?"

"of course i do."

"then i may say at once that i am glad of it, because it is on
 
 ___________________________
 
 that
subject that i am anxious to be understood. by you, mind--you, my
dear! i am not accountable to mr. jarndyce or mr. anybody."

i was pained to find him taking this tone, and he observed it.

"well, well, my dear," said richard, "we won't go into that now. i
want to appear quietly in your country-house here, with you under my
arm, and give my charming cousin a surprise. i suppose your loyalty
to john jarndyce will allow that?"

"my dear richard," i returned, "you know you would be heartily
welcome at his house--your home, if you will but consider it so; and
you are as heartily welcome here!"

"spoken like the best of little women!" cried richard gaily.

i asked him how he liked his profession.

"oh, i like it well enough!" said richard. "it's all right. it does
as well as anything else, for a time. i don't know that i shall care
about it when i come to be settled, but i can sell out then

 
 ___________________________
 
t had directly wanted to come
too; and so he had brought him. "and he is worth--not to say his
sordid expenses--but thrice his weight in gold," said richard. "he is
such a cheery fellow. no worldliness about him. fresh and
green-hearted!"

i certainly did not see the proof of mr. skimpole's worldliness in
his having his expenses paid by richard, but i made no remark about
that. indeed, he came in and turned our conversation. he was charmed
to see me, said he had been shedding delicious tears of joy and
sympathy at intervals for six weeks on my account, had never been so
happy as in hearing of my progress, began to understand the mixture
of good and evil in the world now, felt that he appreciated health
the more when somebody else was ill, didn't know but what it might be
in the scheme of things that a should squint to make b happier in
looking straight or that c should carry a wooden leg to make d better
satisfied with his flesh and blood in a silk stocking.

"my dear miss summerson, her
 
 ___________________________
 
e is our friend richard," said mr.
skimpole, "full of the brightest visions of the future, which he
evokes out of the darkness of chancery. now that's delightful, that's
inspiriting, that's full of poetry! in old times the woods and
solitudes were made joyous to the shepherd by the imaginary piping
and dancing of pan and the nymphs. this present shepherd, our
pastoral richard, brightens the dull inns of court by making fortune
and her train sport through them to the melodious notes of a judgment
from the bench. that's very pleasant, you know! some ill-conditioned
growling fellow may say to me, 'what's the use of these legal and
equitable abuses? how do you defend them?' i reply, 'my growling
friend, i don't defend them, but they are very agreeab
 
 ___________________________
 
almost have believed in the attraction on which my poor
little wandering friend had expatiated when i saw again the darkened
look of last night. terrible to think it had in it also a shade of
that unfortunate man who had died.

"my dear richard," said i, "this is a bad beginning of our
conversation."

"i knew you would tell me so, dame durden."

"and not i alone, dear richard. it was not i who cautioned you once
never to found a hope or expectation on the family curse."

"there you come back to john jarndyce!" said richard impatiently.
"well! we must approach him sooner or later, for he is the staple of
what i have to say, and it's as well at once. my dear esther, how can
you be so blind? don't you see that he is an interested party and
that it may be very well for him to wish me to know nothing of the
suit, and care nothing about it, but that it may not be quite so well
for me?"

"oh, richard," i remonstrated, "is it possible that you can ever have
seen him and heard him, that you can e
 
 ___________________________
 
ecome lax about their interests; and people may die
off, and points may drag themselves out of memory, and many things
may smoothly happen that are convenient enough."

i was so touched with pity for richard that i could not reproach him
any more, even by a look. i remembered my guardian's gentleness
towards his errors and with what perfect freedom from resentment he
had spoken of them.

"esther," richard resumed, "you are not to suppose that i have come
here to make underhanded charges against john jarndyce. i have only
come to justify myself. what i say is, it was all very well and we
got on very well while i was a boy, utterly regardless of this same
suit; but as soon as i began to take an interest in it and to look
into it, then it was quite another thing. then john jarndyce
discovers that ada and i must break off and that if i don't amend
that very objectionable course, i am not fit for her. now, esther, i
don't mean to amend that very objectionable course: i will not hold
john jarn
 
 ___________________________
 
spicions and cross-suspicions,
they involve, you would think me moderate in comparison."

"perhaps so," said i. "but do you think that, among those many
papers, there is much truth and justice, richard?"

"there is truth and justice somewhere in the case, esther--"

"or was once, long ago," said i.

"is--is--must be somewhere," pursued richard impetuously, "and must
be brought out. to allow ada to be made a bribe and hush-money of is
not the way to bring it out. you say the suit is changing me; john
jarndyce says it changes, has changed, and will change everybody who
has any share in it. then the greater right i have on my side when i
resolve to do all i can to bring it to an end."

"all you can, richard! do you think that in these many years no
others have done all they could? has the difficulty grown easier
because of so many failures?"

"it can't last for ever," returned richard with a fierceness kindling
in him which again presented to me that last sad reminder. "i am
young and earne
 
 ___________________________
 
st, and energy and determination have done wonders
many a time. others have only half thrown themselves into it. i
devote myself to it. i make it the object of my life."

"oh, richard, my dear, so much the worse, so much the worse!"

"no, no, no, don't you be afraid for me," he returned affectionately.
"you're a dear, good, wise, quiet, blessed girl; but you have your
prepossessions. so i come round to john jarndyce. i tell you, my good
esther, when he and i were on those terms which he found so
convenient, we were not on natural terms."

"are division and animosity your natural terms, richard?"

"no, i don't say that. i mean that all this business puts us on
unnatural terms, with which natural relations are incompatible. see
another reason for urging it on! i may find out when it's over that i
have been mistaken in john jarndyce. my head may be clearer when i am
free of it, and i may then agree
 
 ___________________________
 
 with what you say to-day. very well.
then i shall acknowledge it and make him reparation."

everything postponed to that imaginary time! everything held in
confusion and indecision until then!

"now, my best of confidantes," said richard, "i want my cousin ada to
understand that i am not captious, fickle, and wilful about john
jarndyce, but that i have this purpose and reason at my back. i wish
to represent myself to her through you, because she has a great
esteem and respect for her cousin john; and i know you will soften
the course i take, even though you disapprove of it; and--and in
short," said richard, who had been hesitating through these words,
"i--i don't like to represent myself in this litigious, contentious,
doubting character to a confiding girl like ada."

i told him that he was more like himself in those latter words than
in anything he had said yet.

"why," acknowledged richard, "that may be true enough, my love. i
rather feel it to be so. but i shall be able to give 
 
 ___________________________
 
myself fair-play
by and by. i shall come all right again, then, don't you be afraid."

i asked him if this were all he wished me to tell ada.

"not quite," said richard. "i am bound not to withhold from her that
john jarndyce answered my letter in his usual manner, addressing me
as 'my dear rick,' trying to argue me out of my opinions, and telling
me that they should make no difference in him. (all very well of
course, but not altering the case.) i also want ada to know that if i
see her seldom just now, i am looking after her interests as well as
my own--we two being in the same boat exactly--and that i hope she
will not suppose from any flying rumours she may hear that i am at
all light-headed or imprud
 
 ___________________________
 
ent; on the contrary, i am always looking
forward to the termination of the suit, and always planning in that
direction. being of age now and having taken the step i have taken, i
consider myself free from any accountability to john jarndyce; but
ada being still a ward of the court, i don't yet ask her to renew our
engagement. when she is free to act for herself, i shall be myself
once more and we shall both be in very different worldly
circumstances, i believe. if you tell her all this with the advantage
of your considerate way, you will do me a very great and a very kind
service, my dear esther; and i shall knock jarndyce and jarndyce on
the head with greater vigour. of course i ask for no secrecy at bleak
house."

"ri
 
 ___________________________
 
ering his whole life to the winds. it made
her very unhappy, of course, though she had a far, far greater
reliance on his correcting his errors than i could have--which was so
natural and loving in my dear!--and she presently wrote him this
little letter:


   my dearest cousin,

   esther has told me all you said to her this morning. i
   write this to repeat most earnestly for myself all that
   she said to you and to let you know how sure i am that
   you will sooner or later find our cousin john a pattern
   of truth, sincerity, and goodness, when you will deeply,
   deeply grieve to have done him (without intending it) so
   much wrong.

   i do not quite know how to write what i wish to say next,
   but i trust you will understand it as i mean it. i have
   some fears, my dearest cousin, that it may be partly for
   my sake you are now laying up so much unhappiness for
   yourself--and if for yourself, for me. in case this should
   be so, or in case you should entertain much thoug
 
 ___________________________
 
ly threw one in my way, and
i delicately said that there was a responsibility in encouraging
richard.

"responsibility, my dear miss summerson?" he repeated, catching at
the word with the pleasantest smile. "i am the last man in the world
for such a thing. i never was responsible in my life--i can't be."

"i am afraid everybody is obliged to be," said i timidly enough, he
being so much older and more clever than i.

"no, really?" said mr. skimpole, receiving this new light with a most
agreeable jocularity of surprise. "but every man's not obliged to be
solvent? i am not. i never was. see, my dear miss summerson," he took
a handful of loose silver and halfpence from his pocket, "there's so
much money. i have not an idea how much. i have not the power of
counting. call it four and ninepence--call it four pound nine. they
tell me i owe more than that. i dare say i do. i dare say i owe as
much as good-natured people will let me owe. if they don't stop, why
should i? there you have harold ski
 
 ___________________________
 
elf--in fact i do say to myself very often--that's
responsibility!"

it was difficult, after this, to explain what i meant; but i
persisted so far as to say that we all hoped he would check and not
confirm richard in the sanguine views he entertained just then.

"most willingly," he retorted, "if i could. but, my dear miss
summerson, i have no art, no disguise. if he takes me by the hand and
leads me through westminster hall in an airy procession after
fortune, i must go. if he says, 'skimpole, join the dance!' i must
join it. common sense wouldn't, i know, but i have no common sense."

it was very unfortunate for richard, i said.

"do you think so!" returned mr. skimpole. "don't say that, don't say
that. let us suppose him keeping company with common sense--an
excellent man--a good deal wrinkled--dreadfully practical--change for
a ten-pound note in every pocket--ruled account-book in his
hand--say, upon the whole, resembling a tax-gatherer. our dear
richard, sanguine, ardent, overleapin
 
 ___________________________
 
g obstacles, bursting with
poetry like a young bud, says to this highly respectable companion,
'i see a golden prospect before me; it's very bright, it's very
beautiful, it's very joyous; here i go, bounding over the landscape
to come at it!' the respectable companion instantly knocks him down
with the ruled account-book; tells him in a literal, prosaic way that
he sees no such thing; shows him it's nothing but fees, fraud,
horsehair wigs, and black gowns. now you know that's a painful
change--sensible in the last degree, i have no doubt, but
disagreeable. i can't do it. i haven't got the ruled account-book, i
have none of the tax-gathering elements in my composition, i am 
 
 ___________________________
 
not
at all respectable, and i don't want to be. odd perhaps, but so it
is!"

it was idle to say more, so i proposed that we should join ada and
richard, who were a little in advance, and i gave up mr. skimpole in
despair. he had been over the hall in the course of the morning and
whimsically described the family pictures as we walked. there were
such portentous shepherdesses among the ladies dedlock dead and gone,
he told us, that peaceful crooks became weapons of assault in their
hands. they tended their flocks severely in buckram and powder and
put their sticking-plaster patches on to terrify commoners as the
chiefs of some
 
 ___________________________
 
perous or ruined, befriended or deserted, could only make this
difference to her, that the more he needed love from one unchanging
heart, the more love that unchanging heart would have to give him;
how he thought of her through his present errors, and she would think
of him at all times--never of herself if she could devote herself to
him, never of her own delights if she could minister to his.

and she kept her word?

i look along the road before me, where the distance already shortens
and the journey's end is growing visible; and true and good above the
dead sea of the chancery suit and all the ashy fruit it cast ashore,
i think i see my darling.




chapter xxxviii

a struggle


when our time came for returning to bleak house again, we were
punctual to the day and were received with an overpowering welcome. i
was perfectly restored to health and strength, and finding my
housekeeping keys laid ready for me in my room, rang myself in as if
i had been a new year, with a merry little peal
 
 ___________________________
 
. "once more, duty,
duty, esther," said i; "and if you are not overjoyed to do it, more
than cheerfully and contentedly, through anything and everything, you
ought to be. that's all i have to say to you, my dear!"

the first few mornings were mornings of so much bustle and business,
devoted to such settlements of accounts, such repeated journeys to
and fro between the growlery and all other parts of the house, so
many rearrangements of drawers and presses, and such a general new
beginning altogether, that i had not a moment's leisure. but when
these arrangements were completed and everything was in order, i paid
a visit of a few hours to london, which something in the letter i had
destroyed at chesney wold had induced me to decide upon in my own
mind.

i made caddy jellyby--her maiden name was so natural to me that i
always calle
 
 ___________________________
 
 this time of year we do figures at five
every morning."

"why, what a laborious life!" i exclaimed.

"i assure you, my dear," returned caddy, smiling, "when the out-door
apprentices ring us up in the morning (the bell rings into our room,
not to disturb old mr. turveydrop), and when i put up the window and
see them standing on the door-step with their little pumps under
their arms, i am actually reminded of the sweeps."

all this presented the art to me in a singular light, to be sure.
caddy enjoyed the effect of her communication and cheerfully
recounted the particulars of her own studies.

"you see, my dear, to save expense i ought to know something of the
piano, and i ought to know something of the kit too, and consequently
i have to practise those two instruments as well as the details of
our profession. if ma had been like anybody else, i might have had
some little musical knowledge to begin upon. however, i hadn't any;
and that part of the work is, at first, a little discouraging,
 
 ___________________________
 
y small world! you recollect that first night, when i was so
unpolite and inky? who would have thought, then, of my ever teaching
people to dance, of all other possibilities and impossibilities!"

her husband, who had left us while we had this chat, now coming back,
preparatory to exercising the apprentices in the ball-room, caddy
informed me she was quite at my disposal. but it was not my time yet,
i was glad to tell her, for i should have been vexed to take her away
then. therefore we three adjourned to the apprentices together, and i
made one in the dance.

the apprentices were the queerest little people. besides the
melancholy boy, who, i hoped, had not been made so by waltzing alone
in the empty kitchen, there were two other boys and one dirty little
limp girl in a gauzy dress. such a precocious little girl, with such
a dowdy bonnet on (that, too, of a gauzy texture), who brought her
sandalled shoes in an old threadbare velvet reticule. such mean
little boys, when they were not danc
 
 ___________________________
 
in their pockets, and the most untidy legs and
feet--and heels particularly.

i asked caddy what had made their parents choose this profession for
them. caddy said she didn't know; perhaps they were designed for
teachers, perhaps for the stage. they were all people in humble
circumstances, and the melancholy boy's mother kept a ginger-beer
shop.

we danced for an hour with great gravity, the melancholy child doing
wonders with his lower extremities, in which there appeared to be
some sense of enjoyment though it never rose above his waist. caddy,
while she was observant of her husband and was evidently founded upon
him, had acquired a grace and self-possession of her own, which,
united to her pretty face and figure, was uncommonly agreeable. she
already relieved him of much of the instruction of these young
people, and he seldom interfered except to walk his part in the
figure if he had anything to do in it. he always played the tune. the
affectation of the gauzy child, and her condescen
 
 ___________________________
 
r. guppy said that any friend of mine was
more than welcome. i then proceeded to the object of my visit.

"i took the liberty of sending you a note, sir," said i.

mr. guppy acknowledged the receipt by taking it out of his
breast-pocket, putting it to his lips, and returning it to his pocket
with a bow. mr. guppy's mother was so diverted that she rolled her
head as she smiled and made a silent appeal to caddy with her elbow.

"could i speak to you alone for a moment?" said i.

anything like the jocoseness of mr. guppy's mother just now, i think
i never saw. she made no sound of laughter, but she rolled her head,
and shook it, and put her handkerchief to her mouth, and appealed to
caddy with her elbow, and her hand, and her shoulder, and was so
unspeakably entertained altogether that it was with some difficulty
she could marshal caddy through the little folding-door into her
bedroom adjoining.

"miss summerson," said mr. guppy, "you will excuse the waywardness of
a parent ever mindful of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 "a rock. that's something. you are separately represented,
and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of others. that's
something. the suit does not sleep; we wake it up, we air it, we walk
it about. that's something. it's not all jarndyce, in fact as well as
in name. that's something. nobody has it all his own way now, sir.
and that's something, surely."

richard, his face flushing suddenly, strikes the desk with his
clenched hand.

"mr. vholes! if any man had told me when i first went to john
jarndyce's house that he was anything but the disinterested friend he
seemed--that he was what he has gradually turned out to be--i could
have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; i could not
have defended him too ardently. so little did i know of the world!
whereas now i do declare to you that he becomes to me the embodiment
of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is john
jarndyce; that the more i suffer, the more indignant i am with him;
that every new delay
 
 ___________________________
 
 and every new disappointment is only a new
injury from john jarndyce's hand."

"no, no," says vholes. "don't say so. we ought to have patience, all
of us. besides, i never disparage, sir. i never disparage."

"mr. vholes," returns the angry client. "you know as well as i that
he would have strangled the suit if he could."

"he was not active in it," mr. vholes admits with an appearance of
reluctance. "he certainly was not active in it. but however, but
however, he might have had amiable intentions. who can read the
heart, mr. c.!"

"you can," returns 
 
 ___________________________
 
tever little balance
may be then outstanding of the costs as between solicitor and client
not included in the taxed costs allowed out of the estate. i pretend
to no claim upon you, mr. c., but for the zealous and active
discharge--not the languid and routine discharge, sir: that much
credit i stipulate for--of my professional duty. my duty prosperously
ended, all between us is ended."

vholes finally adds, by way of rider to this declaration of his
principles, that as mr. carstone is about to rejoin his regiment,
perhaps mr. c. will favour him with an order on his agent for twenty
pounds on account.

"for there have been many little consultations and attendances of
late, sir," observes vholes, turning over the leaves of his diary,
"and these things mount up, and i don't profess to be a man of
capital. when we first entered on our present relations i stated to
you openly--it is a principle of mine that there never can be too
much openness between solicitor and client--that i was not a man
 
 ___________________________
 
 and by this light it changes into
threatening hands raised up and menacing the handsome face with every
breath that stirs.

"she is not well, ma'am," says a groom in mrs. rouncewell's
audience-chamber.

"my lady not well! what's the matter?"

"why, my lady has been but poorly, ma'am, since she was last here--i
don't mean with the family, ma'am, but when she was here as a bird of
passage like. my lady has not been out much, for her, and has kept
her room a good deal."

"chesney wold, thomas," rejoins the housekeeper with proud
complacency, "will set my lady up! there is no finer air and no
healthier soil in the world!"

thomas may have his own personal opinions on this subject, probably
hints them in his manner of smoothing his sleek head from the nape of
his neck to his temples, but he forbears to express them further and
retires to the servants' hall to regale on cold meat-pie and ale.

this groom is the pilot-fish before the nobler shark. next evening,
down come sir leicester and my l
 
 ___________________________
 
ou, though inadvertently and
without intending so unreasonable a question, asked me 'what for?'
let me reply to you. for necessary expenses. and i trust to your good
sense, volumnia, not to pursue the subject, here or elsewhere."

sir leicester feels it incumbent on him to observe a crushing aspect
towards volumnia because it is whispered abroad that these necessary
expenses will, in some two hundred election petitions, be
unpleasantly connected with the word bribery, and because some
graceless jokers have consequently suggested the omission from the
church service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the high
court of parliament and have recommended instead that the prayers of
the congregation be requested for six hundred and fifty-eight
gentlemen in a very unhealthy state.

"i suppose," observes volumnia, having taken a little time to recover
her spirits after her late castigation, "i suppose mr. tulkinghorn
has been worked to death."

"i don't know," says sir leicester, opening h
 
 ___________________________
 
 as if from reproach and disgrace. he had no sense of
the honour done him and his daughter by the lady's condescension; not
the least. he resented the girl's position, as if the lady had been
the commonest of commoners. that is the story. i hope lady dedlock
will excuse its painful nature."

there are various opinions on the merits, more or less conflicting
with volumnia's. that fair young creature cannot believe there ever
was any such lady and rejects the whole history on the threshold. the
majority incline to the debilitated cousin's sentiment, which is in
few words--"no business--rouncewell's fernal townsman." sir leicester
generally refers back in his mind to wat tyler and arranges a
sequence of events on a plan of his own.

there is not much conversation in all, for late hours have been kept
at chesney wold since the necessary expenses elsewhere began, and
this is the first night in many on which the family have been alone.
it is past ten when sir leicester begs mr. tulkinghorn to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 water. winking cousins, bat-like in
the candle glare, crowd round to give it; volumnia (always ready for
something better if procurable) takes another, a very mild sip of
which contents her; lady dedlock, graceful, self-possessed, looked
after by admiring eyes, passes away slowly down the long perspective
by the side of that nymph, not at all improving her as a question of
contrast.




chapter xli

in mr. tulkinghorn's room


mr. tulkinghorn arrives in his turret-room a little breathed by the
journey up, though leisurely performed. there is an expression on his
face as if he had discharged his mind of some grave matter and were,
in his close way, satisfied. to say of a man so severely and strictly
self-repressed that he is triumphant would be to do him as great an
injustice as to suppose him troubled with love or sentiment or any
romantic weakness. he is sedately satisfied. perhaps there is a
rather increased sense of power upon him as he loosely grasps one of
his veinous wrists with h
 
 ___________________________
 
 to all here. i leave chesney wold to-night. i go this
hour."

mr. tulkinghorn shakes his head. she rises, but he, without moving
hand from chair-back or from old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill,
shakes his head.

"what? not go as i have said?"

"no, lady dedlock," he very calmly replies.

"do you know the relief that my disappearance will be? have you
forgotten the stain and blot upon this place, and where it is, and
who it is?"

"no, lady dedlock, not by any means."

without deigning to rejoin, she moves to the inner door and has it in
her hand when he says to her, without himself stirring hand or foot
or raising his voice, "lady dedlock, have the goodness to stop and
hear me, or before you reach the staircase i shall ring the
alarm-bell and rouse the house. and then i must speak out before
every guest and servant, every man and woman, in it."

he has conquered her. she falters, trembles, and puts her hand
confusedly to her head. slight tokens these in any one else, but when
so pra
 
 ___________________________
 
 family credit for a day. it is not to be thought of."

there is a quiet decision in his reply which admits of no
remonstrance.

"when i speak of sir leicester being the sole consideration, he and
the family credit are one. sir leicester and the baronetcy, sir
leicester and chesney wold, sir leicester and his ancestors and his
patrimony"--mr. tulkinghorn very dry here--"are, i need not say to
you, lady dedlock, inseparable."

"go on!"

"therefore," says mr. tulkinghorn, pursuing his case in his jog-trot
style, "i have much to consider. this is to be hushed up if it can
be. how can it be, if sir leicester is driven out of his wits or laid
upon a death-bed? if i inflicted this shock upon him to-morrow
morning, how could the immediate change in him be accounted for? what
could have caused it? what could have divided you? lady dedlock, the
wall-chalking and the street-crying would come on directly, and you
are to remember that it would not affect you merely (whom i cannot at
all consider in 
 
 ___________________________
 
he place in
lincolnshire.




chapter xlii

in mr. tulkinghorn's chambers


from the verdant undulations and the spreading oaks of the dedlock
property, mr. tulkinghorn transfers himself to the stale heat and
dust of london. his manner of coming and going between the two places
is one of his impenetrabilities. he walks into chesney wold as if it
were next door to his chambers and returns to his chambers as if he
had never been out of lincoln's inn fields. he neither changes his
dress before the journey nor talks of it afterwards. he melted out of
his turret-room this morning, just as now, in the late twilight, he
melts into his own square.

like a dingy london bird among the birds at roost in these pleasant
fields, where the sheep are all made into parchment, the goats into
wigs, and the pasture into chaff, the lawyer, smoke-dried and faded,
dwelling among mankind but not consorting with them, aged without
experience of genial youth, and so long used to make his cramped nest
in holes and
 
 ___________________________
 
lady and shuts her up in prison under hard
discipline. turns the key upon her, mistress." illustrating with the
cellar-key.

"truly?" returns mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice. "that is
droll! but--my faith!--still what does it matter to me?"

"my fair friend," says mr. tulkinghorn, "make another visit here, or
at mr. snagsby's, and you shall learn."

"in that case you will send me to the prison, perhaps?"

"perhaps."

it would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle's state of
agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth, otherwise a tigerish
expansion thereabouts might look as if a very little more would make
her do it.

"in a word, mistress," says mr. tulkinghorn, "i am sorry to be
unpolite, but if you ever present yourself uninvited here--or
there--again, i will give you over to the police. their gallantry is
great, but they carry troublesome people through the streets in an
ignominious manner, strapped down on a board, my good wench."

"i will prove you," whispers mademoiselle, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 answers, "twice two hundred times!"

"you were dismissed by your lady, you know," mr. tulkinghorn
observes, following her out upon the staircase, "as the most
implacable and unmanageable of women. now turn over a new leaf and
take warning by what i say to you. for what i say, i mean; and what i
threaten, i will do, mistress."

she goes down without answering or looking behind her. when she is
gone, he goes down too, and returning with his cobweb-covered bottle,
devotes himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its contents, now and
then, as he throws his head back in his chair, catching sight of the
pertinacious roman pointing from the ceiling.




chapter xliii

esther's narrative


it matters little now how much i thought of my living mother who had
told me evermore to consider her dead. i could not venture to
approach her or to communicate with her in writing, for my sense of
the peril in which her life was passed was only to be equalled by my
fears of increasing it. knowing that my mere e
 
 ___________________________
 
ghing, "my dear, who would advise
with skimpole?"

"encourager would perhaps have been a better word," said i.

"encourager!" returned my guardian again. "who could be encouraged by
skimpole?"

"not richard?" i asked.

"no," he replied. "such an unworldly, uncalculating, gossamer
creature is a relief to him and an amusement. but as to advising or
encouraging or occupying a serious station towards anybody or
anything, it is simply not to be thought of in such a child as
skimpole."

"pray, cousin john," said ada, who had just joined us and now looked
over my shoulder, "what made him such a child?"

"what made him such a child?" inquired my guardian, rubbing his head,
a little at a loss.

"yes, cousin john."

"why," he slowly replied, roughening his head more and more, "he is
all sentiment, and--and susceptibility, and--and sensibility,
and--and imagination. and these qualities are not regulated in him,
somehow. i suppose the people who admired him for them in his youth
attached too much im
 
 ___________________________
 
e i say to a
man, how much? suppose the man says to me seven and sixpence? i know
nothing about seven and sixpence. it is impossible for me to pursue
the subject with any consideration for the man. i don't go about
asking busy people what seven and sixpence is in moorish--which i
don't understand. why should i go about asking them what seven and
sixpence is in money--which i don't understand?"

"well," said my guardian, by no means displeased with this artless
reply, "if you come to any kind of journeying with rick, you must
borrow the money of me (never breathing the least allusion to that
circumstance), and leave the calculation to him."

"my dear jarndyce," returned mr. skimpole, "i will do anything to
give you pleasure, but it seems an idle form--a superstition.
besides, i give you my word, miss clare and my dear miss summerson, i
thought mr. carstone was immensely rich. i thought he had only to
make over something, or to sign a bond, or a draft, or a cheque, or a
bill, or to put som
 
 ___________________________
 
 what
ensued from it, was to happen before this day was out. our guest was
in such spirits on the way home that i could do nothing but listen to
him and wonder at him; nor was i alone in this, for ada yielded to
the same fascination. as to my guardian, the wind, which had
threatened to become fixed in the east when we left somers town,
veered completely round before we were a couple of miles from it.

whether of questionable childishness or not in any other matters, mr.
skimpole had a child's enjoyment of change and bright weather. in no
way wearied by his sallies on the road, he was in the drawing-room
before any of us; and i heard him at the piano while i was yet
looking after my housekeeping, singing refrains of barcaroles and
drinking songs, italian and german, by the score.

we were all assembled shortly before dinner, and he was still at the
piano idly picking out in his luxurious way little strains of music,
and talking between whiles of finishing some sketches of the ruined
old v
 
 ___________________________
 
sion on me as it
passed. i heard them speaking, but my mind was so confused and my
instinctive avoidance of this gentleman made his presence so
distressing to me that i thought i understood nothing, through the
rushing in my head and the beating of my heart.

"i mentioned the subject to lady dedlock," said sir leicester,
rising, "and my lady informed me that she had had the pleasure of
exchanging a few words with mr. jarndyce and his wards on the
occasion of an accidental meeting during their sojourn in the
vicinity. permit me, mr. jarndyce, to repeat to yourself, and to
these ladies, the assurance i have already tendered to mr. skimpole.
circumstances undoubtedly prevent my saying that it would afford me
any gratification to hear that mr. boythorn had favoured my house
with his presence, but those circumstances are confined to that
gentleman himself and do not extend beyond him."

"you know my old opinion of him," said mr. skimpole, lightly
appealing to us. "an amiable bull who is deter
 
 ___________________________
 
 to us that mr. vholes said neither more nor less than the
truth in intimating that he sought to divide the responsibility, such
as it was, of knowing richard's situation. i could only suggest that
i should go down to deal, where richard was then stationed, and see
him, and try if it were possible to avert the worst. without
consulting mr. vholes on this point, i took my guardian aside to
propose it, while mr. vholes gauntly stalked to the fire and warmed
his funeral gloves.

the fatigue of the journey formed an immediate objection on my
guardian's part, but as i saw he had no other, and as i was only too
happy to go, i got his consent. we had then merely to dispose of mr.
vholes.

"well, sir," said mr. jarndyce, "miss summerson will communicate with
mr. carstone, and you can only hope that his position may be yet
retrievable. you will allow me to order you lunch after your journey,
sir."

"i thank you, mr. jarndyce," said mr. vholes, putting out his long
black sleeve to check the ringin
 
 ___________________________
 

too true to richard to say anything but words of pity and words of
excuse, and in a more loving spirit still--my dear devoted girl!--she
wrote him a long letter, of which i took charge.

charley was to be my travelling companion, though i am sure i wanted
none and would willingly have left her at home. we all went to london
that afternoon, and finding two places in the mail, secured them. at
our usual bed-time, charley and i were rolling away seaward with the
kentish letters.

it was a night's journey in those coach times, but we had the mail to
ourselves and did not find the night very tedious. it passed with me
as i suppose it would with most people under such circumstances. at
one while my journey looked hopeful, and at another hopeless. now i
thought i should do some good, and now i wondered how i could ever
have supposed so. now it seemed one of the most reasonable things in
the world that i should have come, and now one of the most
unreasonable. in what state i should find richard
 
 ___________________________
 
 the letter he had written into fragments and moodily casting
them away, by driblets, "how could i have gone abroad? i must have
been ordered abroad, but how could i have gone? how could i, with my
experience of that thing, trust even vholes unless i was at his
back!"

i suppose he knew by my face what i was about to say, but he caught
the hand i had laid upon his arm and touched my own lips with it to
prevent me from going on.

"no, dame durden! two subjects i forbid--must forbid. the first is
john jarndyce. the second, you know what. call it madness, and i tell
you i can't help it now, and can't be sane. but it is no such thing;
it is the one object i have to pursue. it is a pity i ever was
prevailed upon to turn out of my road for any other. it would be
wisdom to abandon it now, after all the time, anxiety, and pains i
have bestowed upon it! oh, yes, true wisdom. it would be very
agreeable, too, to some people; but i never will."

he was in that mood in which i thought it best not to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 be the dearest wish of her heart," said i.
"and, oh, my dear richard, ada's is a noble heart."

"i am sure it is. i--i wish i was dead!"

he went back to the window, and laying his arm across it, leaned his
head down on his arm. it greatly affected me to see him so, but i
hoped he might become more yielding, and i remained silent. my
experience was very limited; i was not at all prepared for his
rousing himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury.

"and this is the heart that the same john jarndyce, who is not
otherwise to be mentioned between us, stepped in to estrange from
me," said he indignantly. "and the dear girl makes me this generous
offer from under the same john jarndyce's roof, and with the same
john jarndyce's gracious consent and connivance, i dare say, as a new
means of buying me off."

"richard!" i cried out, rising hastily. "i will not hear you say such
shameful words!" i was very angry with him indeed, for the first time
in my life, but it only lasted a moment.
 
 ___________________________
 
owed me without hesitation
a correspondence making it quite plain that his retirement was
arranged. i found, from what he told me, that mr. vholes had copies
of these papers and had been in consultation with him throughout.
beyond ascertaining this, and having been the bearer of ada's letter,
and being (as i was going to be) richard's companion back to london,
i had done no good by coming down. admitting this to myself with a
reluctant heart, i said i would return to the hotel and wait until he
joined me there, so he threw a cloak over his shoulders and saw me to
the gate, and charley and i went back along the beach.

there was a concourse of people in one spot, surrounding some naval
officers who were landing from a boat, and pressing about them with
unusual interest. i said to charley this would be one of the great
indiaman's boats now, and we stopped to look.

the gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking
good-humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing

 
 ___________________________
 
e same gentlemen because i knew their voices
again--i mean i knew mr. woodcourt's. it would still have been a
great relief to me to have gone away without making myself known, but
i was determined not to do so. "no, my dear, no. no, no, no!"

i untied my bonnet and put my veil half up--i think i mean half down,
but it matters very little--and wrote on one of my cards that i
happened to be there with mr. richard carstone, and i sent it in to
mr. woodcourt. he came immediately. i told him i was rejoiced to be
by chance among the first to welcome him home to england. and i saw
that he was very sorry for me.

"you have been in shipwreck and peril since you left us, mr.
woodcourt," said i, "but we can hardly call that a misfortune which
enabled you to be so useful and so brave. we read of it with the
truest interest. it first came to my knowledge through your old
patient, poor miss flite, when i was recovering from my severe
illness."

"ah! little miss flite!" he said. "she lives the same lif
 
 ___________________________
 
t
going well with him. he frequently glanced at his face as if there
were something in it that gave him pain, and more than once he looked
towards me as though he sought to ascertain whether i knew what the
truth was. yet richard was in one of his sanguine states and in good
spirits and was thoroughly pleased to see mr. woodcourt again, whom
he had always liked.

richard proposed that we all should go to london together; but mr.
woodcourt, having to remain by his ship a little longer, could not
join us. he dined with us, however, at an early hour, and became so
much more like what he used to be that i was still more at peace to
think i had been able to soften his regrets. yet his mind was not
relieved of richard. when the coach was almost ready and richard ran
down to look after his luggage, he spoke to me about him.

i was not sure that i had a right to lay his whole story open, but i
referred in a few words to his estrangement from mr jarndyce and to
his being entangled in the ill-fate
 
 ___________________________
 
s bright dark
eye there is compassionate interest; and as he looks here and there,
he seems to understand such wretchedness and to have studied it
before.

on the banks of the stagnant channel of mud which is the main street
of tom-all-alone's, nothing is to be seen but the crazy houses, shut
up and silent. no waking creature save himself appears except in one
direction, where he sees the solitary figure of a woman sitting on a
door-step. he walks that way. approaching, he observes that she has
journeyed a long distance and is footsore and travel-stained. she
sits on the door-step in the manner of one who is waiting, with her
elbow on her knee and her head upon her hand. beside her is a canvas
bag, or bundle, she has carried. she is dozing probably, for she
gives no heed to his steps as he comes toward her.

the broken footway is so narrow that when allan woodcourt comes to
where the woman sits, he has to turn into the road to pass her.
looking down at her face, his eye meets hers, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
e curve, the duck, the dive, and scours away again. to
strike at him on any of these occasions would be to fell and disable
him, but the pursuer cannot resolve to do that, and so the grimly
ridiculous pursuit continues. at last the fugitive, hard-pressed,
takes to a narrow passage and a court which has no thoroughfare.
here, against a hoarding of decaying timber, he is brought to bay and
tumbles down, lying gasping at his pursuer, who stands and gasps at
him until the woman comes up.

"oh, you, jo!" cries the woman. "what? i have found you at last!"

"jo," repeats allan, looking at him with attention, "jo! stay. to be
sure! i recollect this lad some time ago being brought before the
coroner."

"yes, i see you once afore at the inkwhich," whimpers jo. "what of
that? can't you never let such an unfortnet as me alone? an't i
unfortnet enough for you yet? how unfortnet do you want me fur to be?
i've been a-chivied and a-chivied, fust by one on you and nixt by
another on you, till i'm worritt
 
 ___________________________
 
why i don't go and make a hole
in the water, i'm sure i don't."

he says it with such a pitiable air, and his grimy tears appear so
real, and he lies in the corner up against the hoarding so like a
growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produced there in
neglect and impurity, that allan woodcourt is softened towards him.
he says to the woman, "miserable creature, what has he done?"

to which she only replies, shaking her head at the prostrate figure
more amazedly than angrily, "oh, you jo, you jo. i have found you at
last!"

"what has he done?" says allan. "has he robbed you?"

"no, sir, no. robbed me? he did nothing but what was kind-hearted by
me, and that's the wonder of it."

allan looks from jo to the woman, and from the woman to jo, waiting
for one of them to unravel the riddle.

"but he was along with me, sir," says the woman. "oh, you jo! he was
along with me, sir, down at saint albans, ill, and a young lady, lord
bless her for a good friend to me, took pity on him when 
 
 ___________________________
 
ans rattles.

allan restrains the woman, merely by a quiet gesture, but
effectually.

"richard told me--" he falters. "i mean, i have heard of this--don't
mind me for a moment, i will speak presently."

he turns away and stands for a while looking out at the covered
passage. when he comes back, he has recovered his composure, except
that he contends against an avoidance of the boy, which is so very
remarkable that it absorbs the woman's attention.

"you hear what she says. but get up, get up!"

jo, shaking and chattering, slowly rises and stands, after the manner
of his tribe in a difficulty, sideways against the hoarding, resting
one of his high shoulders against it and covertly rubbing his right
hand over his left and his left foot over his right.

"you hear what she says, and i know it's true. have you been here
ever since?"

"wishermaydie if i seen tom-all-alone's till this blessed morning,"
replies jo hoarsely.

"why have you come here now?"

jo looks all round the confined court, l
 
 ___________________________
 
ooks at his questioner no
higher than the knees, and finally answers, "i don't know how to do
nothink, and i can't get nothink to do. i'm wery poor and ill, and i
thought i'd come back here when there warn't nobody about, and lay
down and hide somewheres as i knows on till arter dark, and then go
and beg a trifle of mr. snagsby. he wos allus willin fur to give me
somethink he wos, though mrs. snagsby she was allus a-chivying on
me--like everybody everywheres."

"where have you come from?"

jo looks all round the court again, looks at his questioner's knees
again, and concludes by laying his profile against the hoarding in a
sort of resignation.

"did you hear me ask you where you have come from?"

"tramp then," says jo.

"now tell me," proceeds allan, making a strong effort to overcome his
repugnance, going very near to him, and leaning over him with an
expression of confidence, "tell me how it came about that you left
that house when the good young lady had been so unfortunate as t
 
 ___________________________
 
o
pity you and take you home."

jo suddenly comes out of his resignation and excitedly declares,
addressing the woman, that he never known about the young lady, that
he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, that he
would sooner have hurt his own self, that he'd sooner have had his
unfortnet ed chopped off than ever gone a-nigh her, and that she wos
wery good to him, she wos. conducting himself throughout as if in his
poor fashion he really meant it, and winding up with some very
miserable sobs.

allan woodcou
 
 ___________________________
 
rt sees that this is not a sham. he constrains himself
to touch him. "come, jo. tell me."

"no. i dustn't," says jo, relapsing into the profile state. "i
dustn't, or i would."

"but i must know," returns the other, "all the same. come, jo."

after two or three such adjurations, jo lifts up his head again,
looks round the court again, and says in a low voice, "well, i'll
tell you something. i was took away. there!"

"took away? in the night?"

"ah!" very apprehensive of being overheard, jo looks about him and
even glances up some ten feet at the top of the hoarding and through
the cracks in it lest the object of his distrust should be looking
over or hidden on the other side.

"who took you away?"

"i dustn't name him," says jo. "i dustn't do it, sir.

"but i want, in the young lady's name, to know. you may trust me. no
one else shall hear."

"ah, but i don't know," replies jo, shaking his head fearfully, "as
he don't hear."

"why, he is not in this place."

"oh, ain't he though?
 
 ___________________________
 
" says jo. "he's in all manner of places, all at
wanst."

allan looks at him in perplexity, but discovers some real meaning and
good faith at the bottom of this bewildering reply. he patiently
awaits an explicit answer; and jo, more baffled by his patience than
by anything else, at last desperately whispers a name in his ear.

"aye!" says allan. "why, what had you been doing?"

"nothink, sir. never done nothink to get myself into no trouble,
'sept in not moving on and the inkwhich. but i'm a-moving on now. i'm
a-moving on to the berryin ground--that's the move as i'm up to."

"no, no, we will try to prevent that. but what did he do with you?"

"put me in a horsepittle," replied jo, whispering, "till i was
discharged,
 
 ___________________________
 
 then giv me a little money--four half-bulls, wot you may
call half-crowns--and ses 'hook it! nobody wants you here,' he ses.
'you hook it. you go and tramp,' he ses. 'you move on,' he ses.
'don't let me ever see you nowheres within forty mile of london, or
you'll repent it.' so i shall, if ever he doos see me, and he'll see
me if i'm above ground," concludes jo, nervously repeating all his
former precautions and investigations.

allan considers a little, then remarks, turning to the woman but
keeping an encouraging eye on jo, "he is not so ungrateful as you
supposed. he had a reason for going away, though it was an
insufficient one."

"thankee, sir, thankee!" exclaims jo. "there now! see how hard you
wos upon me. but ony you tell the young lady wot the genlmn ses, and
it's all right. for you wos wery good to me too, and i knows it."

"now, jo," says a
 
 ___________________________
 
side of the way and you the other to avoid observation, you
will not run away, i know very well, if you make me a promise."

"i won't, not unless i wos to see him a-coming, sir."

"very well. i take your word. half the town is getting up by this
time, and the whole town will be broad awake in another hour. come
along. good day again, my good woman."

"good day again, sir, and i thank you kindly many times again."

she has been sitting on her bag, deeply attentive, and now rises and
takes it up. jo, repeating, "ony you tell the young lady as i never
went fur to hurt her and wot the genlmn ses!" nods and shambles and
shivers, and smears and blinks, and half laughs and half cries, a
farewell to her, and takes his creeping way along after allan
woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of the street. in
this order, the two come up out of tom-all-alone's into the broad
rays of the sunlight and the purer air.




chapter xlvii

jo's will


as allan woodcourt and jo proceed along the 
 
 ___________________________
 
es and the distances are so near and clear in the morning
light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, allan revolves in
his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. "it surely is a
strange fact," he considers, "that in the heart of a civilized world
this creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of
than an unowned dog." but it is none the less a fact because of its
strangeness, and the difficulty remains.

at first he looks behind him often to assure himself that jo is still
really following. but look where he will, he still beholds him close
to the opposite houses, making his way with his wary hand from brick
to brick and from door to door, and often, as he creeps along,
glancing over at him watchfully. soon satisfied that the last thing
in his thoughts is to give him the slip, allan goes on, considering
with a less divided attention what he shall do.

a breakfast-stall at a street-corner suggests the first thing to be
done. he stops there, looks round, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd beckons jo. jo crosses and
comes halting and shuffling up, slowly scooping the knuckles of his
right hand round and round in the hollowed palm of his left, kneading
dirt with a natural pestle and mortar. what is a dainty repast to jo
is then set before him, and he begins to gulp the coffee and to gnaw
the bread and butter, looking anxiously about him in all directions
as he eats and drinks, like a scared animal.

but he is so sick and miserable that even hunger has abandoned him.
"i thought i was amost a-starvin, sir," says jo, soon putting down
his food, "but i don't know nothink--not even that. i don't care for
eating wittles nor yet for drinking on 'em." and jo stands shivering
and looking at the breakfast wonderingly.


 
 ___________________________
 
allan woodcourt lays his hand upon his pulse and on his chest. "draw
breath, jo!" "it draws," says jo, "as heavy as a cart." he might add,
"and rattles like it," but he only mutters, "i'm a-moving on, sir."

allan looks about for an apothecary's shop. there is none at hand,
but a tavern does as well or better. he obtains a little measure of
wine and gives the lad a portion of it very carefully. he begins to
revive almost as soon as it passes his lips. "we may repeat that
dose, jo," observes allan after watching him with his attentive face.
"so! now we will take five minutes' rest, and then go on again."

leaving the boy sitting on the bench of the breakfast-stall, with his
back against an iron railing, allan woodcourt paces up and down in
the early sunshine, casting an occasional look towards him without
appearing to watch him. it requires no discernment to perceive that
he is warmed and refreshed. if a face so shaded can brighten, his
face brightens somewhat; and by li
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle and little he eats the slice
of bread he had so hopelessly laid down. observant of these signs of
improvement, allan engages him in conversation and elicits to his no
small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil, with all its
consequences. jo slowly munches as he slowly tells it. when he has
finished his story and his bread, they go on again.

intending to refer his difficulty in finding a temporary place of
refuge for the boy to his old patient, zealous little miss flite,
allan leads the way to the court where he and jo first foregathered.
but all is changed at the rag and bottle shop; miss flite no longer
lodges there; it is shut up; and a hard-featured female, much
obscured by dust, whose age is a problem, but who is indeed no ot
 
 ___________________________
 
here miss flite (who rises early that she
may be punctual at the divan of justice held by her excellent friend
the chancellor) comes running downstairs with tears of welcome and
with open arms.

"my dear physician!" cries miss flite. "my meritorious,
distinguished, honourable officer!" she uses some odd expressions,
but is as cordial and full of heart as sanity itself can be--more so
than it often is. allan, very patient with her, waits until she has
no more raptures to express, then points out jo, trembling in a
doorway, and tells her how he comes there.

"where can i lodge him hereabouts for the present? now, you have a
fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise me."

miss flite, mighty proud of the compliment, sets herself to consider;
but it is long before a bright thought occurs to her. mrs. blinder is
entirely let, and she herself occupies poor gridley's room.
"gridley!" exclaims miss flite, clapping her hands after a twentieth
repetition of this remark. "gridley! to be sure! 
 
 ___________________________
 
of course! my dear
physician! general george will help us out."

it is hopeless to ask for any information about general george, and
would be, though miss flite had not already run upstairs to put on
her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself with
her reticule of documents. but as she informs her physician in her
disjointed manner on coming down in full array that general george,
whom she often calls upon, knows her dear fitz jarndyce and takes a
great interest in all connected with her, allan is induced to think
that they may be in the right way. so he tells jo, for his
encouragement, that this walking about will soon be over now; and
they repair to the general's. fortunately it is not far.

from the exterior of george's shooting gallery, and the long entry,
and the bare perspective beyond it, allan woodcour
 
 ___________________________
 
blue-jacket
myself."

allan hopes mr. george will forgive his intrusion the more readily on
that account, and particularly that he will not lay aside his pipe,
which, in his politeness, he has testified some intention of doing.
"you are very good, sir," returns the trooper. "as i know by
experience that it's not disagreeable to miss flite, and since it's
equally agreeable to yourself--" and finishes the sentence by putting
it between his lips again. allan proceeds to tell him all he knows
about jo, unto which the trooper listens with a grave face.

"and that's the lad, sir, is it?" he inquires, looking along the
entry to where jo stands staring up at the great letters on the
whitewashed front, which have no meaning in his eyes.

"that's he," says allan. "and, mr. george, i am in this difficulty
about him. i am unwilling to place him in a hospital, even if i could
procure him immediate admission, because i foresee that he would not
stay there many hours if he could be so much as got there
 
 ___________________________
 
have not
mentioned that party's name. is it a secret, sir?"

"the boy makes it one. but his name is bucket."

"bucket the detective, sir?"

"the same man."

"the man is known to me, sir," returns the trooper after blowing out
a cloud of smoke and squaring his chest, "and the boy is so far
correct that he undoubtedly is a--rum customer." mr. george smokes
with a profound meaning after this and surveys miss flite in silence.

"now, i wish mr. jarndyce and miss summerson at least to know that
this jo, who tells so strange a story, has reappeared, and to have it
in their power to speak with him if they should desire to do so.
therefore i want to get him, for the present moment, into any poor
lodging kept by decent people where he would be admitted. decent
people and jo, mr. george," says allan, following the direction of
the trooper's eyes along the entry, "have not been much acquainted,
as you see. hence the difficulty. do you happen to know any one in
this neighbourhood who would receive h
 
 ___________________________
 
low and reduced and
that he may be--i do not say that he is--too far gone to recover."

"do you consider him in present danger, sir?" inquires the trooper.

"yes, i fear so."

"then, sir," returns the trooper in a decisive manner, "it appears to
me--being naturally in the vagabond way myself--that the sooner he
comes out of the street, the better. you, phil! bring him in!"

mr. squod tacks out, all on one side, to execute the word of command;
and the trooper, having smoked his pipe, lays it by. jo is brought
in. he is not one of mrs. pardiggle's tockahoopo indians; he is not
one of mrs. jellyby's lambs, being wholly unconnected with
borrioboola-gha; he is not softened by distance and unfamiliarity; he
is not a genuine foreign-grown savage; he is the ordinary home-made
article. dirty, ugly, disagreeable to all the senses, in body a
common creature of the common streets, only in soul a heathen. homely
filth begrimes him, homely parasites devour him, homely sores are in
him, homely rags are
 
 ___________________________
 
 on him; native ignorance, the growth of english
soil and climate, sinks his immortal nature lower than the beasts
that perish. stand forth, jo, in uncompromising colours! from the
sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head, there is nothing
interesting about thee.

he shuffles slowly into mr. george's gallery and stands huddled
together in a bundle, looking all about the floor. he seems to know
that they have an inclination to shrink from him, partly for what he
is and partly for what he has caused. he, too, shrinks from them. he
is not of the same order of things, not of the same place in
creation. he is of no order and no place, neit
 
 ___________________________
 
her of the beasts nor
of humanity.

"look here, jo!" says allan. "this is mr. george."

jo searches the floor for some time longer, then looks up for a
moment, and then down again.

"he is a kind friend to you, for he is going to give you lodging room
here."

jo makes a scoop with one hand, which is supposed to be a bow. after
a little more consideration and some backing and changing of the foot
on which he rests, he mutters that he is "wery thankful."

"you are quite safe here. all you have to do at present is to be
obedient and to get strong. and mind you tell us the truth here,
whatever you do, jo."

"wishermaydie if i don't, sir," says jo, reverting to his favourite
declaration. "i never done nothink yit, but wot you knows on, to get
myself into no
 
 ___________________________
 
or
creature. you do, don't you, phil?"

"certainly and surely i do, guv'ner," is phil's reply.

"now i was thinking, sir," says mr. george in a martial sort of
confidence, as if he were giving his opinion in a council of war at a
drum-head, "that if this man was to take him to a bath and was to lay
out a few shillings in getting him one or two coarse articles--"

"mr. george, my considerate friend," returns allan, taking out his
purse, "it is the very favour i would have asked."

phil squod and jo are sent out immediately on this work of
improvement. miss flite, quite enraptured by her success, makes the
best of her way to court, having great fears that otherwise her
friend the chancellor may be uneasy about her or may give the
judgment she has so long expected in her absence, and observing
"which you know, my dear physician, and general, after so many years,
would be too absurdly unfortunate!" allan takes the opportunity of
going out to procure some restorative medicines, and obtaining 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it necessary to wipe his
forehead on his shirt-sleeve. even while he whistles his impetuosity
away with the national anthem, some involuntary shakings of his head
and heavings of his chest still linger behind, not to mention an
occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of his open shirt-collar,
as if it were scarcely open enough to prevent his being troubled by a
choking sensation. in short, allan woodcourt has not much doubt about
the going down of mr. tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

jo and his conductor presently return, and jo is assisted to his
mattress by the careful phil, to whom, after due administration of
medicine by his own hands, allan confides all needful means and
instructions. the morning is by this time getting on apace. he
repairs to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without
seeking rest, goes away to mr. jarndyce to communicate his discovery.

with him mr. jarndyce returns alone, confidentially telling him that
there are reasons for keeping this ma
 
 ___________________________
 
tter very quiet indeed and
showing a serious interest in it. to mr. jarndyce, jo repeats in
substance what he said in the morning, without any material
variation. only that cart of his is heavier to draw, and draws with a
hollower sound.

"let me lay here quiet and not be chivied no more," falters jo, "and
be so kind any person as is a-passin nigh where i used fur to sleep,
as jist to say to mr. sangsby that jo, wot he known once, is a-moving
on right forards with his duty, and i'll be wery thankful. i'd be
more thankful than i am aready if it wos any ways possible for an
unfortnet to be it."

he makes so many of these references to the law-stationer in the
course of a day or two that allan, after conferring with mr.
jarndyce, good-naturedly resolves to call in cook's court, the
rather, as the cart seems to be breaking down.

to cook's court, therefore, he repairs. mr. snagsby is behind his
counter in
 
 ___________________________
 
against his desk, protesting, "i never had a secret of my own, sir. i
can't charge my memory with ever having once attempted to deceive my
little woman on my own account since she named the day. i wouldn't
have done it, sir. not to put too fine a point upon it, i couldn't
have done it, i dursn't have done it. whereas, and nevertheless, i
find myself wrapped round with secrecy and mystery, till my life is a
burden to me."

his visitor professes his regret to hear it and asks him does he
remember jo. mr. snagsby answers with a suppressed groan, oh, don't
he!

"you couldn't name an individual human being--except myself--that my
little woman is more set and determined against than jo," says mr.
snagsby.

allan asks why.

"why?" repeats mr. snagsby, in his desperation clutching at the clump
of hair at the back of his bald head. "how should i know why? but you
are a single person, sir, and may you long be spared to ask a married
person such a question!"

with this beneficent wish, mr. snagsby 
 
 ___________________________
 
coughs a cough of dismal
resignation and submits himself to hear what the visitor has to
communicate.

"there again!" says mr. snagsby, who, between the earnestness of his
feelings and the suppressed tones of his voice is discoloured in the
face. "at it again, in a new direction! a certain person charges me,
in the solemnest way, not to talk of jo to any one, even my little
woman. then comes another certain person, in the person of yourself,
and charges me, in an equally solemn way, not to mention jo to that
other certain person above all other persons. why, this is a private
asylum! why, not to put too fine a point upon it, this is bedlam,
sir!" says mr. snagsby.

but it is better than he expected after all, being no explosion of
the mine below him or deepening of the pit into which he has fallen.
and being tender-hearted and affected b
 
 ___________________________
 
y the account he hears of jo's
condition, he readily engages to "look round" as early in the evening
as he can manage it quietly. he looks round very quietly when the
evening comes, but it may turn out that mrs. snagsby is as quiet a
manager as he.

jo is very glad to see his old friend and says, when they are left
alone, that he takes it uncommon kind as mr. sangsby should come so
far out of his way on accounts of sich as him. mr. snagsby, touched
by the spectacle before him, immediately lays upon the table half a
crown, that magic balsam of his for all kinds of wounds.

"and how do you find yourself, my poor lad?" inquires the stationer
with his cough of sympathy.

"i am in luck, mr. sangsby, i am," returns jo, "and don't want for
nothink. 
 
 ___________________________
 
i'm more cumfbler nor you can't think. mr. sangsby! i'm wery
sorry that i done it, but i didn't go fur to do it, sir."

the stationer softly lays down another half-crown and asks him what
it is that he is sorry for having done.

"mr. sangsby," says jo, "i went and giv a illness to the lady as wos
and yit as warn't the t'other lady, and none of 'em never says
nothink to me for having done it, on accounts of their being ser good
and my having been s'unfortnet. the lady come herself and see me
yesday, and she ses, 'ah, jo!' she ses. 'we thought we'd lost you,
jo!' she ses. and she sits down a-smilin so quiet, and don't pass a
word nor yit a look upon me for having done it, she don't, and i
turns agin the wall, i doos, mr. sangsby. and mr. jarnd
 
 ___________________________
 
ers, i see him
a-forced to turn away his own self. and mr. woodcot, he come fur to
giv me somethink fur to ease me, wot he's allus a-doin' on day and
night, and wen he come a-bending over me and a-speakin up so bold, i
see his tears a-fallin, mr. sangsby."

the softened stationer deposits another half-crown on the table.
nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will relieve
his feelings.

"wot i was a-thinkin on, mr. sangsby," proceeds jo, "wos, as you wos
able to write wery large, p'raps?"

"yes, jo, please god," returns the stationer.

"uncommon precious large, p'raps?" says jo with eagerness.

"yes, my poor boy."

jo laughs with pleasure. "wot i wos a-thinking on then, mr. sangsby,
wos, that when i wos moved on as fur as ever i could go and couldn't
be moved no furder, whether you might be so good p'raps as to write
out, wery large so that any one could see it anywheres, as that i wos
wery truly hearty sorry that i done it an
 
 ___________________________
 
d that i never went fur to
do it, and that though i didn't know nothink at all, i knowd as mr.
woodcot once cried over it and wos allus grieved over it, and that i
hoped as he'd be able to forgive me in his mind. if the writin could
be made to say it wery large, he might."

"it shall say it, jo. very large."

jo laughs again. "thankee, mr. sangsby. it's wery kind of you, sir,
and it makes me more cumfbler nor i was afore."

the meek little stationer, with a broken and unfinished cough, slips
down his fourth half-crown--he has never been so close to a case
requiring so many--and is fain to depart. and jo and he, upon this
little earth, shall meet no more. no more.

for the cart so hard to draw is near its journey's end and drags over
stony ground. all round the clock it labours up the broken steps,
shat
 
 ___________________________
 
ing
round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an encouraging
elevation of his one eyebrow, "hold up, my boy! hold up!" there, too,
is mr. jarndyce many a time, and allan woodcourt almost always, both
thinking, much, how strangely fate has entangled this rough outcast
in the web of very different lives. there, too, the trooper is a
frequent visitor, filling the doorway with his athletic figure and,
from his superfluity of life and strength, seeming to shed down
temporary vigour upon jo, who never fails to speak more robustly in
answer to his cheerful words.

jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and allan woodcourt, newly
arrived, stands by him, looking down upon his wasted form. after a
while he softly seats himself upon the bedside with his face towards
him--just as he sat in the law-writer's room--and touches his chest
and heart. the cart had very nearly given up, but labours on a little
more.

the trooper stands in the doorway, still and silent. phil has stopped
in a lo
 
 ___________________________
 
w clinking noise, with his little hammer in his hand. mr.
woodcourt looks round with that grave professional interest and
attention on his face, and glancing significantly at the trooper,
signs to phil to carry his table out. when the little hammer is next
used, there will be a speck of rust upon it.

"well, jo! what is the matter? don't be frightened."

"i thought," says jo, who has started and is looking round, "i
thought i was in tom-all-alone's agin. ain't there nobody here but
you, mr. woodcot?"

"nobody."

"and i ain't took back to tom-all-alone's. am i, sir?"

"no." jo closes his eyes, muttering, "i'm wery thankful."

after watching him closely a little while, allan puts his mouth very
near his ear and says to him in a low, distinct voice, "jo! did you
ever know a prayer?"

"never knowd nothink, sir."

"not so much as one short prayer?"

"no, sir. nothink at
 
 ___________________________
 
m-all-alone's a-prayin, but they all mostly sed as the t'other
'wuns prayed wrong, and all mostly sounded to be a-talking to
theirselves, or a-passing blame on the t'others, and not a-talkin to
us. we never knowd nothink. i never knowd what it wos all about."

it takes him a long time to say this, and few but an experienced and
attentive listener could hear, or, hearing, understand him. after a
short relapse into sleep or stupor, he makes, of a sudden, a strong
effort to get out of bed.

"stay, jo! what now?"

"it's time for me to go to that there berryin ground, sir," he
returns with a wild look.

"lie down, and tell me. what burying ground, jo?"

"where they laid him as wos wery good to me, wery good to me indeed,
he wos. it's time fur me to go down to that there berryin ground,
sir, and ask to be put along with him. i wants to go there and be
berried. he used fur to say to me, 'i am as poor as you to-day, jo,'
he ses. i wants to tell him that i am as poor as him now and have
come ther
 
 ___________________________
 
e to be laid along with him."

"by and by, jo. by and by."

"ah! p'raps they wouldn't do it if i wos to go myself. but will you
promise to have me took there, sir, and laid along with him?"

"i will, indeed."

"thankee, sir. thankee, sir. they'll have to get the key of the gate
afore they can take me in, for it's allus locked. and there's a step
there, as i used for to clean with my broom. it's turned wery dark,
sir. is there any light a-comin?"

"it is coming fast, jo."

fast. the cart is shaken all to pieces, and the rugged road is very
near its end.

"jo, my poor fellow!"

"i hear you, sir, in the dark, but i'm a-gropin--a-gropin--let me
catch hold of your hand."

"jo, can you say what i say?"

"i'll say anythink as you say, sir, for i knows it's good."

"our father."

"our father! yes, that's wery good, sir."

"which art in heaven."

"art in heaven--is the light a-comin, sir?"

"it is close at hand. hallowed be thy name!"

"hallowed be--thy--"

the light 
 
 ___________________________
 
 taken in
by the vendor and installed in the possession of the oldest
inhabitants of any coop in europe. returning with these triumphs of
toughness tied up in a clean blue and white cotton handkerchief
(essential to the arrangements), he in a casual manner invites mrs.
bagnet to declare at breakfast what she would like for dinner. mrs.
bagnet, by a coincidence never known to fail, replying fowls, mr.
bagnet instantly produces his bundle from a place of concealment
amidst general amazement and rejoicing. he further requires that the
old girl shall do nothing all day long but sit in her very best gown
and be served by himself and the young people. as he is not
illustrious for his cookery, this may be supposed to be a matter of
state rather than enjoyment on the old girl's part, but she keeps her
state with all imaginable cheerfulness.

on this present birthday, mr. bagnet has accomplished the usual
preliminaries. he has bought two specimens of poultry, which, if
there be any truth in adage
 
 ___________________________
 
s, were certainly not caught with chaff,
to be prepared for the spit; he has amazed and rejoiced the family by
their unlooked-for production; he is himself directing the roasting
of the poultry; and mrs. bagnet, with her wholesome brown fingers
itching to prevent what she sees going wrong, sits in her gown of
ceremony, an honoured guest.

quebec and malta lay the cloth for dinner, while woolwich, serving,
as beseems him, under his father, keeps the fowls revolving. to these
young scullions mrs. bagnet occasionally imparts a wink, or a shake
of the head, or a crooked face, as they made 
 
 ___________________________
 
sion of tongues, a clattering
of crockery, a rattling of tin mugs, a whisking of brooms, and an
expenditure of water, all in excess, while the saturation of the
young ladies themselves is almost too moving a spectacle for mrs.
bagnet to look upon with the calmness proper to her position. at last
the various cleansing processes are triumphantly completed; quebec
and malta appear in fresh attire, smiling and dry; pipes, tobacco,
and something to drink are placed upon the table; and the old girl
enjoys the first peace of mind she ever knows on the day of this
delightful entertainment.

when mr. bagnet takes his usual seat, the hands of the clock are very
near to half-past four; as they mark it accurately, mr. bagnet
announces, "george! military time."

it is george, and he has hearty congratulations for the old girl
(whom he kisses on the great occasion), and for the children, and for
mr. bagnet. "happy returns to all!" says mr. george.

"but, george, old man!" cries mrs. bagnet, looking at
 
 ___________________________
 
dren close up to see it done, and mr. bagnet looks over young
woolwich's head to see it done with an interest so maturely wooden,
yet pleasantly childish, that mrs. bagnet cannot help laughing in her
airy way and saying, "oh, lignum, lignum, what a precious old chap
you are!" but the trooper fails to fasten the brooch. his hand
shakes, he is nervous, and it falls off. "would any one believe
this?" says he, catching it as it drops and looking round. "i am so
out of sorts that i bungle at an easy job like this!"

mrs. bagnet concludes that for such a case there is no remedy like a
pipe, and fastening the brooch herself in a twinkling, causes the
trooper to be inducted into his usual snug place and the pipes to be
got into action. "if that don't bring you round, george," says she,
"just throw your eye across here at your present now and then, and
the two together must do it."

"you ought to do it of yourself," george answers; "i know that very
well, mrs. bagnet. i'll tell you how, one way a
 
 ___________________________
 
n--and he takes in everybody's look at him, all at once,
individually and collectively, in a manner that stamps him a
remarkable man.

"george," says the man, nodding, "how do you find yourself?"

"why, it's bucket!" cries mr. george.

"yes," says the man, coming in and closing the door. "i was going
down the street here when i happened to stop and look in at the
musical instruments in the shop-window--a friend of mine is in want
of a second-hand wiolinceller of a good tone--and i saw a party
enjoying themselves, and i thought it was you in the corner; i
thought i couldn't be mistaken. how goes the world with you, george,
at the present moment? pretty smooth? and with you, ma'am? and with
you, governor? and lord," says mr. bucket, opening his arms, "here's
children too! you may do anything with me if you only show me
children. give us a kiss, my pets. no occasion to inquire who your
father and mother is. never saw such a likeness in my life!"

mr. bucket, not unwelcome, has sat himself d
 
 ___________________________
 
ter under any circumstances, but she tells him
that as a friend of george's she is particularly glad to see him this
evening, for george has not been in his usual spirits.

"not in his usual spirits?" exclaims mr. bucket. "why, i never heard
of such a thing! what's the matter, george? you don't intend to tell
me you've been out of spirits. what should you be out of spirits for?
you haven't got anything on your mind, you know."

"nothing particular," returns the trooper.

"i should think not," rejoins mr. bucket. "what could you have on
your mind, you know! and have these pets got anything on their minds,
eh? not they, but they'll be upon the minds of some of the young
fellows, some of these days, and make 'em precious low-spirited. i
ain't much of a prophet, but i can tell you that, ma'am."

mrs. bagnet, quite charmed, hopes mr. bucket has a family of his own.

"there, ma'am!" says mr. bucket. "would you believe it? no, i
haven't. my wife and a lodger constitute my family. mrs. bucket is
 
 ___________________________
 
 boy, ma'am."

"i can certify at all events that he is not anybody else's," returns
mrs. bagnet, laughing.

"well, you do surprise me! yet he's like you, there's no denying.
lord, he's wonderfully like you! but about what you may call the
brow, you know, there his father comes out!" mr. bucket compares the
faces with one eye shut up, while mr. bagnet smokes in stolid
satisfaction.

this is an opportunity for mrs. bagnet to inform him that the boy is
george's godson.

"george's godson, is he?" rejoins mr. bucket with extreme cordiality.
"i must shake hands over again with george's godson. godfather and
godson do credit to one another. and what do you intend to make of
him, ma'am? does he show any turn for any musical instrument?"

mr. bagnet suddenly interposes, "plays the fife. beautiful."

"would you believe it, governor," says mr. bucket, struck by the
coincidence, "that when i was a boy i played the fife myself? not in
a scientific way, as i expect he does, but by ear. lord bless you!
 
 ___________________________
 
ap. she almost--i think i
must say quite--believed that i did her good whenever i was near her.
now although this was such a fancy of the affectionate girl's that i
am almost ashamed to mention it, still it might have all the force of
a fact when she was really ill. therefore i set off to caddy, with my
guardian's consent, post-haste; and she and prince made so much of me
that there never was anything like it.

next day i went again to sit with her, and next day i went again. it
was a very easy journey, for i had only to rise a little earlier in
the morning, and keep my accounts, and attend to housekeeping matters
before leaving home.

but when i had made these three visits, my guardian said to me, on my
return at night, "now, little woman, little woman, this will never
do. constant dropping will wear away a stone, and constant coaching
will wear out a dame durden. we will go to london for a while and
take possession of our old lodgings."

"not for me, dear guardian," said i, "for i neve
 
 ___________________________
 
at i ought to tell her, and caddy too, that
i was going to be the mistress of bleak house and that if i avoided
that disclosure any longer i might become less worthy in my own eyes
of its master's love. therefore, when we went upstairs and had waited
listening until the clock struck twelve in order that only i might be
the first to wish my darling all good wishes on her birthday and to
take her to my heart, i set before her, just as i had set before
myself, the goodness and honour of her cousin john and the happy life
that was in store for me. if ever my darling were fonder of me at
one time than another in all our intercourse, she was surely fondest
of me that night. and i was so rejoiced to know it and so comforted
by the sense of having done right in casting this last idle
reservation away that i was ten times happier than i had been before.
i had scarcely thought it a reservation a few hours ago, but now that
it was gone i felt as if i understood its nature better.

next day we went 
 
 ___________________________
 
aid
there must be two little women, for his little woman was never
missing--i resolved to be doubly diligent and gay. so i went about
the house humming all the tunes i knew, and i sat working and working
in a desperate manner, and i talked and talked, morning, noon, and
night.

and still there was the same shade between me and my darling.

"so, dame trot," observed my guardian, shutting up his book one night
when we were all three together, "so woodcourt has restored caddy
jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?"

"yes," i said; "and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be
made rich, guardian."

"i wish it was," he returned, "with all my heart."

so did i too, for that matter. i said so.

"aye! we would make him as rich as a jew if we knew how. would we
not, little woman?"

i laughed as i worked and replied that i was not sure about that, for
it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be
many who could ill spare him. as miss flite, and caddy herself, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to do but to be myself.

so i made my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder--how little thinking
what was heavy on her mind!--and i said she was not quite well, and
put my arm about her, and took her upstairs. when we were in our own
room, and when she might perhaps have told me what i was so
unprepared to hear, i gave her no encouragement to confide in me; i
never thought she stood in need of it.

"oh, my dear good esther," said ada, "if i could only make up my mind
to speak to you and my cousin john when you are together!"

"why, my love!" i remonstrated. "ada, why should you not speak to
us!"

ada only dropped her head and pressed me closer to her heart.

"you surely don't forget, my beauty," said i, smiling, "what quiet,
old-fashioned people we are and how i have settled down to be the
discreetest of dames? you don't forget how happily and peacefully my
life is all marked out for me, and by whom? i am certain that you
don't forget by what a noble character, ada. that can never be."

"n
 
 ___________________________
 
s is not a hundred
miles from here, sir, mr. c.'s address is not a hundred miles from
here. would you take a seat, sir?"

mr. woodcourt thanked mr. vholes, but he had no business with him
beyond what he had mentioned.

"just so, sir. i believe, sir," said mr. vholes, still quietly
insisting on the seat by not giving the address, "that you have
influence with mr. c. indeed i am aware that you have."

"i was not aware of it myself," returned mr. woodcourt; "but i
suppose you know best."

"sir," rejoined mr. vholes, self-contained as usual, voice and all,
"it is a part of my professional duty to know best. it is a part of
my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who
confides his interests to me. in my professional duty i shall not be
wanting, sir, if i know it. i may, with the best intentions, be
wanting in it without knowing it; but not if i know it, sir."

mr. woodcourt again mentioned the address.

"give me leave, sir," said mr. vholes. "bear with me for a moment.
sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
 the friend of mr. c. without
funds i shall always be happy to appear and act for mr. c. to the
extent of all such costs as are safe to be allowed out of the estate,
not beyond that. i could not go beyond that, sir, without wronging
some one. i must either wrong my three dear girls or my venerable
father, who is entirely dependent on me, in the vale of taunton; or
some one. whereas, sir, my resolution is (call it weakness or folly
if you please) to wrong no one."

mr. woodcourt rather sternly rejoined that he was glad to hear it.

"i wish, sir," said mr. vholes, "to leave a good name behind me.
therefore i take every opportunity of openly stating to a friend of
mr. c. how mr. c. is situated. as to myself, sir, the labourer is
worthy of his hire. if i undertake to put my shoulder to the wheel, i
do it, and i earn what i get. i am here for that purpose. my name is
painted on the door outside, with that object."

"and mr. carstone's address, mr. vholes?"

"sir," returned mr. vholes, "as i b
 
 ___________________________
 
eath could change, i saw it then before
me.

"speak to esther, my dearest," said richard, breaking the silence
presently. "tell her how it was."

i met her before she could come to me and folded her in my arms. we
neither of us spoke, but with her cheek against my own i wanted to
hear nothing. "my pet," said i. "my love. my poor, poor girl!" i
pitied her so much. i was very fond of richard, but the impulse that
i had upon me was to pity her so much.

"esther, will you forgive me? will my cousin john forgive me?"

"my dear," said i, "to doubt it for a moment is to do him a great
wrong. and as to me!" why, as to me, what had i to forgive!

i dried my sobbing darling's eyes and sat beside her on the sofa, and
richard sat on my other side; and while i was reminded of that so
different night when they had first taken me into their confidence
and had gone on in their own wild happy way, they told me between
them how it was.

"all i had was richard's," ada said; "and richard would not take it,

 
 ___________________________
 
when i loved him dearly!"

"and you were so fully and so kindly occupied, excellent dame
durden," said richard, "that how could we speak to you at such a
time! and besides, it was not a long-considered step. we went out one
morning and were married."

"and when it was done, esther," said my darling, "i was always
thinking how to tell you and what to do for the best. and sometimes i
thought you ought to know it directly, and sometimes i thought you
ought not to know it and keep it from my cousin john; and i could not
tell what to do, and i fretted very much."

how selfish i must have been not to have thought of this before! i
don't know what i said now. i was so sorry, and yet i was so fond of
them and so glad that they were fond of me; i pitied them so much,
and yet i felt a kind of pride in their loving one another. i never
had experienced such painful and pleasurable emotion at one time, and
in my own heart i did not know which predominated. but i was not
there to darken their way; i d
 
 ___________________________
 
s true enough to a certain extent," returned my guardian,
softened. "but my good fellow, even an innocent man must take
ordinary precautions to defend himself."

"certainly, sir. and i have done so. i have stated to the
magistrates, 'gentlemen, i am as innocent of this charge as
yourselves; what has been stated against me in the way of facts is
perfectly true; i know no more about it.' i intend to continue
stating that, sir. what more can i do? it's the truth."

"but the mere truth won't do," rejoined my guardian.

"won't it indeed, sir? rather a bad look-out for me!" mr. george
good-humouredly observed.

"you must have a lawyer," pursued my guardian. "we must engage a good
one for you."

"i ask your pardon, sir," said mr. george with a step backward. "i am
equally obliged. but i must decidedly beg to be excused from anything
of that sort."

"you won't have a lawyer?"

"no, sir." mr. george shook his head in the most emphatic manner. "i
thank you all the same, sir, but--no lawyer!"

"why
 
 ___________________________
 
ose in me after
this; it is enough that the vague duty and obligation i had felt upon
me from the first of following the investigation was, without my
distinctly daring to ask myself any question, increased, and that i
was indignantly sure of there being no possibility of a reason for my
being afraid.

we three went out of the prison and walked up and down at some short
distance from the gate, which was in a retired place. we had not
waited long when mr. and mrs. bagnet came out too and quickly joined
us.

there was a tear in each of mrs. bagnet's eyes, and her face was
flushed and hurried. "i didn't let george see what i thought about
it, you know, miss," was her first remark when she came up, "but he's
in a bad way, poor old fellow!"

"not with care and prudence and good help," said my guardian.

"a gentleman like you ought to know best, sir," returned mrs. bagnet,
hurriedly drying her eyes on the hem of her grey cloak, "but i am
uneasy for him. he has been so careless and said so much
 
 ___________________________
 
ood looking at one another
lost in amazement. she actually trudged away in her grey cloak at a
sturdy pace, and turned the corner, and was gone.

"mr. bagnet," said my guardian. "do you mean to let her go in that
way?"

"can't help it," he returned. "made her way home once from another
quarter of the world. with the same grey cloak. and same umbrella.
whatever the old girl says, do. do it! whenever the old girl says,
i'll do it. she does it."

"then she is as honest and genuine as she looks," rejoined my
guardian, "and it is impossible to say more for her."

"she's colour-sergeant of the nonpareil battalion," said mr. bagnet,
looking at us over his shoulder as he went his way also. "and there's
not such another. but i never own to it before her. discipline must
be maintained."




chapter liii

the track


mr. bucket and his fat forefinger are much in consultation together
under existing circumstances. when mr. bucket has a matter of this
pressing interest under his consideration, the fa
 
 ___________________________
 
t forefinger seems
to rise, to the dignity of a familiar demon. he puts it to his ears,
and it whispers information; he puts it to his lips, and it enjoins
him to secrecy; he rubs it over his nose, and it sharpens his scent;
he shakes it before a guilty man, and it charms him to his
destruction. the augurs of the detective temple invariably predict
that when mr. bucket and that finger are in much conference, a
terrible avenger will be heard of before long.

otherwise mildly studious in his observation of human nature, on the
whole a benignant philosopher not disposed to be severe upon the
follies of mankind, mr. bucket pervades a vast number of
 
 ___________________________
 
evening he will be casually looking
into the iron extinguishers at the door of sir leicester dedlock's
house in town; and to-morrow morning he will be walking on the leads
at chesney wold, where erst the old man walked whose ghost is
propitiated with a hundred guineas. drawers, desks, pockets, all
things belonging to him, mr. bucket examines. a few hours afterwards,
he and the roman will be alone together comparing forefingers.

it is likely that these occupations are irreconcilable with home
enjoyment, but it is certain that mr. bucket at present does not go
home. though in general he highly appreciates the society of mrs.
bucket--a lady of a natural detective genius, which if it had been
improved by professional exercise, might have done great things, but
which has paused at the level of a clever amateur--he holds himself
aloof from that dear solace. mrs. bucket is dependent on their lodger
(fortunately an amiable lady in whom she takes an interest) for
companionship and conversation.

 
 ___________________________
 


and it says a great deal for his attachment, as a husband, that he is
still occupied with mrs. b. "there you are, my partner, eh?" he
murmuringly repeats. "and our lodger with you. i'm taking notice of
you, mrs. bucket; i hope you're all right in your health, my dear!"

not another word does mr. bucket say, but sits with most attentive
eyes until the sacked depository of noble secrets is brought
down--where are all those secrets now? does he keep them yet? did
they fly with him on that sudden journey?--and until the procession
moves, and mr. bucket's view is changed. after which he composes
himself for an easy ride and takes note of the fittings of the
carriage in case he should ever find such knowledge useful.

contrast enough between mr. tulkinghorn shut up in his dark carriage
and mr. bucket shut up in his. between the immeasurable track of
space beyond the little wound that has thrown the one into the fixed
sleep which jolts so heavily over the stones of the streets, and the
narrow
 
 ___________________________
 
oes up the steps the old man came down to his
grave, past murderous groups of statuary repeated with their shadowy
weapons on the wall, past the printed bill, which she looks at going
by, out of view.

"she's a lovely woman, too, she really is," says mr. bucket, coming
back to mercury. "don't look quite healthy though."

is not quite healthy, mercury informs him. suffers much from
headaches.

really? that's a pity! walking, mr. bucket would recommend for that.
well, she tries walking, mercury rejoins. walks sometimes for two
hours when she has them bad. by night, too.

"are you sure you're quite so much as six foot three?" asks mr.
bucket. "begging your pardon for interrupting you a moment?"

not a doubt about it.

"you're so well put together that i shouldn't have thought it. but
the household troops, though considered fine men, are built so
straggling. walks by night, does she? when it's moonlight, though?"

oh, yes. when it's moonlight! of course. oh, of course!
conversational and acq
 
 ___________________________
 
of
both parties?




chapter liv

springing a mine


refreshed by sleep, mr. bucket rises betimes in the morning and
prepares for a field-day. smartened up by the aid of a clean shirt
and a wet hairbrush, with which instrument, on occasions of ceremony,
he lubricates such thin locks as remain to him after his life of
severe study, mr. bucket lays in a breakfast of two mutton chops as a
foundation to work upon, together with tea, eggs, toast, and
marmalade on a corresponding scale. having much enjoyed these
strengthening matters and having held subtle conference with his
familiar demon, he confidently instructs mercury "just to mention
quietly to sir leicester dedlock, baronet, that whenever he's ready
for me, i'm ready for him." a gracious message being returned that
sir leicester will expedite his dressing and join mr. bucket in the
library within ten minutes, mr. bucket repairs to that apartment and
stands before the fire with his finger on his chin, looking at the
blazing coals.

thou
 
 ___________________________
 
rjeant of that name; and a moderate man he
was in all respects, as ever i come across!"

thus invited, mr. chadband steps forth, and after a little sleek
smiling and a little oil-grinding with the palms of his hands,
delivers himself as follows, "my friends, we are now--rachael, my
wife, and i--in the mansions of the rich and great. why are we now in
the mansions of the rich and great, my friends? is it because we are
invited? because we are bidden to feast with them, because we are
bidden to rejoice with them, because we are bidden to play the lute
with them, because we are bidden to dance with them? no. then why are
we here, my friends? air we in possession of a sinful secret, and do
we require corn, and wine, and oil, or what is much the same thing,
money, for the keeping thereof? probably so, my friends."

"you're a man of business, you are," returns mr. bucket, very
attentive, "and consequently you're going on to mention what the
nature of your secret is. you are right. you couldn't
 
 ___________________________
 
 do better."

"let us then, my brother, in a spirit of love," says mr. chadband
with a cunning eye, "proceed unto it. rachael, my wife, advance!"

mrs. chadband, more than ready, so advances as to jostle her husband
into the background and confronts mr. bucket with a hard, frowning
smile.

"since you want to know what we know," says she, "i'll tell you. i
helped to bring up miss hawdon, her ladyship's daughter. i was in the
service of her ladyship's sister, who was very sensitive to the
disgrace her ladyship brought upon her, and gave out, even to her
ladyship, that the child was dead--she was very nearly so--when she
was born. but she's alive, and i know her." with these words, and a
laugh
 
 ___________________________
 
ll her woes. everybody it appears, the
present company excepted, has plotted against mrs. snagsby's peace.
there is mr. guppy, clerk to kenge and carboy, who was at first as
open as the sun at noon, but who suddenly shut up as close as
midnight, under the influence--no doubt--of mr. snagsby's suborning
and tampering. there is mr. weevle, friend of mr. guppy, who lived
mysteriously up a court, owing to the like coherent causes. there was
krook, deceased; there was nimrod, deceased; and there was jo,
deceased; and they were "all in it." in what, mrs. snagsby does not
with particularity express, but she knows that jo was mr. snagsby's
son, "as well as if a trumpet had spoken it," and she followed mr.
snagsby when he went on his last visit to the boy, and if he was not
his son why did he go? the one occupation of her life has been, for
some time back, to follow mr. snagsby to and fro, and up and down,
and to piece suspicious circumstances together--and every
circumstance that has happened ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ime she sees sir leicester dedlock in
his chair.

"i ask you pardon," she mutters hurriedly. "they tell me there was no
one here."

her step towards the door brings her front to front with mr. bucket.
suddenly a spasm shoots across her face and she turns deadly pale.

"this is my lodger, sir leicester dedlock," says mr. bucket, nodding
at her. "this foreign young woman has been my lodger for some weeks
back."

"what do sir leicester care for that, you think, my angel?" returns
mademoiselle in a jocular strain.

"why, my angel," returns mr. bucket, "we shall see."

mademoiselle hortense eyes him with a scowl upon her tight face,
which gradually changes into a smile of scorn, "you are very
mysterieuse. are you drunk?"

"tolerable sober, my angel," returns mr. bucket.

"i come from arriving at this so detestable house with your wife.
your wife have left me since some minutes. they tell me downstairs
that your wife is here. i come here, and your wife is not here. what
is the intention of thi
 
 ___________________________
 
me was
altogether such a time for bringing down what you may call
retribution upon her, that if i had been a younger hand with less
experience, i should have taken her, certain. equally, last night,
when her ladyship, as is so universally admired i am sure, come home
looking--why, lord, a man might almost say like venus rising from the
ocean--it was so unpleasant and inconsistent to think of her being
charged with a murder of which she was innocent that i felt quite to
want to put an end to the job. what should i have lost? sir leicester
dedlock, baronet, i should have lost the weapon. my prisoner here
proposed to mrs. bucket, after the departure of the funeral, that
they should go per bus a little ways into the country and take tea at
a very decent house of entertainment. now, near that house of
entertainment there's a piece of water. at tea, my prisoner got up to
fetch her pocket handkercher from the bedroom where the bonnets was;
she was rather a long time gone and came back a little 
 
 ___________________________
 
d those wandering hands of hers are quite
enough for mrs. bagnet's confirmation, even if she could see the
mother and the son together, knowing what she knows, and doubt their
relationship.

not a rustle of the housekeeper's dress, not a gesture, not a word
betrays her. she stands looking at him as he writes on, all
unconscious, and only her fluttering hands give utterance to her
emotions. but they are very eloquent, very, very eloquent. mrs.
bagnet understands them. they speak of gratitude, of joy, of grief,
of hope; of inextinguishable affection, cherished with no return
since this stalwart man was a stripling; of a better son loved less,
and this son loved so fondly and so proudly; and they speak in such
touching language that mrs. bagnet's eyes brim up with tears and they
run glistening down her sun-brown face.

"george rouncewell! oh, my dear child, turn and look at me!"

the trooper starts up, clasps his mother round the neck, and falls
down on his knees before her. whether in a la
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and cries.

"my george, my dearest son! always my favourite, and my favourite
still, where have you been these cruel years and years? grown such a
man too, grown such a fine strong man. grown so like what i knew he
must be, if it pleased god he was alive!"

she can ask, and he can answer, nothing connected for a time. all
that time the old girl, turned away, leans one arm against the
whitened wall, leans her honest forehead upon it, wipes her eyes with
her serviceable grey cloak, and quite enjoys herself like the best of
old girls as she is.

"mother," says the trooper when they are more composed, "forgive me
first of all, for i know my need of it."

forgive him! she does it with all her heart and soul. she always has
done it. she tells him how she has had it written in her will, these
many years, that he was her beloved son george. she has never
believed any ill of him, never. if she had died without this
happiness--and she is an old woman now and can't look to live very
long--she wo
 
 ___________________________
 
 mother, that my best
amends was to lie upon that bed i had made, and die upon it. and i
should have done it (though i have been to see you more than once
down at chesney wold, when you little thought of me) but for my old
comrade's wife here, who i find has been too many for me. but i thank
her for it. i thank you for it, mrs. bagnet, with all my heart and
might."

to which mrs. bagnet responds with two pokes.

and now the old lady impresses upon her son george, her own dear
recovered boy, her joy and pride, the light of her eyes, the happy
close of her life, and every fond name she can think of, that he must
be governed by the best advice obtainable by money and influence,
that he must yield up his case to the greatest lawyers that can be
got, that he must act in this serious plight as he shall be advised
to act and must not be self-willed, however right, but must promise
to think only of his poor old mother's anxiety and suffering until he
is released, or he will break her heart.

"mo
 
 ___________________________
 
trouble. oh, my lady, may i beg a word with
you?"

what new occurrence is it that makes this tranquil old woman tremble
so? far happier than her lady, as her lady has often thought, why
does she falter in this manner and look at her with such strange
mistrust?

"what is the matter? sit down and take your breath."

"oh, my lady, my lady. i have found my son--my youngest, who went
away for a soldier so long ago. and he is in prison."

"for debt?"

"oh, no, my lady; i would have paid any debt, and joyful."

"for what is he in prison then?"

"charged with a murder, my lady, of which he is as innocent as--as i
am. accused of the murder of mr. tulkinghorn."

what does she mean by this look and this imploring gesture? why does
she come so close? what is the letter that she holds?

"lady dedlock, my dear lady, my good lady, my kind lady! you must
have a heart to feel for me, you must have a heart to forgive me. i
was in this family before you were born. i am devoted to it. but
think of my dear s
 
 ___________________________
 
 be sure.
take the notes out? so i will. count 'em? that's soon done. twenty
and thirty's fifty, and twenty's seventy, and fifty's one twenty, and
forty's one sixty. take 'em for expenses? that i'll do, and render an
account of course. don't spare money? no i won't."

the velocity and certainty of mr. bucket's interpretation on all
these heads is little short of miraculous. mrs. rouncewell, who holds
the light, is giddy with the swiftness of his eyes and hands as he
starts up, furnished for his journey.

"you're george's mother, old lady; that's about what you are, i
believe?" says mr. bucket aside, with his hat already on and
buttoning his coat.

"yes, sir, i am his distressed mother."

"so i thought, according to what he mentioned to me just now. well,
then, i'll tell you something. you needn't be distressed no more.
your son's all right. now, don't you begin a-crying, because what
you've got to do is to take care of sir leicester dedlock, baronet,
and you won't do that by crying. as t
 
 ___________________________
 
sand pound now instead of a hundred."

this is all true, and the pressing nature of the case cannot be
questioned. mr. jarndyce begs him to remain there while he speaks to
miss summerson. mr. bucket says he will, but acting on his usual
principle, does no such thing, following upstairs instead and keeping
his man in sight. so he remains, dodging and lurking about in the
gloom of the staircase while they confer. in a very little time mr.
jarndyce comes down and tells him that miss summerson will join him
directly and place herself under his protection to accompany him
where he pleases. mr. bucket, satisfied, expresses high approval and
awaits her coming at the door.

there he mounts a high tower in his mind and looks out far and wide.
many solitary figures he perceives creeping through the streets; many
solitary figures out on heaths, and roads, and lying under haystacks.
but the figure that he seeks is not among them. other solitaries he
perceives, in nooks of bridges, looking over; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
moment; yet
nobody was at all hurried. as soon as the paper was sent out upon its
travels, the two officers resumed their former quiet work of writing
with neatness and care. mr. bucket thoughtfully came and warmed the
soles of his boots, first one and then the other, at the fire.

"are you well wrapped up, miss summerson?" he asked me as his eyes
met mine. "it's a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out
in."

i told him i cared for no weather and was warmly clothed.

"it may be a long job," he observed; "but so that it ends well, never
mind, miss."

"i pray to heaven it may end well!" said i.

he nodded comfortingly. "you see, whatever you do, don't you go and
fret yourself. you keep yourself cool and equal for anything that may
happen, and it'll be the better for you, the better for me, the
better for lady dedlock, and the better for sir leicester dedlock,
baronet."

he was really very kind and gentle, and as he stood before the fire
warming his boots and rubbing his face with
 
 ___________________________
 
 alighted and went back after a shadowy female figure that flitted
past us, and he gazed into the profound black pit of water with a
face that made my heart die within me. the river had a fearful look,
so overcast and secret, creeping away so fast between the low flat
lines of shore--so heavy with indistinct and awful shapes, both of
substance and shadow; so death-like and mysterious. i have seen it
many times since then, by sunlight and by moonlight, but never free
from the impressions of that journey. in my memory the lights upon
the bridge are always burning dim, the cutting wind is eddying round
the homeless woman whom we pass, the monotonous wheels are whirling
on, and the light of the carriage-lamps reflected back looks palely
in upon me--a face rising out of the dreaded water.

clattering and clattering through the empty streets, we came at
length from the pavement on to dark smooth roads and began to leave
the houses behind us. after a while i recognized the familiar way to
saint
 
 ___________________________
 
get on, my lad!"

with all these stoppages, it was between five and six o'clock and we
were yet a few miles short of saint albans when he came out of one of
these houses and handed me in a cup of tea.

"drink it, miss summerson, it'll do you good. you're beginning to get
more yourself now, ain't you?"

i thanked him and said i hoped so.

"you was what you may call stunned at first," he returned; "and lord,
no wonder! don't speak loud, my dear. it's all right. she's on
ahead."

i don't know what joyful exclamation i made or was going to make, but
he put up his finger and i stopped myself.

"passed through here on foot this evening about eight or nine. i
heard of her first at the archway toll, over at highgate, but
couldn't make quite sure. traced her all along, on and off. picked
her up at one place, and dropped her at another; but she's before us
now, safe. take hold of this cup and saucer, ostler. now, if you
wasn't brought up to the butter trade, look out and see if you can
catch half 
 
 ___________________________
 
y companion gave me his arm, and we went towards home.

"as this is your regular abode, miss summerson, you see," he
observed, "i should like to know whether you've been asked for by any
stranger answering the description, or whether mr. jarndyce has. i
don't much expect it, but it might be."

as we ascended the hill, he looked about him with a sharp eye--the
day was now breaking--and reminded me that i had come down it one
night, as i had reason for remembering, with my little servant and
poor jo, whom he called toughey.

i wondered how he knew that.

"when you passed a man upon the road, just yonder, you know," said
mr. bucket.

yes, i remembered that too, very well.

"that was me," said mr. bucket.

seeing my surprise, he went on, "i drove down in a gig that afternoon
to look after that boy. you might have heard my wheels when you came
out to look after him yourself, for i was aware of you and your
little maid going up when i was walking the horse down. making an
inquiry or two about 
 
 ___________________________
 
pose."

we were now in front of the house; he looked attentively and closely
at the gravel for footprints before he raised his eyes to the
windows.

"do you generally put that elderly young gentleman in the same room
when he's on a visit here, miss summerson?" he inquired, glancing at
mr. skimpole's usual chamber.

"you know mr. skimpole!" said i.

"what do you call him again?" returned mr. bucket, bending down his
ear. "skimpole, is it? i've often wondered what his name might be.
skimpole. not john, i should say, nor yet jacob?"

"harold," i told him.

"harold. yes. he's a queer bird is harold," said mr. bucket, eyeing
me with great expression.

"he is a singular character," said i.

"no idea of money," observed mr. bucket. "he takes it, though!"

i involuntarily returned for answer that i perceived mr. bucket knew
him.

"why, now i'll tell you, miss summerson," he replied. "your mind will
be all the better for not running on one point too continually, and
i'll tell you for a change. it
 
 ___________________________
 
re when the lady come? yes, she wos here when the lady
come. wot did the lady say to her? well, i'll tell you wot the lady
said to her. she said, 'you remember me as come one time to talk to
you about the young lady as had been a-wisiting of you? you remember
me as give you somethink handsome for a handkercher wot she had
left?' ah, she remembered. so we all did. well, then, wos that young
lady up at the house now? no, she warn't up at the house now. well,
then, lookee here. the lady was upon a journey all alone, strange as
we might think it, and could she rest herself where you're a setten
for a hour or so. yes she could, and so she did. then she went--it
might be at twenty minutes past eleven, and it might be at twenty
minutes past twelve; we ain't got no watches here to know the time
by, nor yet clocks. where did she go? i don't know where she go'd.
she went one way, and jenny went another; one went right to lunnun,
and t'other went right from it. that's all about it. ask this man. he
 
 ___________________________
 
 obliged to come to a
standstill to rest them. one horse fell three times in this first
stage, and trembled so and was so shaken that the driver had to
dismount from his saddle and lead him at last.

i could eat nothing and could not sleep, and i grew so nervous under
those delays and the slow pace at which we travelled that i had an
unreasonable desire upon me to get out and walk. yielding to my
companion's better sense, however, i remained where i was. all this
time, kept fresh by a certain enjoyment of the work in which he was
engaged, he was up and down at every house we came to, addressing
people whom he had never beheld before as old acquaintances, running
in to warm himself at every fire he saw, talking and drinking and
shaking hands at every bar and tap, friendly with every waggoner,
wheelwright, blacksmith, and toll-taker, yet never seeming to lose
time, and always mounting to the box again with his watchful, steady
face and his business-like "get on, my lad!"

when we were chan
 
 ___________________________
 
emble lest they should detain me there that she soon recalled her
words and compromised for a rest of half an hour.

a good endearing creature she was. she and her three fair girls, all
so busy about me. i was to take hot soup and broiled fowl, while mr.
bucket dried himself and dined elsewhere; but i could not do it when
a snug round table was presently spread by the fireside, though i was
very unwilling to disappoint them. however, i could take some toast
and some hot negus, and as i really enjoyed that refreshment, it made
some recompense.

punctual to the time, at the half-hour's end the carriage came
rumbling under the gateway, and they took me down, warmed, refreshed,
comforted by kindness, and safe (i assured them) not to faint any
more. after i had got in and had taken a grateful leave of them all,
the youngest daughter--a blooming girl of nineteen, who was to be the
first married, they had told me--got upon the carriage step, reached
in, and kissed me. i have never seen her, fro
 
 ___________________________
 
me out before the
lords on sir leicester's application for a bill of divorce.

at blaze and sparkle's the jewellers and at sheen and gloss's the
mercers, it is and will be for several hours the topic of the age,
the feature of the century. the patronesses of those establishments,
albeit so loftily inscrutable, being as nicely weighed and measured
there as any other article of the stock-in-trade, are perfectly
understood in this new fashion by the rawest hand behind the counter.
"our people, mr. jones," said blaze and sparkle to the hand in
question on engaging him, "our people, sir, are sheep--mere sheep.
where two or three marked ones go, all the rest follow. keep those
two or three in your eye, mr. jones, and you have the flock." so,
likewise, sheen and gloss to their jones, in reference to knowing
where to have the fashionable people and how to bring what they
(sheen and gloss) choose into fashion. on similar unerring
principles, mr. sladdery the librarian, and indeed the great farmer
 
 ___________________________
 
, and the last new drawl,
and the last new polite indifference, and all the rest of it, all at
second-hand but considered equal to new in inferior systems and to
fainter stars. if there be any man of letters, art, or science among
these little dealers, how noble in him to support the feeble sisters
on such majestic crutches!

so goes the wintry day outside the dedlock mansion. how within it?

sir leicester, lying in his bed, can speak a little, though with
difficulty and indistinctness. he is enjoined to silence and to rest,
and they have given him some opiate to lull his pain, for his old
enemy is very hard with him. he is never asleep, though sometimes he
seems to fall into a dull waking doze. he caused his bedstead to be
moved out nearer to the window when he heard it was such inclement
weather, and his head to be so adjusted that he could see the driving
snow and sleet. he watches it as it falls, throughout the whole
wintry day.

upon the least noise in the house, which is kept hushe
 
 ___________________________
 
g it away again
as he says these words.

"i was about to add," he presently goes on, "i was about to add,
respecting this attack, that it was unfortunately simultaneous with a
slight misunderstanding between my lady and myself. i do not mean
that there was any difference between us (for there has been none),
but that there was a misunderstanding of certain circumstances
important only to ourselves, which deprives me, for a little while,
of my lady's society. she has found it necessary to make a journey--i
trust will shortly return. volumnia, do i make myself intelligible?
the words are not quite under my command in the manner of pronouncing
them."

volumnia understands him perfectly, and in truth he delivers himself
with far greater plainness than could have been supposed possible a
minute ago. the effort by which he does so is written in the anxious
and labouring expression of his face. nothing but the strength of his
purpose enables him to make it.

"therefore, volumnia, i desire to sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ckened. it had only been, as i thought, of less assistance than
the horses in getting us on, and it had often aided them. they had
stopped exhausted half-way up hills, they had been driven through
streams of turbulent water, they had slipped down and become
entangled with the harness; but he and his little lantern had been
always ready, and when the mishap was set right, i had never heard
any variation in his cool, "get on, my lads!"

the steadiness and confidence with which he had directed our journey
back i could not account for. never wavering, he never even stopped
to make an inquiry until we were within a few miles of london. a very
few words, here and there, were then enough for him; and thus we
came, at between three and four o'clock in the morning, into
islington.

i will not dwell on the suspense and anxiety with which i reflected
all this time that we were leaving my mother farther and farther
behind every minute. i think i had some strong hope that he must be
right and could n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot fail to have a satisfactory object in following
this woman, but i tormented myself with questioning it and discussing
it during the whole journey. what was to ensue when we found her and
what could compensate us for this loss of time were questions also
that i could not possibly dismiss; my mind was quite tortured by long
dwelling on such reflections when we stopped.

we stopped in a high-street where there was a coach-stand. my
companion paid our two drivers, who were as completely covered with
splashes as if they had been dragged along the roads like the
carriage itself, and giving them some brief direction where to take
it, lifte
 
 ___________________________
 
 box,
and we once more drove away. where we drove i neither knew then nor
have ever known since, but we appeared to seek out the narrowest and
worst streets in london. whenever i saw him directing the driver, i
was prepared for our descending into a deeper complication of such
streets, and we never failed to do so.

sometimes we emerged upon a wider thoroughfare or came to a larger
building than the generality, well lighted. then we stopped at
offices like those we had visited when we began our journey, and i
saw him in consultation with others. sometimes he would get down by
an archway or at a street corner and mysteriously show the light of
his little lantern. this would attract similar lights from various
dark quarters, like so many insects, and a fresh consultation would
be held. by degrees we appeared to contract our search within
narrower and easier limits. single police-officers on duty could now
tell mr. bucket what he wanted to know and point to him where to go.
at last we stopp
 
 ___________________________
 
hrough the sleet, i
heard the clocks strike half-past five. we passed on in silence and
as quickly as we could with such a foot-hold, when some one coming
towards us on the narrow pavement, wrapped in a cloak, stopped and
stood aside to give me room. in the same moment i heard an
exclamation of wonder and my own name from mr. woodcourt. i knew his
voice very well.

it was so unexpected and so--i don't know what to call it, whether
pleasant or painful--to come upon it after my feverish wandering
journey, and in the midst of the night, that i could not keep back
the tears from my eyes. it was like hearing his voice in a strange
country.

"my dear miss summerson, that you should be out at this hour, and in
such weather!"

he had heard from my guardian of my having been called away on some
uncommon business and said so to dispense with any explanation. i
told him that we had but just left a coach and were going--but then i
was obliged to look at my companion.

"why, you see, mr. woodcourt"--
 
 ___________________________
 
s not wholly free from respecting this young lady. but shall i
tell you who this young lady is? now, come, you're what i call an
intellectual woman--with your soul too large for your body, if you
come to that, and chafing it--and you know me, and you recollect
where you saw me last, and what was talked of in that circle. don't
you? yes! very well. this young lady is that young lady."

mrs. snagsby appeared to understand the reference better than i did
at the time.

"and toughey--him as you call jo--was mixed up in the same business,
and no other; and the law-writer that you know of was mixed up in the
same business, and no other; and your husband, with no more knowledge
of it than your great grandfather, was mixed up (by mr. tulkinghorn,
deceased, his best customer) in the same business, and no other; and
the whole bileing of people was mixed up in the same business, and no
other. and yet a married woman, possessing your attractions, shuts
her eyes (and sparklers too), and goes and runs 
 
 ___________________________
 
 woodcourt every morning, dame durden."

"does he still say the same of richard?"

"just the same. he knows of no direct bodily illness that he has; on
the contrary, he believes that he has none. yet he is not easy about
him; who can be?"

my dear girl had been to see us lately every day, some times twice in
a day. but we had foreseen, all along, that this would only last
until i was quite myself. we knew full well that her fervent heart
was as full of affection and gratitude towards her cousin john as it
had ever been, and we acquitted richard of laying any injunctions
upon her to stay away; but we knew on the other hand that she felt it
a part of her duty to him to be sparing of her visits at our house.
my guardian's delicacy had soon perceived this and had tried to
convey to her that he thought she was right.

"dear, unfortunate, mistaken richard," said i. "when will he awake
from his delusion!"

"he is not in the way to do so now, my dear," replied my guardian.
"the more he suffers, 
 
 ___________________________
 
d. esther, esther, why not? esther, think!

"it is a very good plan indeed, dear guardian, and we could not do
better."

"sure, little woman?"

quite sure. i had had a moment's time to think, since i had urged
that duty on myself, and i was quite sure.

"good," said my guardian. "it shall be done. carried unanimously."

"carried unanimously," i repeated, going on with my work.

it was a cover for his book-table that i happened to be ornamenting.
it had been laid by on the night preceding my sad journey and never
resumed. i showed it to him now, and he admired it highly. after i
had explained the pattern to him and all the great effects that were
to come out by and by, i thought i would go back to our last theme.

"you said, dear guardian, when we spoke of mr. woodcourt before ada
left us, that you thought he would give a long trial to another
country. have you been advising him since?"

"yes, little woman, pretty often."

"has he decided to do so?"

"i rather think not."

"some other pro
 
 ___________________________
 

confidence."

she carefully opened her reticule a little way and showed me a folded
piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she spoke.

"another secret, my dear. i have added to my collection of birds."

"really, miss flite?" said i, knowing how it pleased her to have her
confidence received with an appearance of interest.

she nodded several times, and her face became overcast and gloomy.
"two more. i call them the wards in jarndyce. they are caged up with
all the others. with hope, joy, youth, peace, rest, life, dust,
ashes, waste, want, ruin, despair, madness, death, cunning, folly,
words, wigs, rags, sheepskin, plunder, precedent, jargon, gammon, and
spinach!"

the poor soul kissed me with the most troubled look i had ever seen
in her and went her way. her manner of running over the names of her
birds, as if she were afraid of hearing them even from her own lips,
quite chilled me.

this was not a cheering preparation for my visit, and i could have
dispensed with the compan
 
 ___________________________
 
o carry it out. but i will not smooth things over
to any connexion of mr. c.'s on any account. as open as i was to mr.
jarndyce, i am to you. i regard it in the light of a professional
duty to be so, though it can be charged to no one. i openly say,
unpalatable as it may be, that i consider mr. c.'s affairs in a very
bad way, that i consider mr. c. himself in a very bad way, and that i
regard this as an exceedingly ill-advised marriage. am i here, sir?
yes, i thank you; i am here, mr. c., and enjoying the pleasure of
some agreeable conversation with miss summerson, for which i have to
thank you very much, sir!"

he broke off thus in answer to richard, who addressed him as he came
into the room. by this time i too well understood mr. vholes's
scrupulous way of saving himself and his respectability not to feel
that our worst fears did but keep pace with his client's progress.

we sat down to dinner, and i had an opportunity of observing richard,
anxiously. i was not disturbed by mr. vholes
 
 ___________________________
 
and into such a ruin richard's youth and youthful beauty
had all fallen away.

he ate little and seemed indifferent what it was, showed himself to
be much more impatient than he used to be, and was quick even with
ada. i thought at first that his old light-hearted manner was all
gone, but it shone out of him sometimes as i had occasionally known
little momentary glimpses of my own old face to look out upon me from
the glass. his laugh had not quite left him either, but it was like
the echo of a joyful sound, and that is always sorrowful.

yet he was as glad as ever, in his old affectionate way, to have me
there, and we talked of the old times pleasantly. these did not
appear to be interesting to mr. vholes, though he occasionally made a
gasp which i believe was his smile. he rose shortly after dinner and
said that with the permission of the ladies he would retire to his
office.

"always devoted to business, vholes!" cried richard.

"yes, mr. c.," he returned, "the interests of clients ar
 
 ___________________________
 
tting beside her. when they were gone out, i drew my arm round her
waist. she put her left hand in mine (i was sitting on that side),
but kept her right upon the keys, going over and over them without
striking any note.

"esther, my dearest," she said, breaking silence, "richard is never
so well and i am never so easy about him as when he is with allan
woodcourt. we have to thank you for that."

i pointed out to my darling how this could scarcely be, because mr.
woodcourt had come to her cousin john's house and had known us all
there, and because he had always liked richard, and richard had
always liked him, and--and so forth.

"all true," said ada, "but that he is such a devoted friend to us we
owe to you."

i thought it best to let my dear girl have her way and to say no more
about it. so i said as much. i said it lightly, because i felt her
trembling.

"esther, my dearest, i want to be a good wife, a very, very good wife
indeed. you shall teach me."

i teach! i said no more, for i not
 
 ___________________________
 
h a poker to
light the fire with.

mr. skimpole, lying on the sofa in his room, playing the flute a
little, was enchanted to see me. now, who should receive me, he
asked. who would i prefer for mistress of the ceremonies? would i
have his comedy daughter, his beauty daughter, or his sentiment
daughter? or would i have all the daughters at once in a perfect
nosegay?

i replied, half defeated already, that i wished to speak to himself
only if he would give me leave.

"my dear miss summerson, most joyfully! of course," he said, bringing
his chair nearer mine and breaking into his fascinating smile, "of
course it's not business. then it's pleasure!"

i said it certainly was not business that i came upon, but it was not
quite a pleasant matter.

"then, my dear miss summerson," said he with the frankest gaiety,
"don't allude to it. why should you allude to anything that is not a
pleasant matter? i never do. and you are a much pleasanter creature,
in every point of view, than i. you are perfect
 
 ___________________________
 
i had many selfish thoughts at that time,
many!"

"heaven knows, beloved of my life," said he, "that my praise is not a
lover's praise, but the truth. you do not know what all around you
see in esther summerson, how many hearts she touches and awakens,
what sacred admiration and what love she wins."

"oh, mr. woodcourt," cried i, "it is a great thing to win love, it is
a great thing to win love! i am proud of it, and honoured by it; and
the hearing of it causes me to shed these tears of mingled joy and
sorrow--joy that i have won it, sorrow that i have not deserved it
better; but i am not free to think of yours."

i said it with a stronger heart, for when he praised me thus and when
i heard his voice thrill with his belief that what he said was true,
i aspired to be more worthy of it. it was not too late for that.
although i closed this unforeseen page in my life to-night, i could
be worthier of it all through my life. and it was a comfort to me,
and an impulse to me, and i felt a dignit
 
 ___________________________
 
 head. how could
i ever be worthy of those tears?

"if, in the unchanged intercourse we shall have together--in tending
richard and ada, and i hope in many happier scenes of life--you ever
find anything in me which you can honestly think is better than it
used to be, believe that it will have sprung up from to-night and
that i shall owe it to you. and never believe, dear dear mr.
woodcourt, never believe that i forget this night or that while my
heart beats it can be insensible to the pride and joy of having been
beloved by you."

he took my hand and kissed it. he was like himself again, and i felt
still more encouraged.

"i am induced by what you said just now," said i, "to hope that you
have succeeded in your endeavour."

"i have," he answered. "with such help from mr. jarndyce as you who
know him so well can imagine him to have rendered me, i have
succeeded."

"heaven bless him for it," said i, giving him my hand; "and heaven
bless you in all you do!"

"i shall do it better for the wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ich mr. smallweed by no means reciprocated, "and so you
chance to find, you know, a paper with the signature of jarndyce to
it. don't you?"

mr. smallweed glanced with a troubled eye at us and grudgingly nodded
assent.

"and coming to look at that paper at your full leisure and
convenience--all in good time, for you're not curious to read it, and
why should you be?--what do you find it to be but a will, you see.
that's the drollery of it," said mr. bucket with the same lively air
of recalling a joke for the enjoyment of mr. smallweed, who still had
the same crest-fallen appearance of not enjoying it at all; "what do
you find it to be but a will?"

"i don't know that it's good as a will or as anything else," snarled
mr. smallweed.

mr. bucket eyed the old man for a moment--he had slipped and shrunk
down in his chair into a mere bundle--as if he were much disposed to
pounce upon him; nevertheless, he continued to bend over him with the
same agreeable air, keeping the corner of one of his e
 
 ___________________________
 
ad, gently moving his right hand as if it
were a silver trowel with which to spread the cement of his words on
the structure of the system and consolidate it for a thousand ages.




chapter lxiii

steel and iron


george's shooting gallery is to let, and the stock is sold off, and
george himself is at chesney wold attending on sir leicester in his
rides and riding very near his bridle-rein because of the uncertain
hand with which he guides his horse. but not to-day is george so
occupied. he is journeying to-day into the iron country farther north
to look about him.

as he comes into the iron country farther north, such fresh green
woods as those of chesney wold are left behind; and coal pits and
ashes, high chimneys and red bricks, blighted verdure, scorching
fires, and a heavy never-lightening cloud of smoke become the
features of the scenery. among such objects rides the trooper,
looking about him and always looking for something he has come to
find.

at last, on the black canal bridg
 
 ___________________________
 
nd mother with such as
are suited to their altered station and the higher fortunes of their
children. here mr. george is much dismayed by the graces and
accomplishments of his nieces that are and by the beauty of rosa, his
niece that is to be, and by the affectionate salutations of these
young ladies, which he receives in a sort of dream. he is sorely
taken aback, too, by the dutiful behaviour of his nephew and has a
woeful consciousness upon him of being a scapegrace. however, there
is great rejoicing and a very hearty company and infinite enjoyment,
and mr. george comes bluff and martial through it all, and his pledge
to be present at the marriage and give away the bride is received
with universal favour. a whirling head has mr. george that night when
he lies down in the state-bed of his brother's house to think of all
these things and to see the images of his nieces (awful all the
evening in their floating muslins) waltzing, after the german manner,
over his counterpane.

the brothers
 
 ___________________________
 
not be sent to a pattern young lady?" asks
the younger.

"nothing at all."

therefore it is sealed and deposited for posting among the iron
correspondence of the day. this done, mr. george takes a hearty
farewell of the family party and prepares to saddle and mount. his
brother, however, unwilling to part with him so soon, proposes to
ride with him in a light open carriage to the place where he will
bait for the night, and there remain with him until morning, a
servant riding for so much of the journey on the thoroughbred old
grey from chesney wold. the offer, being gladly accepted, is followed
by a pleasant ride, a pleasant dinner, and a pleasant breakfast, all
in brotherly communion. then they once more shake hands long and
heartily and part, the ironmaster turning his face to the smoke and
fires, and the trooper to the green country. early in the afternoon
the subdued sound of his heavy military trot is heard on the turf in
the avenue as he rides on with imaginary clank and jingle of

 
 ___________________________
 
 appear, but i certainly did
encourage expectations. in richard, the discovery gave occasion for a
burst of business and agitation that buoyed him up for a little time,
but he had lost the elasticity even of hope now and seemed to me to
retain only its feverish anxieties. from something my guardian said
one day when we were talking about this, i understood that my
marriage would not take place until after the term-time we had been
told to look forward to; and i thought the more, for that, how
rejoiced i should be if i could be married when richard and ada were
a little more prosperous.

the term was very near indeed when my guardian was called out of town
and went down into yorkshire on mr. woodcourt's business. he had told
me beforehand that his presence there would be necessary. i had just
come in one night from my dear girl's and was sitting in the midst of
all my new clothes, looking at them all around me and thinking, when
a letter from my guardian was brought to me. it asked me to 
 
 ___________________________
 
join him
in the country and mentioned by what stage-coach my place was taken
and at what time in the morning i should have to leave town. it added
in a postscript that i would not be many hours from ada.

i expected few things less than a journey at that time, but i was
ready for it in half an hour and set off as appointed early next
morning. i travelled all day, wondering all day what i could be
wanted for at such a distance; now i thought it might be for this
purpose, and now i thought it might be for that purpose, but i was
never, never, never near the truth.

it was night when i came to my journey's end and found my guardian
waiting for me. this was a great relief, for towards evening i had
begun to fear (the more so as his let
 
 ___________________________
 
n act of kindness.

supper was ready at the hotel, and when we were alone at table he
said, "full of curiosity, no doubt, little woman, to know why i have
brought you here?"

"well, guardian," said i, "without thinking myself a fatima or you a
blue beard, i am a little curious about it."

"then to ensure your night's rest, my love," he returned gaily, "i
won't wait until to-morrow to tell you. i have very much wished to
express to woodcourt, somehow, my sense of his humanity to poor
unfortunate jo, his inestimable services to my young cousins, and his
value to us all. when it was decided that he should settle here, it
came into my head that i might ask his acceptance of some
unpretending and suitable little place to lay his own head in. i
therefore caused such a place to be looked out for, and such a place
was found on very easy terms, and i have been touching it up for him
and making it habitable. however, when i walked over it the day
before yesterday and it was reported ready, i found
 
 ___________________________
 
e that i should not have been so brought before him? because
although i was not what he thought me, still he loved me very dearly,
and it might remind him mournfully of what be believed he had lost. i
did not wish him to forget me--perhaps he might not have done so,
without these aids to his memory--but my way was easier than his, and
i could have reconciled myself even to that so that he had been the
happier for it.

"and now, little woman," said my guardian, whom i had never seen so
proud and joyful as in showing me these things and watching my
appreciation of them, "now, last of all, for the name of this house."

"what is it called, dear guardian?"

"my child," said he, "come and see,"

he took me to the porch, which he had hitherto avoided, and said,
pausing before we went out, "my dear child, don't you guess the
name?"

"no!" said i.

we went out of the porch and he showed me written over it, bleak
house.

he led me to a seat among the leaves close by, and sitting down
beside me and
 
 ___________________________
 
irl. i had no doubt of your being contented
and happy with me, being so dutiful and so devoted; but i saw with
whom you would be happier. that i penetrated his secret when dame
durden was blind to it is no wonder, for i knew the good that could
never change in her better far than she did. well! i have long been
in allan woodcourt's confidence, although he was not, until
yesterday, a few hours before you came here, in mine. but i would not
have my esther's bright example lost; i would not have a jot of my
dear girl's virtues unobserved and unhonoured; i would not have her
admitted on sufferance into the line of morgan ap-kerrig, no, not for
the weight in gold of all the mountains in wales!"

he stopped to kiss me on the forehead, and i sobbed and wept afresh.
for i felt as if i could not bear the painful delight of his praise.

"hush, little woman! don't cry; this is to be a day of joy. i have
looked forward to it," he said exultingly, "for months on months! a
few words more, dame trot, a
 
 ___________________________
 
im to his old
place in your affections; and blot it out of your memory. allan, take
my dear."

he moved away from under the green roof of leaves, and stopping in
the sunlight outside and turning cheerfully towards us, said, "i
shall be found about here somewhere. it's a west wind, little woman,
due west! let no one thank me any more, for i am going to revert to
my bachelor habits, and if anybody disregards this warning, i'll run
away and never come back!"

what happiness was ours that day, what joy, what rest, what hope,
what gratitude, what bliss! we were to be married before the month
was out, but when we were to come and take possession of our own
house was to depend on richard and ada.

we all three went home together next day. as soon as we arrived in
town, allan went straight to see richard and to carry our joyful news
to him and my darling. late as it was, i meant to go to her for a few
minutes before lying down to sleep, but i went home with my guardian
first to make his tea for 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld be shown in when he came again, and they
were scarcely given when he did come again.

he was embarrassed when he found my guardian with me, but recovered
himself and said, "how de do, sir?"

"how do you do, sir?" returned my guardian.

"thank you, sir, i am tolerable," returned mr. guppy. "will you allow
me to introduce my mother, mrs. guppy of the old street road, and my
particular friend, mr. weevle. that is to say, my friend has gone by
the name of weevle, but his name is really and truly jobling."

my guardian begged them to be seated, and they all sat down.

"tony," said mr. guppy to his friend after an awkward silence. "will
you open the case?"

"do it yourself," returned the friend rather tartly.

"well, mr. jarndyce, sir," mr. guppy, after a moment's consideration,
began, to the great diversion of his mother, which she displayed by
nudging mr. jobling with her elbow and winking at me in a most
remarkable manner, "i had an idea that i should see miss summerson by
herself and wa
 
 ___________________________
 
of attorneys and have taken out my
certificate, if it would be any satisfaction to you to see it."

"thank you, mr. guppy," returned my guardian. "i am quite willing--i
believe i use a legal phrase--to admit the certificate."

mr. guppy therefore desisted from taking something out of his pocket
and proceeded without it.

"i have no capital myself, but my mother has a little property which
takes the form of an annuity"--here mr. guppy's mother rolled her
head as if she never could sufficiently enjoy the observation, and
put her handkerchief to her mouth, and again winked at me--"and a few
pounds for expenses out of pocket in conducting business will never
be wanting, free of interest, which is an advantage, you know," said
mr. guppy feelingly.

"certainly an advantage," returned my guardian.

"i have some connexion," pursued mr. guppy, "and it lays in the
direction of walcot square, lambeth. i have therefore taken a 'ouse
in that locality, which, in the opinion of my friends, is a hollow

 
 ___________________________
 
bargain (taxes ridiculous, and use of fixtures included in the rent),
and intend setting up professionally for myself there forthwith."

here mr. guppy's mother fell into an extraordinary passion of rolling
her head and smiling waggishly at anybody who would look at her.

"it's a six-roomer, exclusive of kitchens," said mr. guppy, "and in
the opinion of my friends, a commodious tenement. when i mention my
friends, i refer principally to my friend jobling, who i believe has
known me," mr. guppy looked at him with a sentimental air, "from
boyhood's hour."

mr. jobling confirmed this with a sliding movement of his legs.

"my friend jobling will render me his assistance in the capacity of
clerk and will live in the 'ouse," said mr. guppy. "my mother will
likewise live in the 'ouse when her present quarter in the old street
road shall have ceased and expired; and consequently there will be no
want of society. my friend jobling is naturally aris
 
 ___________________________
 
tocratic by
taste, and besides being acquainted with the movements of the upper
circles, fully backs me in the intentions i am now developing."

mr. jobling said "certainly" and withdrew a little from the elbow of
mr guppy's mother.

"now, i have no occasion to mention to you, sir, you being in the
confidence of miss summerson," said mr. guppy, "(mother, i wish you'd
be so good as to keep still), that miss summerson's image was
formerly imprinted on my 'eart and that i made her a proposal of
marriage."

"that i have heard," returned my guardian.

"circumstances," pursued mr. guppy, "over which i had no control, but
quite the contrary, weakened
 
 ___________________________
 
erson's conduct was highly genteel; i may even
add, magnanimous."

my guardian patted me on the shoulder and seemed much amused.

"now, sir," said mr. guppy, "i have got into that state of mind
myself that i wish for a reciprocity of magnanimous behaviour. i wish
to prove to miss summerson that i can rise to a heighth of which
perhaps she hardly thought me capable. i find that the image which i
did suppose had been eradicated from my 'eart is not eradicated. its
influence over me is still tremenjous, and yielding to it, i am
willing to overlook the circumstances over which none of us have had
any control and to renew those proposals to miss summerson which i
had the honour to make at a former period. i beg to lay the 'ouse in
walcot square, the business, and myself before miss summerson for her
acceptance."

"very magnanimous indeed, sir," observed my guardian.

"well, sir," replied mr. guppy with candour, "my wish is to be
magnanimous. i do not consider that in making this offer to miss
 
 ___________________________
 
, "to reply to your proposals on behalf of miss summerson. she is
very sensible of your handsome intentions, and wishes you good
evening, and wishes you well."

"oh!" said mr. guppy with a blank look. "is that tantamount, sir, to
acceptance, or rejection, or consideration?"

"to decided rejection, if you please," returned my guardian.

mr. guppy looked incredulously at his friend, and at his mother, who
suddenly turned very angry, and at the floor, and at the ceiling.

"indeed?" said he. "then, jobling, if you was the friend you
represent yourself, i should think you might hand my mother out of
the gangway instead of allowing her to remain where she ain't
wanted."

but mrs. guppy positively refused to come out of the gangway. she
wouldn't hear of it. "why, get along with you," said she to my
guardian, "what do you mean? ain't my son good enough for you? you
ought to be ashamed of yourself. get out with you!"

"my good lady," returned my guardian, "it is hardly reasonable to ask
me to get
 
 ___________________________
 
 out of my own room."

"i don't care for that," said mrs. guppy. "get out with you. if we
ain't good enough for you, go and procure somebody that is good
enough. go along and find 'em."

i was quite unprepared for the rapid manner in which mrs. guppy's
power of jocularity merged into a power of taking the profoundest
offence.

"go along and find somebody that's good enough for you," repeated
mrs. guppy. "get out!" nothing seemed to astonish mr. guppy's mother
so much and to make her so very indignant as our not getting out.
"why don't you get out?" said mrs. guppy. "what are you stopping here
for?"

"mother," interposed her son, always getting before her and pushing
her back with one shoulder as she sidled at my guardian, "will you
hold your tongue?"

"n
 
 ___________________________
 
o, william," she returned, "i won't! not unless he gets out, i
won't!"

however, mr. guppy and mr. jobling together closed on mr. guppy's
mother (who began to be quite abusive) and took her, very much
against her will, downstairs, her voice rising a stair higher every
time her figure got a stair lower, and insisting that we should
immediately go and find somebody who was good enough for us, and
above all things that we should get out.




chapter lxv

beginning the world


the term had commenced, and my guardian found an intimation from mr.
kenge that the cause would come on in two days. as i h
 
 ___________________________
 
 richard and
ada, i heard somebody calling "esther! my dear esther! esther!" and
there was caddy jellyby, with her head out of the window of a little
carriage which she hired now to go about in to her pupils (she had so
many), as if she wanted to embrace me at a hundred yards' distance. i
had written her a note to tell her of all that my guardian had done,
but had not had a moment to go and see her. of course we turned back,
and the affectionate girl was in that state of rapture, and was so
overjoyed to talk about the night when she brought me the flowers,
and was so determined to squeeze my face (bonnet and all) between her
hands, and go on in a wild manner altogether, calling me all kinds of
precious names, and telling allan i had done i don't know what for
her, that i was just obliged to get into the little carriage and calm
her down by letting her say and do exactly what she liked. allan,
standing at the window, was as pleased as caddy; and i was as pleased
as either of them; and i w
 
 ___________________________
 
. but he
looked handsomer than i had seen him look for many a day.

i sat down by his side in silence. opening his eyes by and by, he
said in a weak voice, but with his old smile, "dame durden, kiss me,
my dear!"

it was a great comfort and surprise to me to find him in his low
state cheerful and looking forward. he was happier, he said, in our
intended marriage than he could find words to tell me. my husband had
been a guardian angel to him and ada, and he blessed us both and
wished us all the joy that life could yield us. i almost felt as if
my own heart would have broken when i saw him take my husband's hand
and hold it to his breast.

we spoke of the future as much as possible, and he said several times
that he must be present at our marriage if he could stand upon his
feet. ada would contrive to take him, somehow, he said. "yes, surely,
dearest richard!" but as my darling answered him thus hopefully, so
serene and beautiful, with the help that was to come to her so
near--i knew--i k
 
 ___________________________
 
new!

it was not good for him to talk too much, and when he was silent, we
were silent too. sitting beside him, i made a pretence of working for
my dear, as he had always been used to joke about my being busy. ada
leaned upon his pillow, holding his head upon her arm. he dozed
often, and whenever he awoke without seeing him, said first of all,
"where is woodcourt?"

evening had come on when i lifted up my eyes and saw my guardian
standing in the little hall. "who is that, dame durden?" richard
asked me. the door was behind him, but he had observed in my face
that some one was there.

i looked to allan for advice, and as he nodded "yes," bent over
richard and told him. my guardi
 
 ___________________________
 
 the place, gets into a fearful state of depression, groaning under
penitential sofa-pillows in his gunless hours and protesting that
such fernal old jail's--nough t'sew fler up--frever.

the only great occasions for volumnia in this changed aspect of the
place in lincolnshire are those occasions, rare and widely separated,
when something is to be done for the county or the country in the way
of gracing a public ball. then, indeed, does the tuckered sylph come
out in fairy form and proceed with joy under cousinly escort to the
exhausted old assembly-room, fourteen heavy miles off, which, during
three hundred and sixty-four days and nights of every ordinary year,
is a kind of antipodean lumber-room full of old chairs and tables
upside down. then, indeed, does she captivate all hearts by her
condescension, by her girlish vivacity, and by her skipping about as
in the days when the hideous old general with the mouth too full of
teeth had not cut one of them at two guineas each. then does she
 
 ___________________________
 
ss and restore
his mother, not his father, was the errand of this baby, its power
was mighty to do it. when i saw the strength of the weak little hand
and how its touch could heal my darling's heart and raised hope
within her, i felt a new sense of the goodness and the tenderness of
god.

they throve, and by degrees i saw my dear girl pass into my country
garden and walk there with her infant in her arms. i was married
then. i was the happiest of the happy.

it was at this time that my guardian joined us and asked ada when she
would come home.

"both houses are your home, my dear," said he, "but the older bleak
house claims priority. when you and my boy are strong enough to do
it, come and take possession of your home."

ada called him "her dearest cousin, john." but he said, no, it must
be guardian now. he was her guardian henceforth, and the boy's; and
he had an old association with the name. so she called him guardian,
and has called him guardian ever since. the children know him by n
 
 ___________________________
 
rgotten caddy's poor
little girl. she is not such a mite now, but she is deaf and dumb. i
believe there never was a better mother than caddy, who learns, in
her scanty intervals of leisure, innumerable deaf and dumb arts to
soften the affliction of her child.

as if i were never to have done with caddy, i am reminded here of
peepy and old mr. turveydrop. peepy is in the custom house, and doing
extremely well. old mr. turveydrop, very apoplectic, still exhibits
his deportment about town, still enjoys himself in the old manner, is
still believed in in the old way. he is constant in his patronage of
peepy and is understood to have bequeathed him a favourite french
clock in his dressing-room--which is not his property.

with the first money we saved at home, we added to our pretty house
by throwing out a little growlery expressly for my guardian, which we
inaugurated with great splendour the next time he came down to see
us. i try to write all this lightly, because my heart is full in
drawin