nd her hand extended,
but seemed to change her mind in a moment and kissed me. in short,
she had such a natural, captivating, winning manner that in a few
minutes we were sitting in the window-seat, with the light of the
fire upon us, talking together as free and happy as could be.

what a load off my mind! it was so delightful to know that she could
confide in me and like me! it was so good of her, and so encouraging
to me!

the young gentleman was her distant cousin, she told me, and his name
richard carstone. he was a handsome youth with an ingenuous face and
a most engaging laugh; and after she had called him up to where we
sat, he stood by us, in the light of the fire, talking gaily, like a
light-hearted boy. he was very young, not more than nineteen then, if
quite so much, but nearly two years older than she was. they were
both orphans and (what was very unexpected and curious to me) had
never met before that day. our all three coming together for the
first time in such an unusual place was a th
 
 ___________________________
 
ve and pride of parents.

"the jarndyce in question," said the lord chancellor, still turning
over leaves, "is jarndyce of bleak house."

"jarndyce of bleak house, my lord," said mr. kenge.

"a dreary name," said the lord chancellor.

"but not a dreary place at present, my lord," said mr. kenge.

"and bleak house," said his lordship, "is in--"

"hertfordshire, my lord."

"mr. jarndyce of bleak house is not married?" said his lordship.

"he is not, my lord," said mr. kenge.

a pause.

"young mr. richard carstone is present?" said the lord chancellor,
glancing towards him.

richard bowed and stepped forward.

"hum!" said the lord chancellor, turning over more leaves.

"mr. jarndyce of bleak house, my lord," mr. kenge observed in a low
voice, "if i may venture to remind your lordship, provides a suitable
companion for--"

"for mr. richard carstone?" i thought (but i am not quite sure) i
heard his lordship say in an equally low voice and with a smile.

"for miss ada clare. this is the young lady. miss sum
 
 ___________________________
 
, and richard with him, to where i was, near the
door, leaving my pet (it is so natural to me that again i can't help
it!) sitting near the lord chancellor, with whom his lordship spoke a
little part, asking her, as she told me afterwards, whether she had
well reflected on the proposed arrangement, and if she thought she
would be happy under the roof of mr. jarndyce of bleak house, and why
she thought so? presently he rose courteously and released her, and
then he spoke for a minute or two with richard carstone, not seated,
but standing, and altogether with more ease and less ceremony, as if
he still knew, though he was lord chancellor, how to go straight to
the candour of a boy.

"very well!" said his lordship aloud. "i shall make the order. mr.
jarndyce of bleak house has chosen, so far as i may judge," and this
was when he looked at me, "a very good companion for the young lady,
and the arrangement altogether seems the best of which the
circumstances admit."

he dismissed us pleasantly, and we all 
 
 ___________________________
 
went out, very much obliged to
him for being so affable and polite, by which he had certainly lost
no dignity but seemed to us to have gained some.

when we got under the colonnade, mr. kenge remembered that he must go
back for a moment to ask a question and left us in the fog, with the
lord chancellor's carriage and servants waiting for him to come out.

"well!" said richard carstone. "that's over! and where do we go next,
miss summerson?"

"don't you know?" i said.

"not in the least," said he.

"and don't you know, my love?" i asked ada.

"no!" said she. "don't you?"

"not at all!" said i.

we looked at one another, half laughing at our being like the
children in the wood, when a curious little old woman in a squeezed
bonnet and carrying a reticule came curtsying and smiling up to us
with an air of great ceremony.

"oh!" said she. "the wards in jarndyce! ve-ry happy, i am
 
 ___________________________
 
said the old man with a start.

"jarndyce and jarndyce. the great suit, krook," returned his lodger.

"hi!" exclaimed the old man in a tone of thoughtful amazement and
with a wider stare than before. "think of it!"

he seemed so rapt all in a moment and looked so curiously at us that
richard said, "why, you appear to trouble yourself a good deal about
the causes before your noble and learned brother, the other
chancellor!"

"yes," said the old man abstractedly. "sure! your name now will be--"

"richard carstone."

"carstone," he repeated, slowly checking off that name upon his
forefinger; and each of the others he went on to mention upon a
separate finger. "yes. there was the name of barbary, and the name of
clare, and the name of dedlock, too, i think."

"he knows as much of the cause as the real salaried chancellor!" said
richard, quite astonished, to ada and me.

"aye!" said the old man, coming slowly out of his abstraction. "yes!
tom jarndyce--you'll excuse me, being related; but he was never know
 
 ___________________________
 
a little
girl.

"ah!" said mr. kenge. "yes. well! a very good profession, mr.
jarndyce, a very good profession."

"the course of study and preparation requires to be diligently
pursued," observed my guardian with a glance at richard.

"oh, no doubt," said mr. kenge. "diligently."

"but that being the case, more or less, with all pursuits that are
worth much," said mr. jarndyce, "it is not a special consideration
which another choice would be likely to escape."

"truly," said mr. kenge. "and mr. richard carstone, who has so
meritoriously acquitted himself in the--shall i say the classic
shades?--in which his youth had been passed, will, no doubt, apply
the habits, if not the principles and practice, of versification in
that tongue in which a poet was said (unless i mistake) to be born,
not made, to the more eminently practical field of action on which he
enters."

"you may rely upon it," said richard in his off-hand manner, "that i
shall go at it and do my best."

"very well, mr. jarndyce!" said mr. ke
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

the party came to the hotel. i heard them speaking on the staircase.
i was sure it was the same gentlemen because i knew their voices
again--i mean i knew mr. woodcourt's. it would still have been a
great relief to me to have gone away without making myself known, but
i was determined not to do so. "no, my dear, no. no, no, no!"

i untied my bonnet and put my veil half up--i think i mean half down,
but it matters very little--and wrote on one of my cards that i
happened to be there with mr. richard carstone, and i sent it in to
mr. woodcourt. he came immediately. i told him i was rejoiced to be
by chance among the first to welcome him home to england. and i saw
that he was very sorry for me.

"you have been in shipwreck and peril since you left us, mr.
woodcourt," said i, "but we can hardly call that a misfortune which
enabled you to be so useful and so brave. we read of it with the
truest interest. it first came to my knowledge through your old
patient, poor miss flite, when i was recovering from
 
 ___________________________
 
eg your pardon,
mr. jarndyce."

"sir."

"mr. vholes of symond's inn. my compliments. jarndyce and jarndyce.
glad to speak with him."

mr. guppy disappeared.

"you ask me what is this to you, mr. jarndyce. if you had perused
this document, you would have seen that it reduces your interest
considerably, though still leaving it a very handsome one, still
leaving it a very handsome one," said mr. kenge, waving his hand
persuasively and blandly. "you would further have seen that the
interests of mr. richard carstone and of miss ada clare, now mrs.
richard carstone, are very materially advanced by it."

"kenge," said my guardian, "if all the flourishing wealth that the
suit brought into this vile court of chancery could fall to my two
young cousins, i should be well contented. but do you ask me to
believe that any good is to come of jarndyce and jarndyce?"

"oh, really, mr. jarndyce! prejudice, prejudice. my dear sir, this is
a very great country, a very great country. its system of equity is a
very great s