contented goose, who stoops
to pass under the old gateway, twenty feet high, may gabble out, if
we only knew it, a waddling preference for weather when the gateway
casts its shadow on the ground.

be this as it may, there is not much fancy otherwise stirring at
chesney wold. if there be a little at any odd moment, it goes, like a
little noise in that old echoing place, a long way and usually leads
off to ghosts and mystery.

it has rained so hard and rained so long down in lincolnshire that
mrs. rouncewell, the old housekeeper at chesney wold, has several
times taken off her spectacles and cleaned them to make certain that
the drops were not upon the glasses. mrs. rouncewell might have been
sufficiently assured by hearing the rain, but that she is rather
deaf, which nothing will induce her to believe. she is a fine old
lady, handsome, stately, wonderfully neat, and has such a back and
such a stomacher that if her stays should turn out when she dies to
have been a broad old-fashioned family fire-g
 
 ___________________________
 
rate, nobody who knows
her would have cause to be surprised. weather affects mrs. rouncewell
little. the house is there in all weathers, and the house, as she
expresses it, "is what she looks at." she sits in her room (in a side
passage on the ground floor, with an arched window commanding a
smooth quadrangle, adorned at regular intervals with smooth round
trees and smooth round blocks of stone, as if the trees were going to
play at bowls with the stones), and the whole house reposes on her
mind. she can open it on occasion and be busy and fluttered, but it
is shut up now and lies on t
 
 ___________________________
 
he breadth of mrs. rouncewell's
iron-bound bosom in a majestic sleep.

it is the next difficult thing to an impossibility to imagine chesney
wold without mrs. rouncewell, but she has only been here fifty years.
ask her how long, this rainy day, and she shall answer "fifty year,
three months, and a fortnight, by the blessing of heaven, if i live
till tuesday." mr. rouncewell died some time before the decease of
the pretty fashion of pig-tails, and modestly hid his own (if he took
it with him) in a corner of the churchyard in the park near the
mouldy porch. he was born in the market-town, and so was his young
widow. her progress in the family began in the time of the last sir
leicester and originated in the still-room.

the present representative of the dedlocks is an excellent master. he
supposes all his dependents to be utterly bereft of individual
characters, int
 
 ___________________________
 
entions, or opinions, and is persuaded that he was
born to supersede the necessity of their having any. if he were to
make a discovery to the contrary, he would be simply stunned--would
never recover himself, most likely, except to gasp and die. but he is
an excellent master still, holding it a part of his state to be so.
he has a great liking for mrs. rouncewell; he says she is a most
respectable, creditable woman. he always shakes hands with her when
he comes down to chesney wold and when he goes away; and if he were
very ill, or if he were knocked down by accident, or run over, or
placed in any situation expressive of a dedlock at a disadvantage, he
would say if he could speak, "leave me, and send mrs. rouncewell
here!" feeling his dignity, at such a pass, safer with her than with
anybody else.

mrs. rouncewell has known trouble. she has had two sons
 
 ___________________________
 
, of whom the
younger ran wild, and went for a soldier, and never came back. even
to this hour, mrs. rouncewell's calm hands lose their composure when
she speaks of him, and unfolding themselves from her stomacher, hover
about her in an agitated manner as she says what a likely lad, what a
fine lad, what a gay, good-humoured, clever lad he was! her second
son would have been provided for at chesney wold and would have been
made steward in due season, but he took, when he was a schoolboy, to
constructing steam-engines out of saucepans and setting birds to draw
their own water with the least possible amoun
 
 ___________________________
 
t of labour, so
assisting them with artful contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a
thirsty canary had only, in a literal sense, to put his shoulder to
the wheel and the job was done. this propensity gave mrs. rouncewell
great uneasiness. she felt it with a mother's anguish to be a move in
the wat tyler direction, well knowing that sir leicester had that
general impression of an aptitude for any art to which smoke and a
tall chimney might be considered essential. but the doomed young
rebel (otherwise a mild youth, and very persevering), showing no sign
of grace as he got older but, on the contrary, constructing a model
of a power-loom, she was fain, with many tears, to mention his
backslidings to the baronet. "
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. rouncewell," said sir leicester,
"i can never consent to argue, as you know, with any one on any
subject. you had better get rid of your boy; you had better get him
into some works. the iron country farther north is, i suppose, the
congenial direction for a boy with these tendencies." farther north
he went, and farther north he grew up; and if sir leicester dedlock
ever saw him when he came to chesney wold to visit his mother, or
ever thought of him afterwards, it is certain that he only regarded
him as o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne of a body of some odd thousand conspirators, swarthy and
grim, who were in the habit of turning out by torchlight two or three
nights in the week for unlawful purposes.

nevertheless, mrs. rouncewell's son has, in the course of nature and
art, grown up, and established himself, and married, and called unto
him mrs. rouncewell's grandson, who, being out of his apprenticeship,
and home from a journey in far countries, whither he was sent to
enlarge his knowledge and complete his preparations for the venture
of this life, stands leaning against the chimney-piece this very day
in mrs. rouncewell's room at chesney wold.

"and, again and again, i am glad to see you, watt! and, once again, i
am glad to see you, watt!" says mrs. rouncewell. "you are a fine
young fellow. you are like your poor uncle george. ah!" mrs.
rouncew
 
 ___________________________
 
ell's hands unquiet, as usual, on this reference.

"they say i am like my father, grandmother."

"like him, also, my dear--but most like your poor uncle george! and
your dear father." mrs. rouncewell folds her hands again. "he is
well?"

"thriving, grandmother, in every way."

"i am thankful!" mrs. rouncewell is fond of her son but has a
plaintive feeling towards him, much as if he were a very honourable
soldier who had gone over to the enemy.

"he is quite happy?" says she.

"quite."

"i am thankful! so he has brought you up to follow in his ways and
has sent you into foreign countries and the like? well, he knows
best. there may be a world beyond chesney wold that i don't
understand. though i am not young, either. and i have seen a quantity
of good company too!"

"grandmother," says the young man,
 
 ___________________________
 
girl that was i found with you just now. you called her rosa?"

"yes, child. she is daughter of a widow in the village. maids are so
hard to teach, now-a-days, that i have put her about me young. she's
an apt scholar and will do well. she shows the house already, very
pretty. she lives with me at my table here."

"i hope i have not driven her away?"

"she supposes we have family affairs to speak about, i dare say. she
is very modest. it is a fine quality in a young woman. and scarcer,"
says mrs. rouncewell, expanding her stomacher to its utmost limits,
"than it formerly was!"

the young man inclines his head in acknowledgment of the precepts of
experience. mrs. rouncewell listens.

"wheels!" says she. they have long been audible to the younger ears
of her companion. "what wheels on such a day as this, for gracious
sake?"

after a short interval, a tap at the door. "come in!" a dark-eyed,
dark-haired, shy, village beauty comes in--so fresh in her rosy and
yet delicate bloom that the drops of rain 
 
 ___________________________
 
which have beaten on her
hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gathered.

"what company is this, rosa?" says mrs. rouncewell.

"it's two young men in a gig, ma'am, who want to see the house--yes,
and if you please, i told them so!" in quick reply to a gesture of
dissent from the housekeeper. "i went to the hall-door and told them
it was the wrong day and the wrong hour, but the young man who was
driving took off his hat in the wet and begged me to bring this card
to you."

"read it, my dear watt," says the housekeeper.

rosa is so shy as she gives it to him that they drop it between them
and almost knock their forehe
 
 ___________________________
 
ads together as they pick it up. rosa is
shyer than before.

"mr. guppy" is all the information the card yields.

"guppy!" repeats mrs. rouncewell, "mr. guppy! nonsense, i never heard
of him!"

"if you please, he told me that!" says rosa. "but he said that he and
the other young gentleman came from london only last night by the
mail, on business at the magistrates' meeting, ten miles off, this
morning, and that as their business was soon over, and they had heard
a great deal said of chesney wold, and really didn't know what to do
with themselves, they had come through the wet to see it. they are
lawyers. he says he is not in mr. tulkingho
 
 ___________________________
 
rn's office, but he is
sure he may make use of mr. tulkinghorn's name if necessary."
finding, now she leaves off, that she has been making quite a long
speech, rosa is shyer than ever.

now, mr. tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place,
and besides, is supposed to have made mrs. rouncewell's will. the old
lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,
and dismisses rosa. the grandson, however, being smitten by a sudden
wish to see the house himself, proposes to join the party. the
grandmother, who is pleased that he should have that interest,
accompanies him--though to do him justice, he is exceedingly
unwilling to trouble her.

"much obliged to you, ma'am!" says mr. guppy, divesting himself of
his wet dreadnought in the hall. "us london lawyers don't often 
 
 ___________________________
 
get
an out, and when we do, we like to make the most of it, you know."

the old housekeeper, with a gracious severity of deportment, waves
her hand towards the great staircase. mr. guppy and his friend follow
rosa; mrs. rouncewell and her grandson follow them; a young gardener
goes before to open the shutters.

as is usually the case with people who go over houses, mr. guppy and
his friend are dead beat before they have well begun. they straggle
about in wrong places, look at wrong things, don't care for the right
things, gape when more rooms are opened, exhibit profound depression
of spirits, and are clearly knocked up. in each successive chamber
that they enter, mrs. rouncewell, who is as upright as the house
itself, r
 
 ___________________________
 
ng again if it has anything to do with a
picture, ma'am," observes mr. guppy, "because i do assure you that
the more i think of that picture the better i know it, without
knowing how i know it!"

the story has nothing to do with a picture; the housekeeper can
guarantee that. mr. guppy is obliged to her for the information and
is, moreover, generally obliged. he retires with his friend, guided
down another staircase by the young gardener, and presently is heard
to drive away. it is now dusk. mrs. rouncewell can trust to the
discretion of her two young hearers and may tell them how the terrace
came to have that ghostly name.

she seats herself in a large chair by the fast-darkening window and
tells them: "in the wicked days, my dears, of king charles the
first--i mean, of course, in the wicked days of the rebels who
leagued themselves against that excellent king--sir morbury dedlock
was the owner of chesney wold. whether there was any account of a
ghost in the family before those days, i can't say.
 
 ___________________________
 
 i should think it
very likely indeed."

mrs. rouncewell holds this opinion because she considers that a
family of such antiquity and importance has a right to a ghost. she
regards a ghost as one of the privileges of the upper classes, a
genteel distinction to which the common people have no claim.

"sir morbury dedlock," says mrs. rouncewell, "was, i have no occasion
to say, on the side of the blessed martyr. but it is supposed that
his lady, who had none of the family blood in her veins, favoured the
bad cause. it is said that she had relations among king charles's
enemies, that she was in correspondence with them, and that she gave
them information. when any of the country gentlemen who followed his
majesty's cause met here, it is said that my lady was always nearer
to the door of their council-room than they supposed. do you hea
 
 ___________________________
 
o raise her, but she repulsed him as he bent over
her, and looking at him fixedly and coldly, said, 'i will die here
where i have walked. and i will walk here, though i am in my grave. i
will walk here until the pride of this house is humbled. and when
calamity or when disgrace is coming to it, let the dedlocks listen
for my step!'"

watt looks at rosa. rosa in the deepening gloom looks down upon the
ground, half frightened and half shy.

"there and then she died. and from those days," says mrs. rouncewell,
"the name has come down--the ghost's walk. if the tread is an echo,
it is an echo that is only heard after dark, and is often unheard for
a long while together. but it comes back from time to time; and so
sure as there is sickness or death in the family, it will be heard
then."

"and disgrace, grandmother--" says watt.

"disgrace never comes to chesney wold," returns the housekeeper.

her grandson apologizes with "true. true."

"that is the story. whatever the sound is, it is a worrying sound,
 
 ___________________________
 
"
says mrs. rouncewell, getting up from her chair; "and what is to be
noticed in it is that it must be heard. my lady, who is afraid of
nothing, admits that when it is there, it must be heard. you cannot
shut it out. watt, there is a tall french clock behind you (placed
there, 'a purpose) that has a loud beat when it is in motion and can
play music. you understand how those things are managed?"

"pretty well, grandmother, i think."

"set it a-going."

watt sets it a-going--music and all.

"now, come hither," says the
 
 ___________________________
 
 clean. it does so very busily and trimly, looks in
again a little while, and so departs.

jo, is it thou? well, well! though a rejected witness, who "can't
exactly say" what will be done to him in greater hands than men's,
thou art not quite in outer darkness. there is something like a
distant ray of light in thy muttered reason for this: "he wos wery
good to me, he wos!"




chapter xii

on the watch


it has left off raining down in lincolnshire at last, and chesney
wold has taken heart. mrs. rouncewell is full of hospitable cares,
for sir leicester and my lady are coming home from paris. the
fashionable intelligence has found it out and communicates the glad
tidings to benighted england. it has also found out that they will
entertain a brilliant and distinguished circle of the elite of the
beau monde (the fashionable intelligence is weak in english, but a
giant refreshed in french) at the ancient and hospitable family seat
in lincolnshire.

for the greater honour of the brilliant and distingu
 
 ___________________________
 
 it, now all consenting to consider the
question disposed of, now all breaking out again in violent debate,
incited by one obstinate and drowsy bird who will persist in putting
in a last contradictory croak. leaving them to swing and caw, the
travelling chariot rolls on to the house, where fires gleam warmly
through some of the windows, though not through so many as to give an
inhabited expression to the darkening mass of front. but the
brilliant and distinguished circle will soon do that.

mrs. rouncewell is in attendance and receives sir leicester's
customary shake of the hand with a profound curtsy.

"how do you do, mrs. rouncewell? i am glad to see you."

"i hope i have the honour of welcoming you in good health, sir
leicester?"

"in excellent health, mrs. rouncewell."

"my lady is looking charmingly well," says mrs. rouncewell with
another curtsy.

my lady signifies, without profuse expenditure of words, that she is
as wearily well as she can hope to be.

but rosa is in the distance, behind 
 
 ___________________________
 
e oak staircase, where sir leicester
pauses for her as her knightly escort. a staring old dedlock in a
panel, as large as life and as dull, looks as if he didn't know what
to make of it, which was probably his general state of mind in the
days of queen elizabeth.

that evening, in the housekeeper's room, rosa can do nothing but
murmur lady dedlock's praises. she is so affable, so graceful, so
beautiful, so elegant; has such a sweet voice and such a thrilling
touch that rosa can feel it yet! mrs. rouncewell confirms all this,
not without personal pride, reserving only the one point of
affability. mrs. rouncewell is not quite sure as to that. heaven
forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of
that excellent family, above all, of my lady, whom the whole world
admires; but if my lady would only be "a little more free," not quite
so cold and distant, mrs. rouncewell thinks she would be more
affable.

"'tis almost a pity," mrs. rouncewell adds--only "almost" because it
borders o
 
 ___________________________
 
t it in his mouth for safety and to sweep the
step and passage with great care. his job done, he sets off for
tom-all-alone's, stopping in the light of innumerable gas-lamps to
produce the piece of gold and give it another one-sided bite as a
reassurance of its being genuine.

the mercury in powder is in no want of society to-night, for my lady
goes to a grand dinner and three or four balls. sir leicester is
fidgety down at chesney wold, with no better company than the gout;
he complains to mrs. rouncewell that the rain makes such a monotonous
pattering on the terrace that he can't read the paper even by the
fireside in his own snug dressing-room.

"sir leicester would have done better to try the other side of the
house, my dear," says mrs. rouncewell to rosa. "his dressing-room is
on my lady's side. and in all these years i never heard the step upon
the ghost's walk more distinct than it is to-night!"




chapter xvii

esther's narrative


richard very often came to see us while we remained in l
 
 ___________________________
 
s,
fern, moss, woods again, and far away across the openings in the
prospect to the distance lying wide before us with a purple bloom
upon it, there seemed to be such undisturbed repose.

when we came into the little village and passed a small inn with the
sign of the dedlock arms swinging over the road in front, mr.
boythorn interchanged greetings with a young gentleman sitting on a
bench outside the inn-door who had some fishing-tackle lying beside
him.

"that's the housekeeper's grandson, mr. rouncewell by name," said,
he, "and he is in love with a pretty girl up at the house. lady
dedlock has taken a fancy to the pretty girl and is going to keep her
about her own fair person--an honour which my young friend himself
does not at all appreciate. however, he can't marry just yet, even if
his rosebud were willing; so he is fain to make the best of it. in
the meanwhile, he comes here pretty often for a day or two at a time
to--fish. ha ha ha ha!"

"are he and the pretty girl engaged, mr. boythorn?"
 
 ___________________________
 
t i ever saw in my life."

"a protegee of my lady's," observes sir leicester.

"i thought so. i felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked
that girl out. she really is a marvel. a dolly sort of beauty
perhaps," says miss volumnia, reserving her own sort, "but in its
way, perfect; such bloom i never saw!"

sir leicester, with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the
rouge, appears to say so too.

"indeed," remarks my lady languidly, "if there is any uncommon eye in
the case, it is mrs. rouncewell's, and not mine. rosa is her
discovery."

"your maid, i suppose?"

"no. my anything; pet--secretary--messenger--i don't know what."

"you like to have her about you, as you would like to have a flower,
or a bird, or a picture, or a poodle--no, not a poodle, though--or
anything else that was equally pretty?" says volumnia, sympathizing.
"yes, how charming now! and how well that delightful old soul mrs.
rouncewell is looking. she must be an immense age, and yet she is as
active and handsome! she 
 
 ___________________________
 
is the dearest friend i have, positively!"

sir leicester feels it to be right and fitting that the housekeeper
of chesney wold should be a remarkable person. apart from that, he
has a real regard for mrs. rouncewell and likes to hear her praised.
so he says, "you are right, volumnia," which volumnia is extremely
glad to hear.

"she has no daughter of her own, has she?"

"mrs. rouncewell? no, volumnia. she has a son. indeed, she had two."

my lady, whose chronic malady of boredom has been sadly aggravated by
volumnia this evening, glances wearily towards the candlesticks and
heaves a noiseless sigh.

"and it is a remarkable example of the confusion into which the
present age has fallen; of the obliteration of landmarks, the opening
of floodgates, and the uprooting of distinctions," says sir leicester
with stately gloom, "that i have been informed by mr. tulkinghorn
that mrs. ro
 
 ___________________________
 
--"i am
bound to say, in a very becoming and well-expressed note, the favour
of a short interview with yourself and myself on the subject of this
young girl. as it appeared that he wished to depart to-night, i
replied that we would see him before retiring."

miss volumnia with a third little scream takes flight, wishing her
hosts--o lud!--well rid of the--what is it?--ironmaster!

the other cousins soon disperse, to the last cousin there. sir
leicester rings the bell, "make my compliments to mr. rouncewell, in
the housekeeper's apartments, and say i can receive him now."

my lady, who has heard all this with slight attention outwardly,
looks towards mr. rouncewell as he comes in. he is a little over
fifty perhaps, of a good figure, like his mother, and has a clear
voice, a broad forehead from which his dark hair has retired, and a
shrewd though open face. he is a responsible-looking gentleman
dressed in black, portly enough, but strong and active. has a
perfectly natural and easy air and is not i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the least embarrassed by
the great presence into which he comes.

"sir leicester and lady dedlock, as i have already apologized for
intruding on you, i cannot do better than be very brief. i thank you,
sir leicester."

the head of the dedlocks has motioned towards a sofa between himself
and my lady. mr. rouncewell quietly takes his seat there.

"in these busy times, when so many great undertakings are in
progress, people like myself have so many workmen in so many places
that we are always on the flight."

sir leicester is content enough that the ironmaster should feel that
there is no hurry there; there, in that ancient house, rooted in that
quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to mature, and
the gnarled and warted elms and the umbrageous oaks stand deep in the
fern and leaves of a hundr
 
 ___________________________
 
ed years; and where the sun-dial on the
terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time which was as much
the property of every dedlock--while he lasted--as the house and
lands. sir leicester sits down in an easy-chair, opposing his repose
and that of chesney wold to the restless flights of ironmasters.

"lady dedlock has been so kind," proceeds mr. rouncewell with a
respectful glance and a bow that way, "as to place near her a young
beauty of the name of rosa. now, my son has fallen in love with rosa
and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and to
their becoming engaged if she will take him--which i suppose she
will. i have never seen rosa until to-day, but i have some confidence
in my son's good sense--even in love. i find her what he represents
her, to the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks of her with
great commendation."

 
 ___________________________
 
ion! all sir leicester's
old misgivings relative to wat tyler and the people in the iron
districts who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come in a shower
upon his head, the fine grey hair of which, as well as of his
whiskers, actually stirs with indignation.

"am i to understand, sir," says sir leicester, "and is my lady to
understand"--he brings her in thus specially, first as a point of
gallantry, and next as a point of prudence, having great reliance on
her sense--"am i to understand, mr. rouncewell, and is my lady to
understand, sir, that you consider this young woman too good for
chesney wold or likely to be injured by remaining here?"

"certainly not, sir leicester,"

"i am glad to hear it." sir leicester very lofty indeed.

"pray, mr. rouncewell," says my lady, warning sir leicester off with
the slightest gesture of her pretty hand, as if he were a fly,
"explain to me what you mean."

"willingly, lady dedlock. there is nothing i could desire more."

addressing her composed face, whose 
 
 ___________________________
 
ly supposed," with the least turn of his eyes towards sir
leicester, "that i am ashamed of my mother's position here, or
wanting in all just respect for chesney wold and the family.
i certainly may have desired--i certainly have desired, lady
dedlock--that my mother should retire after so many years and end
her days with me. but as i have found that to sever this strong bond
would be to break her heart, i have long abandoned that idea."

sir leicester very magnificent again at the notion of mrs. rouncewell
being spirited off from her natural home to end her days with an
ironmaster.

"i have been," proceeds the visitor in a modest, clear way, "an
apprentice and a workman. i have lived on workman's wages, years and
years, and beyond a certain point have had to educate myself. my wife
was a foreman's daughter, and plainly brought up. we have three
daughters besides this son of whom i have spoken, and being
fortunately able to give them greater advantages than we have had
ourselves, we have educated 
 
 ___________________________
 
girl at the same school with your sisters
for such a time, during which you will give me your word and honour
to see her only so often. if at the expiration of that time, when she
has so far profited by her advantages as that you may be upon a fair
equality, you are both in the same mind, i will do my part to make
you happy.' i know of several cases such as i describe, my lady, and
i think they indicate to me my own course now."

sir leicester's magnificence explodes. calmly, but terribly.

"mr. rouncewell," says sir leicester with his right hand in the
breast of his blue coat, the attitude of state in which he is painted
in the gallery, "do you draw a parallel between chesney wold and a--"
here he resists a disposition to choke, "a factory?"

"i need not reply, sir leicester, that the two places are very
different; but for the purposes of this case, i think a parallel may
be justly drawn between them."

sir leicester directs his majestic glance down one side of the long
drawing-room and up the o
 
 ___________________________
 
ther before he can believe that he is awake.

"are you aware, sir, that this young woman whom my lady--my lady--has
placed near her person was brought up at the village school outside
the gates?"

"sir leicester, i am quite aware of it. a very good school it is, and
handsomely supported by this family."

"then, mr. rouncewell," returns sir leicester, "the application of
what you have said is, to me, incomprehensible."

"will it be more comprehensible, sir leicester, if i say," the
ironmaster is reddening a little, "that i do not regard the village
school as teaching everything desirable to be known by my son's
wife?"

from the village school of chesney wold, intact as it is this minute,
to the whole framework of society; from the whole framework of
society, to the aforesaid framework receiving tremendous cracks in
c
 
 ___________________________
 
ng out of the station unto
which they are called--necessarily and for ever, according to sir
leicester's rapid logic, the first station in which they happen to
find themselves; and from that, to their educating other people out
of their stations, and so obliterating the landmarks, and opening the
floodgates, and all the rest of it; this is the swift progress of the
dedlock mind.

"my lady, i beg your pardon. permit me, for one moment!" she has
given a faint indication of intending to speak. "mr. rouncewell, our
views of duty, and our views of station, and our views of education,
and our views of--in short, all our views--are so diametrically
opposed, that to prolong this discussion must be repellent to your
feelings and repellent to my own. this young woman is honoured with
my lady's notice and favour. if she wishes to withdraw herself from
that notice and favour or if she chooses to place herself under the
influence of any one who may in his peculiar opinions--you will allow
me to say, in his pe
 
 ___________________________
 
 spoken. it will have no effect of itself, one way or other,
on the young woman's position here. beyond this, we can make no
terms; and here we beg--if you will be so good--to leave the
subject."

the visitor pauses a moment to give my lady an opportunity, but she
says nothing. he then rises and replies, "sir leicester and lady
dedlock, allow me to thank you for your attention and only to observe
that i shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer his present
inclinations. good night!"

"mr. rouncewell," says sir leicester with all the nature of a
gentleman shining in him, "it is late, and the roads are dark. i hope
your time is not so precious but that you will allow my lady and
myself to offer you the hospitality of chesney wold, for to-night at
least."

"i hope so," adds my lady.

"i am much obliged to you, but i have to travel all night in order to
reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed time
in the morning."

therewith the ironmaster takes his departure, sir leices
 
 ___________________________
 
ter ringing
the bell and my lady rising as he leaves the room.

when my lady goes to her boudoir, she sits down thoughtfully by the
fire, and inattentive to the ghost's walk, looks at rosa, writing in
an inner room. presently my lady calls her.

"come to me, child. tell me the truth. are you in love?"

"oh! my lady!"

my lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling,
"who is it? is it mrs. rouncewell's grandson?"

"yes, if you please, my lady. but i don't know that i am in love with
him--yet."

"yet, you silly little thing! do you know that he loves you, yet?"

"i think he likes me a little, my lady." and rosa bursts into tears.

is this lady dedlock standing beside the village beauty, smoothing
her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so
full of musing interest? aye, indeed it is!

"listen to me, child. you are young and true, and i believe you are
attached to me.
 
 ___________________________
 
a man's? a woman's? the pattering of a little child's
feet, ever coming on--on--on? some melancholy influence is upon her,
or why should so proud a lady close the doors and sit alone upon the
hearth so desolate?

volumnia is away next day, and all the cousins are scattered before
dinner. not a cousin of the batch but is amazed to hear from sir
leicester at breakfast-time of the obliteration of landmarks, and
opening of floodgates, and cracking of the framework of society,
manifested through mrs. rouncewell's son. not a cousin of the batch
but is really indignant, and connects it with the feebleness of
william buffy when in office, and really does feel deprived of a
stake in the country--or the pension list--or something--by fraud and
wrong. as to volumnia, she is handed down the great staircase by sir
leicester, as eloquent upon the theme as if there were a general
rising in the north of england to obtain her rouge-pot and pearl
necklace. and thus, with a clatter of maids and valets--for it is on
 
 ___________________________
 
ot at all willing to see them,
for when they have waited a full hour, and the clerk, on his bell
being rung, takes the opportunity of mentioning as much, he brings
forth no more encouraging message than that mr. tulkinghorn has
nothing to say to them and they had better not wait. they do wait,
however, with the perseverance of military tactics, and at last the
bell rings again and the client in possession comes out of mr.
tulkinghorn's room.

the client is a handsome old lady, no other than mrs. rouncewell,
housekeeper at chesney wold. she comes out of the sanctuary with a
fair old-fashioned curtsy and softly shuts the door. she is treated
with some distinction there, for the clerk steps out of his pew to
show her through the outer office and to let her out. the old lady is
thanking him for his attention when she observes the comrades in
waiting.

"i beg your pardon, sir, but i think those gentlemen are military?"

the clerk referring the question to them with his eye, and mr. george
not turning 
 
 ___________________________
 
 many places simultaneously and can throw himself
upon a considerable portion of the country at one time. britannia
being much occupied in pocketing doodle in the form of sovereigns,
and swallowing doodle in the form of beer, and in swearing herself
black in the face that she does neither--plainly to the advancement
of her glory and morality--the london season comes to a sudden end,
through all the doodleites and coodleites dispersing to assist
britannia in those religious exercises.

hence mrs. rouncewell, housekeeper at chesney wold, foresees, though
no instructions have yet come down, that the family may shortly be
expected, together with a pretty large accession of cousins and
others who can in any way assist the great constitutional work. and
hence the stately old dame, taking time by the forelock, leads him up
and down the staircases, and along the galleries and passages, and
through the rooms, to witness before he grows any older that
everything is ready, that floors are rubbed bright, car
 
 ___________________________
 
hapes, when the armour
has dull lights upon it not easily to be distinguished from stealthy
movement, and when barred helmets are frightfully suggestive of heads
inside. but of all the shadows in chesney wold, the shadow in the
long drawing-room upon my lady's picture is the first to come, the
last to be disturbed. at this hour and by this light it changes into
threatening hands raised up and menacing the handsome face with every
breath that stirs.

"she is not well, ma'am," says a groom in mrs. rouncewell's
audience-chamber.

"my lady not well! what's the matter?"

"why, my lady has been but poorly, ma'am, since she was last here--i
don't mean with the family, ma'am, but when she was here as a bird of
passage like. my lady has not been out much, for her, and has kept
her room a good deal."

"chesney wold, thomas," rejoins the housekeeper with proud
complacency, "will set my lady up! there is no finer air and no
healthier soil in the world!"

thomas may have his own personal opinions on this subj
 
 ___________________________
 
. three to one."

it is a part of mr. tulkinghorn's policy and mastery to have no
political opinions; indeed, no opinions. therefore he says "you" are
beaten, and not "we."

sir leicester is majestically wroth. volumnia never heard of such a
thing. 'the debilitated cousin holds that it's sort of thing that's
sure tapn slongs votes--giv'n--mob.

"it's the place, you know," mr. tulkinghorn goes on to say in the
fast-increasing darkness when there is silence again, "where they
wanted to put up mrs. rouncewell's son."

"a proposal which, as you correctly informed me at the time, he had
the becoming taste and perception," observes sir leicester, "to
decline. i cannot say that i by any means approve of the sentiments
expressed by mr. rouncewell when he was here for some half-hour in
this room, but there was a sense of propriety in his decision which i
am glad to acknowledge."

"ha!" says mr. tulkinghorn. "it did not prevent him from being very
active in this election, though."

sir leicester is distinc
 
 ___________________________
 
tly heard to gasp before speaking. "did i
understand you? did you say that mr. rouncewell had been very active
in this election?"

"uncommonly active."

"against--"

"oh, dear yes, against you. he is a very good speaker. plain and
emphatic. he made a damaging effect, and has great influence. in the
business part of the proceedings he carried all before him."

it is evident to the whole company, though nobody can see him, that
sir leicester is staring majestically.

"and he was much assisted," says mr. tulkinghorn as a wind-up, "by
his son."

"by his son, sir?" repeats sir leicester 
 
 ___________________________
 
ant and
repeats with some little emphasis grafted upon his usual monotony,
"real flesh and blood, miss dedlock. sir leicester, these particulars
have only lately become known to me. they are very brief. they
exemplify what i have said. i suppress names for the present. lady
dedlock will not think me ill-bred, i hope?"

by the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking
towards the moonlight. by the light of the moon lady dedlock can be
seen, perfectly still.

"a townsman of this mrs. rouncewell, a man in exactly parallel
circumstances as i am told, had the good fortune to have a daughter
who attracted the notice of a great lady. i speak of really a great
lady, not merely great to him, but married to a gentleman of your
condition, sir leicester."

sir leicester condescendingly says, "yes, mr. tulkinghorn," implying
that then she must have appeared of very considerable moral
dimensions indeed in the eyes of an iron-master.

"the lady was wealthy and beautiful, and had a liking for the g
 
 ___________________________
 
e army being dead, she believed herself safe; but a
train of circumstances with which i need not trouble you led to
discovery. as i received the story, they began in an imprudence on
her own part one day when she was taken by surprise, which shows how
difficult it is for the firmest of us (she was very firm) to be
always guarded. there was great domestic trouble and amazement, you
may suppose; i leave you to imagine, sir leicester, the husband's
grief. but that is not the present point. when mr. rouncewell's
townsman heard of the disclosure, he no more allowed the girl to be
patronized and honoured than he would have suffered her to be trodden
underfoot before his eyes. such was his pride, that he indignantly
took her away, as if from reproach and disgrace. he had no sense of
the honour done him and his daughter by the lady's condescension; not
the least. he resented the girl's position, as if the lady had been
the commonest of commoners. that is the story. i hope lady dedlock
will excuse its pai
 
 ___________________________
 
ittle while hence. remember this, and keep my
confidence. do so much for my sake, and thus all ends between us!"

she detaches herself from her simple-hearted companion and leaves the
room. late in the afternoon, when she next appears upon the
staircase, she is in her haughtiest and coldest state. as indifferent
as if all passion, feeling, and interest had been worn out in the
earlier ages of the world and had perished from its surface with its
other departed monsters.

mercury has announced mr. rouncewell, which is the cause of her
appearance. mr. rouncewell is not in the library, but she repairs to
the library. sir leicester is there, and she wishes to speak to him
first.

"sir leicester, i am desirous--but you are engaged."

oh, dear no! not at all. only mr. tulkinghorn.

always at hand. haunting every place. no relief or security from him
for a moment.

"i beg your pardon, lady dedlock. will you allow me to retire?"

with a look that plainly says, "you know you have the power to remain
if you
 
 ___________________________
 
bsurd glass pot, with a knob in the bottom like an
oyster, blinks and sulks at newer lights every night, like its high
and dry master in the house of lords.

therefore there is not much that lady dedlock, seated in her chair,
could wish to see through the window in which mr. tulkinghorn stands.
and yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if it were
her heart's desire to have that figure moved out of the way.

sir leicester begs his lady's pardon. she was about to say?

"only that mr. rouncewell is here (he has called by my appointment)
and that we had better make an end of the question of that girl. i am
tired to death of the matter."

"what can i do--to--assist?" demands sir leicester in some
considerable doubt.

"let us see him here and have done with it. will you tell them to
send him up?"

"mr. tulkinghorn, be so good as to ring. thank you. request," says
sir leicester to mercury, not immediately remembering the business
term, "request the iron gentleman to walk this way."

mercur
 
 ___________________________
 
y departs in search of the iron gentleman, finds, and produces
him. sir leicester receives that ferruginous person graciously.

"i hope you are well, mr. rouncewell. be seated. (my solicitor, mr.
tulkinghorn.) my lady was desirous, mr. rouncewell," sir leicester
skilfully transfers him with a solemn wave of his hand, "was desirous
to speak with you. hem!"

"i shall be very happy," returns the iron gentleman, "to give my best
attention to anything lady dedlock does me the honour to say."

as he turns towards her, he finds that the impression she makes upon
him is less agreeable than on the former occasion. a distant
supercilious air makes a cold atmosphere about her, and there is
nothing in her bearing, as there was before, to encourage 
 
 ___________________________
 
ence in this respect between the base metals and the
precious. highly proper.

"and pray has he done so?"

"really, lady dedlock, i cannot make you a definite reply. i fear
not. probably not yet. in our condition of life, we sometimes couple
an intention with our--our fancies which renders them not altogether
easy to throw off. i think it is rather our way to be in earnest."

sir leicester has a misgiving that there may be a hidden wat tylerish
meaning in this expression, and fumes a little. mr. rouncewell is
perfectly good-humoured and polite, but within such limits, evidently
adapts his tone to his reception.

"because," proceeds my lady, "i have been thinking of the subject,
which is tiresome to me."

"i am very sorry, i am sure."

"and also of what sir leicester said upon it, in which i quite
concur"--sir leicester flattered--"and if you cannot give us the
assurance that this fancy is at an end, i have come to the conclusion
that the girl had better leave me."

"i can give no such assurance, 
 
 ___________________________
 
of that eminent lady, surrounded by the various advantages
which such a position confers, and which are unquestionably very
great--i believe unquestionably very great, sir--for a young woman in
that station of life. the question then arises, should that young
woman be deprived of these many advantages and that good fortune
simply because she has"--sir leicester, with an apologetic but
dignified inclination of his head towards the ironmaster, winds up
his sentence--"has attracted the notice of mr rouncewell's son? now,
has she deserved this punishment? is this just towards her? is this
our previous understanding?"

"i beg your pardon," interposes mr. rouncewell's son's father. "sir
leicester, will you allow me? i think i may shorten the subject. pray
dismiss that from your consideration. if you remember anything so
unimportant--which is not to be expected--you would recollect that my
first thought in the affair was directly opposed to her remaining
here."

dismiss the dedlock patronage from consid
 
 ___________________________
 
ither side. the girl is a very good girl; i have nothing whatever
to say against her, but she is so far insensible to her many
advantages and her good fortune that she is in love--or supposes she
is, poor little fool--and unable to appreciate them."

sir leicester begs to observe that wholly alters the case. he might
have been sure that my lady had the best grounds and reasons in
support of her view. he entirely agrees with my lady. the young woman
had better go.

"as sir leicester observed, mr. rouncewell, on the last occasion when
we were fatigued by this business," lady dedlock languidly proceeds,
"we cannot make conditions with you. without conditions, and under
present circumstances, the girl is quite misplaced here and had
better go. i have told her so. would you wish to have her sent back
to the village, or would you like to take her with you, or what would
you prefer?"

"lady dedlock, if i may speak plainly--"

"by all means."

"--i should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve 
 
 ___________________________
 
coming in, the
ironmaster leaves his chair, takes her arm in his, and remains with
her near the door ready to depart.

"you are taken charge of, you see," says my lady in her weary manner,
"and are going away well protected. i have mentioned that you are a
very good girl, and you have nothing to cry for."

"she seems after all," observes mr. tulkinghorn, loitering a little
forward with his hands behind him, "as if she were crying at going
away."

"why, she is not well-bred, you see," returns mr. rouncewell with
some quickness in his manner, as if he were glad to have the lawyer
to retort upon, "and she is an inexperienced little thing and knows
no better. if she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, no
doubt."

"no doubt," is mr. tulkinghorn's composed reply.

rosa sobs out that she is very sorry to leave my lady, and that she
was happy at chesney wold, and has been happy with my lady, and that
she thanks my lady over and over again. "out, you silly little puss!"
says the ironmaster, c
 
 ___________________________
 
hecking her in a low voice, though not angrily.
"have a spirit, if you're fond of watt!" my lady merely waves her off
with indifference, saying, "there, there, child! you are a good girl.
go away!" sir leicester has magnificently disengaged himself from the
subject and retired into the sanctuary of his blue coat. mr.
tulkinghorn, an indistinct form against the dark street now dotted
with lamps, looms in my lady's view, bigger and blacker than before.

"sir leicester and lady dedlock," says mr. rouncewell after a pause
of a few moments, "i beg to take my leave, with an apology for having
again troubled you, though not of my own act, on this tiresome
subject. i can very well understand, i assure you, how tiresome so
small a matter must have become to lady dedlock. if i am doubtful of
my dealing with it, it is only because i did not at first quietly
exert my influence to take my young friend here away without
troubling you at all. but it appeared to me--i dare say magnifying
the importance of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
thing--that it was respectful to explain to you
how the matter stood and candid to consult your wishes and
convenience. i hope you will excuse my want of acquaintance with the
polite world."

sir leicester considers himself evoked out of the sanctuary by these
remarks. "mr. rouncewell," he returns, "do not mention it.
justifications are unnecessary, i hope, on either side."

"i am glad to hear it, sir leicester; and if i may, by way of a last
word, revert to what i said before of my mother's long connexion with
the family and the worth it bespeaks on both sides, i would point out
this little instance here on my arm who shows herself so affectionate
and faithful in parting and in whom my mother, i dare say, has done
something to awaken such feelings--though of course lady ded
 
 ___________________________
 
lock, by
her heartfelt interest and her genial condescension, has done much
more."

if he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks. he points
it, however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner of
speech, though in saying it he turns towards that part of the dim
room where my lady sits. sir leicester stands to return his parting
salutation, mr. tulkinghorn again rings, mercury takes another
flight, and mr. rouncewell and rosa leave the house.

then lights are brought in, discovering mr. tulkinghorn still
standing in his window with his hands behind him and my lady still
sitting with his figure before her, closing up her view of the night
as well as of the day. she is very pale. mr. tulkinghorn, observing
it as she rises to retire, thinks, "well she may be! the power of
this woman is astonishing. she has been acting a part the whole
time." but he can act a part too--his one unchanging character--and
as he ho
 
 ___________________________
 
iers desolately look at
one another over roads and streams like brick and mortar couples with
an obstacle to their union; fragments of embankments are thrown up
and left as precipices with torrents of rusty carts and barrows
tumbling over them; tripods of tall poles appear on hilltops, where
there are rumours of tunnels; everything looks chaotic and abandoned
in full hopelessness. along the freezing roads, and through the
night, the post-chaise makes its way without a railroad on its mind.

mrs. rouncewell, so many years housekeeper at chesney wold, sits
within the chaise; and by her side sits mrs. bagnet with her grey
cloak and umbrella. the old girl would prefer the bar in front, as
being exposed to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in
accordance with her usual course of travelling, but mrs. rouncewell
is too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of her proposing it. the
old lady cannot make enough of the old girl. she sits, in her stately
manner, holding her hand, and regardless of i
 
 ___________________________
 
t, "was always free with me, ma'am,
and when he said at our house to my woolwich that of all the things
my woolwich could have to think of when he grew to be a man, the
comfortablest would be that he had never brought a sorrowful line
into his mother's face or turned a hair of her head grey, then i felt
sure, from his way, that something fresh had brought his own mother
into his mind. i had often known him say to me, in past times, that
he had behaved bad to her."

"never, my dear!" returns mrs. rouncewell, bursting into tears. "my
blessing on him, never! he was always fond of me, and loving to me,
was my george! but he had a bold spirit, and he ran a little wild and
went for a soldier. and i know he waited at first, in letting us know
about himself, till he should rise to be an officer; and when he
didn't rise, i know he considered himself beneath us, and wouldn't be
a disgrace to us. for he had a lion heart, had my george, always from
a baby!"

the old lady's hands stray about her as of yore, w
 
 ___________________________
 
ave my thoughts as i have often had before, and i
draw it out of george how he comes to have such things on him that
afternoon. then george tells me that he has seen by chance, at the
lawyer's office, a fine old lady that has brought his mother plain
before him, and he runs on about that old lady till he quite forgets
himself and paints her picture to me as she used to be, years upon
years back. so i says to george when he has done, who is this old
lady he has seen? and george tells me it's mrs. rouncewell,
housekeeper for more than half a century to the dedlock family down
at chesney wold in lincolnshire. george has frequently told me before
that he's a lincolnshire man, and i says to my old lignum that night,
'lignum, that's his mother for five and for-ty pound!'"

all this mrs. bagnet now relates for the twentieth time at least
within the last four hours. trilling it out like a kind of bird, with
a pretty high note, that it may be audible to the old lady above the
hum of the wheels.

"bless yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u, and thank you," says mrs. rouncewell. "bless you, and
thank you, my worthy soul!"

"dear heart!" cries mrs. bagnet in the most natural manner. "no
thanks to me, i am sure. thanks to yourself, ma'am, for being so
ready to pay 'em! and mind once more, ma'am, what you had best do
on finding george to be your own son is to make him--for your
sake--have every sort of help to put himself in the right and clear
himself of a charge of which he is as innocent as you or me. it won't
do to have truth and justice on his side; he must have law
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
lawyers," exclaims the old girl, apparently persuaded that the latter
form a separate establishment and have dissolved partnership with
truth and justice for ever and a day.

"he shall have," says mrs. rouncewell, "all the help that can be got
for him in the world, my dear. i will spend all i have, and
thankfully, to procure it. sir leicester will do his best, the whole
family will do their best. i--i know something, my dear; and will
make my own appeal, as his mother parted from him all these years,
and finding him in a jail at last."

the extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper's manner in saying
this, her broken words, and her wringing of her hands make a powerful
impression on mrs. bagnet and wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld astonish her but that she refers
them all to her sorrow for her son's condition. and yet mrs. bagnet
wonders too why mrs. rouncewell should murmur so distractedly, "my
lady, my lady, my lady!" over and over again.

the frosty night wears away, and the dawn breaks, and the post-chaise
comes rolling on through the early mist like the ghost of a chaise
departed. it has plenty of spectral company in ghosts of trees and
hedges, slowly vanishing and giving place to the realities of day.
london reached, the travellers alight, the old housekeeper in great
tribulation and confusion, mrs. bagnet quite fresh and collected--as
she would
 
 ___________________________
 
only her fluttering hands give utterance to her
emotions. but they are very eloquent, very, very eloquent. mrs.
bagnet understands them. they speak of gratitude, of joy, of grief,
of hope; of inextinguishable affection, cherished with no return
since this stalwart man was a stripling; of a better son loved less,
and this son loved so fondly and so proudly; and they speak in such
touching language that mrs. bagnet's eyes brim up with tears and they
run glistening down her sun-brown face.

"george rouncewell! oh, my dear child, turn and look at me!"

the trooper starts up, clasps his mother round the neck, and falls
down on his knees before her. whether in a late repentance, whether
in the first association that comes back upon him, he puts his hands
together as a child does when it says its prayers, and raising them
towards her breast, bows down his head, and cries.

"my george, my dearest son! always my favourite, and my favourite
still, where have you been these cruel years and years? grown such
 
 ___________________________
 
elf?
how could you help regarding as an incumbrance and a discredit to you
an idle dragooning chap who was an incumbrance and a discredit to
himself, excepting under discipline? how could i look my brother's
children in the face and pretend to set them an example--i, the
vagabond boy who had run away from home and been the grief and
unhappiness of my mother's life? 'no, george.' such were my words,
mother, when i passed this in review before me: 'you have made your
bed. now, lie upon it.'"

mrs. rouncewell, drawing up her stately form, shakes her head at the
old girl with a swelling pride upon her, as much as to say, "i told
you so!" the old girl relieves her feelings and testifies her
interest in the conversation by giving the trooper a great poke
between the shoulders with her umbrella; this action she afterwards
repeats, at intervals, in a species of affectionate lunacy, never
failing, after the administration of each of these remonstrances, to
resort to the whitened wall and the grey cloak ag
 
 ___________________________
 
own in this case, and whatever is said or done, i give my promise not
to have any."

matters being brought to this so far satisfactory pass, and time
being on the wane, mrs. bagnet proposes a departure. again and again
the old lady hangs upon her son's neck, and again and again the
trooper holds her to his broad chest.

"where are you going to take my mother, mrs. bagnet?"

"i am going to the town house, my dear, the family house. i have some
business there that must be looked to directly," mrs. rouncewell
answers.

"will you see my mother safe there in a coach, mrs. bagnet? but of
course i know you will. why should i ask it!"

why indeed, mrs. bagnet expresses with the umbrella.

"take her, my old friend, and take my gratitude along with you.
kisses to quebec and malta, love to my godson, a hearty shake of the
hand to lignum, and this for yourself, and i wish it was ten thousand
pound in gold, my dear!" so saying, the trooper puts his lips to the
old girl's tanned forehead, and the door shuts up
 
 ___________________________
 
y at the door of the dedlock mansion and handing mrs.
rouncewell up the steps, the old girl shakes hands and trudges off,
arriving soon afterwards in the bosom of the bagnet family and
falling to washing the greens as if nothing had happened.

my lady is in that room in which she held her last conference with
the murdered man, and is sitting where she sat that night, and is
looking at the spot where he stood upon the hearth studying her so
leisurely, when a tap comes at the door. who is it? mrs. rouncewell.
what has brought mrs. rouncewell to town so unexpectedly?

"trouble, my lady. sad trouble. oh, my lady, may i beg a word with
you?"

what new occurrence is it that makes this tranquil old woman tremble
so? far happier than her lady, as her lady has often thought, why
does she falter in this manner and look at her with such strange
mistrust?

"what is the matter? sit down and take your breath."

"oh, my lady, my lady. i have found my son--my youngest, who went
away for a soldier so long ago. an
 
 ___________________________
 
t here, sir leicester dedlock, baronet? certainly. open it
with one of these here keys? certainly. the littlest key? to be sure.
take the notes out? so i will. count 'em? that's soon done. twenty
and thirty's fifty, and twenty's seventy, and fifty's one twenty, and
forty's one sixty. take 'em for expenses? that i'll do, and render an
account of course. don't spare money? no i won't."

the velocity and certainty of mr. bucket's interpretation on all
these heads is little short of miraculous. mrs. rouncewell, who holds
the light, is giddy with the swiftness of his eyes and hands as he
starts up, furnished for his journey.

"you're george's mother, old lady; that's about what you are, i
believe?" says mr. bucket aside, with his hat already on and
buttoning his coat.

"yes, sir, i am his distressed mother."

"so i thought, according to what he mentioned to me just now. well,
then, i'll tell you something. you needn't be distressed no more.
your son's all right. now, don't you begin a-crying, because 
 
 ___________________________
 
snow
again until they seem, by being long looked at, to fall so thick and
fast that he is obliged to close his eyes for a minute on the giddy
whirl of white flakes and icy blots.

he began to look at them as soon as it was light. the day is not yet
far spent when he conceives it to be necessary that her rooms should
be prepared for her. it is very cold and wet. let there be good
fires. let them know that she is expected. please see to it yourself.
he writes to this purpose on his slate, and mrs. rouncewell with a
heavy heart obeys.

"for i dread, george," the old lady says to her son, who waits below
to keep her company when she has a little leisure, "i dread, my dear,
that my lady will never more set foot within these walls."

"that's a bad presentiment, mother."

"nor yet within the walls of chesney wold, my dear."

"that's worse. but why, mother?"

"when i saw my lady yesterday, george, she looked to me--and i may
say at me too--as if the step on the ghost's walk had almost walked
her down."


 
 ___________________________
 
here, there is little doubt, to
prevent her talking somewhere else. he is very ill, but he makes his
present stand against distress of mind and body most courageously.

the fair volumnia, being one of those sprightly girls who cannot long
continue silent without imminent peril of seizure by the dragon
boredom, soon indicates the approach of that monster with a series of
undisguisable yawns. finding it impossible to suppress those yawns by
any other process than conversation, she compliments mrs. rouncewell
on her son, declaring that he positively is one of the finest figures
she ever saw and as soldierly a looking person, she should think, as
what's his name, her favourite life guardsman--the man she dotes on,
the dearest of creatures--who was killed at waterloo.

sir leicester hears this tribute with so much surprise and stares
about him in such a confused way that mrs. rouncewell feels it
necessary to explain.

"miss dedlock don't speak of my eldest son, sir leicester, but my
youngest. i have f
 
 ___________________________
 
ound him. he has come home."

sir leicester breaks silence with a harsh cry. "george? your son
george come home, mrs. rouncewell?"

the old housekeeper wipes her eyes. "thank god. yes, sir leicester."

does this discovery of some one lost, this return of some one so long
gone, come upon him as a strong confirmation of his hopes? does he
think, "shall i not, with the aid i have, recall her safely after
this, there being fewer hours in her case than there are years in
his?"

it is of no use entreating him; he is determined to speak now, and he
does. in a thick crowd of sounds, but still intelligibly enough to be
understood
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"why did you not tell me, mrs. rouncewell?"

"it happened only yesterday, sir leicester, and i doubted your being
well enough to be talked to of such things."

besides, the giddy volumnia now remembers with her little scream that
nobody was to have known of his being mrs. rouncewell's son and that
she was not to have told. but mrs. rouncewell protests, with warmth
enough to swell the stomacher, that of course she would have told sir
leicester as soon as he got better.

"where is your son george, mrs. rouncewell?" asks sir leicester,

mrs. rouncewell, not a little alarmed by his disregard of the
doctor's injunctions, replies, in london.

"where in london?"

mrs. rouncewell is constrained to admit that he is in the house.

"bring him here to my room. bring him directly."

the old lady can do nothing but go in search of him. sir leices
 
 ___________________________
 
r the returning steps. a quantity
of straw has been tumbled down in the street to deaden the noises
there, and she might be driven to the door perhaps without his
hearing wheels.

he is lying thus, apparently forgetful of his newer and minor
surprise, when the housekeeper returns, accompanied by her trooper
son. mr. george approaches softly to the bedside, makes his bow,
squares his chest, and stands, with his face flushed, very heartily
ashamed of himself.

"good heaven, and it is really george rouncewell!" exclaims sir
leicester. "do you remember me, george?"

the trooper needs to look at him and to separate this sound from that
sound before he knows what he has said, but doing this and being a
little helped by his mother, he replies, "i must have a very bad
memory, indeed, sir leicester, if i failed to remember you."

"when i look at you, george rouncewell," sir leicester observes with
difficulty, "i see something of a boy at chesney wold--i remember
well--very well."

he looks at the trooper 
 
 ___________________________
 
until tears come into his eyes, and then he
looks at the sleet and snow again.

"i ask your pardon, sir leicester," says the trooper, "but would you
accept of my arms to raise you up? you would lie easier, sir
leicester, if you would allow me to move you."

"if you please, george rouncewell; if you will be so good."

the trooper takes him in his arms like a child, lightly raises him,
and turns him with his face more towards the window. "thank you. you
have your mother's gentleness," returns sir leicester, "and your own
strength. thank you."

he signs to him with his hand not to go away. george quietly remains
at the bedside, waiting to be spoken to.

"why did you wish for secrecy?" it takes sir leicester some time to
ask this.

"truly i am not much to boast of, sir leicester, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
and not very
creditable to myself. however opinions may differ on a variety of
subjects, i should think it would be universally agreed, sir
leicester, that i am not much to boast of."

"you have been a soldier," observes sir leicester, "and a faithful
one."

george makes his military bow. "as far as that goes, sir leicester, i
have done my duty under discipline, and it was the least i could do."

"you find me," says sir leicester, whose eyes are much attracted
towards him, "far from well, george rouncewell."

"i am very sorry both to hear it and to see it, sir leicester."

"i am sure you are. no. in addition to my older malady, i have had a
sudden and bad attack. something that deadens," making an endeavour
to pass one hand down one side, "and confuses," touching his lips.

george, with a look of assent and sympathy, makes another bow. the
different times when they were both young men (the trooper much the
younger of the two) and looked at one another down at chesney wold
arise before them both a
 
 ___________________________
 
?
the words are not quite under my command in the manner of pronouncing
them."

volumnia understands him perfectly, and in truth he delivers himself
with far greater plainness than could have been supposed possible a
minute ago. the effort by which he does so is written in the anxious
and labouring expression of his face. nothing but the strength of his
purpose enables him to make it.

"therefore, volumnia, i desire to say in your presence--and in the
presence of my old retainer and friend, mrs. rouncewell, whose truth
and fidelity no one can question, and in the presence of her son
george, who comes back like a familiar recollection of my youth in
the home of my ancestors at chesney wold--in case i should relapse,
in case i should not recover, in case i should lose both my speech
and the power of writing, though i hope for better things--"

the old housekeeper weeping silently; volumnia in the greatest
agitation, with the freshest bloom on her cheeks; the trooper with
his arms folded and his hea
 
 ___________________________
 
r leicester, my honoured master," she softly whispers, "i
must, for your own good, and my duty, take the freedom of begging and
praying that you will not lie here in the lone darkness watching and
waiting and dragging through the time. let me draw the curtains, and
light the candles, and make things more comfortable about you. the
church-clocks will strike the hours just the same, sir leicester, and
the night will pass away just the same. my lady will come back, just
the same."

"i know it, mrs. rouncewell, but i am weak--and he has been so long
gone."

"not so very long, sir leicester. not twenty-four hours yet."

"but that is a long time. oh, it is a long time!"

he says it with a groan that wrings her heart.

she knows that this is not a period for bringing the rough light upon
him; she thinks his tears too sacred to be seen, even by her.
therefore she sits in the darkness for a while without a word, then
gently begins to move about, now stirring the fire, now standing at
the dark window looki
 
 ___________________________
 
ng out. finally he tells her, with recovered
self-command, "as you say, mrs. rouncewell, it is no worse for being
confessed. it is getting late, and they are not come. light the
room!" when it is lighted and the weather shut out, it is only left
to him to listen.

but they find that however dejected and ill he is, he brightens when
a quiet pretence is made of looking at the fires in her rooms and
being sure that everything is ready to receive her. poor pretence as
it is, these allusions to her being expected keep up hope within him.

midnight comes, and with it the same blank. the
 
 ___________________________
 
e
are none, unless a man so very nomadically drunk as to stray into the
frigid zone goes brawling and bellowing along the pavement. upon this
wintry night it is so still that listening to the intense silence is
like looking at intense darkness. if any distant sound be audible in
this case, it departs through the gloom like a feeble light in that,
and all is heavier than before.

the corporation of servants are dismissed to bed (not unwilling to
go, for they were up all last night), and only mrs. rouncewell and
george keep watch in sir leicester's room. as the night lags tardily
on--or rather when it seems to stop altogether, at between two and
three o'clock--they find a restless craving on him to know more about
the weather, now he cannot see it. hence george, patrolling regularly
every half-hour to the rooms so carefully looked after, extends his
march to the hall-door, looks about him, and brings back the best
report he can make of the worst of nights, the sleet still falling
and even the stone
 
 ___________________________
 
 these very rooms and
the tokens of whose recent presence are all here; thinking of the
master of the house upstairs and of the foreboding, "who will tell
him!" he looks here and looks there, and reflects how he might see
something now, which it would tax his boldness to walk up to, lay his
hand upon, and prove to be a fancy. but it is all blank, blank as the
darkness above and below, while he goes up the great staircase again,
blank as the oppressive silence.

"all is still in readiness, george rouncewell?"

"quite orderly and right, sir leicester."

"no word of any kind?"

the trooper shakes his head.

"no letter that can possibly have been overlooked?"

but he knows there is no such hope as that and lays his head down
without looking for an answer.

very familiar to him, as he said himself some hours ago, george
rouncewell lifts him into easier positions through the long remainder
of the blank wintry night, and equally familiar with his unexpressed
wish, extinguishes the light and undraws the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 high chimneys and red bricks, blighted verdure, scorching
fires, and a heavy never-lightening cloud of smoke become the
features of the scenery. among such objects rides the trooper,
looking about him and always looking for something he has come to
find.

at last, on the black canal bridge of a busy town, with a clang of
iron in it, and more fires and more smoke than he has seen yet, the
trooper, swart with the dust of the coal roads, checks his horse and
asks a workman does he know the name of rouncewell thereabouts.

"why, master," quoth the workman, "do i know my own name?"

"'tis so well known here, is it, comrade?" asks the trooper.

"rouncewell's? ah! you're right."

"and where might it be now?" asks the trooper with a glance before
him.

"the bank, the factory, or the house?" the workman wants to know.

"hum! rouncewell's is so great apparently," mutters the trooper,
stroking his chin, "that i have as good as half a mind to go back
again. why, i don't know which i want. should i find mr. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
at the factory, do you think?"

"tain't easy to say where you'd find him--at this time of the day you
might find either him or his son there, if he's in town; but his
contracts take him away."

and which is the factory? why, he sees those chimneys--the tallest
ones! yes, he sees them. well! let him keep his eye on those
chimneys, going on as straight as ever he can, and presently he'll
see 'em down a turning on the left, shut in by a great brick wall
which forms one side of the street. that's rouncewell's.

the trooper thanks his informant and rides slowly on, looking about
him. he does not turn back, but puts up his horse (and is much
disposed to groom him too) at a public-house where some of
rouncewell's hands are dining, as the ostler tells him. some of
rouncewell's hands have just knocked off for dinner-time and seem to
be invading the whole town. they are very sinewy and strong, are
rouncewell's hands--a little sooty too.

he comes to a gateway in the brick wall, looks in, and sees a grea
 
 ___________________________
 
youth; bright fireworks of it
showering about under the blows of the steam-hammer; red-hot iron,
white-hot iron, cold-black iron; an iron taste, an iron smell, and a
babel of iron sounds.

"this is a place to make a man's head ache too!" says the trooper,
looking about him for a counting-house. "who comes here? this is very
like me before i was set up. this ought to be my nephew, if
likenesses run in families. your servant, sir."

"yours, sir. are you looking for any one?"

"excuse me. young mr. rouncewell, i believe?"

"yes."

"i was looking for your father, sir. i wish to have a word with him."

the young man, telling him he is fortunate in his choice of a time,
for his father is there, leads the way to the office where he is to
be found. "very like me before i was set up--devilish like me!"
thinks the trooper as he follows. they come to a building in the yard
with an office on an upper floor. at sight of the gentleman in the
office, mr. george turns very red.

"what name shall i say to my fath
 
 ___________________________
 
re office, with bare windows, looking on the iron view
below. tumbled together on the table are some pieces of iron,
purposely broken to be tested at various periods of their service, in
various capacities. there is iron-dust on everything; and the smoke
is seen through the windows rolling heavily out of the tall chimneys
to mingle with the smoke from a vaporous babylon of other chimneys.

"i am at your service, mr. steel," says the gentleman when his
visitor has taken a rusty chair.

"well, mr. rouncewell," george replies, leaning forward with his left
arm on his knee and his hat in his hand, and very chary of meeting
his brother's eye, "i am not without my expectations that in the
present visit i may prove to be more free than welcome. i have served
as a dragoon in my day, and a comrade of mine that i was once rather
partial to was, if i don't deceive myself, a brother of yours. i
believe you had a brother who gave his family some trouble, and ran
away, and never did any good but in keeping awa