orge's approach until, lifting up herself and her tub together when
she has poured the water off into the gutter, she finds him standing
near her. her reception of him is not flattering.

"george, i never see you but i wish you was a hundred mile away!"

the trooper, without remarking on this welcome, follows into the
musical-instrument shop, where the lady places her tub of greens upon
the counter, and having shaken hands with him, rests her arms upon
it.

"i never," she says, "george, consider matthew bagnet safe a minute
when you're near him. you are that restless and that roving--"

"yes! i know i am, mrs. bagnet. i know i am."

"you know you are!" says mrs. bagnet. "what's the use of that? why
are you?"

"the nature of the animal, i suppose," returns the trooper
good-humouredly.

"ah!" cries mrs. bagnet, something shrilly. "but what satisfaction
will the nature of the animal be to me when the animal shall have
tempted my mat away from the musical business to new zealand or
australey?"

mrs. bagn
 
 ___________________________
 
proaches in his usual way, sidling off at first as if he were
going anywhere else and then bearing down upon his commander like a
bayonet-charge. certain splashes of white show in high relief upon
his dirty face, and he scrapes his one eyebrow with the handle of the
brush.

"attention, phil! listen to this."

"steady, commander, steady."

"'sir. allow me to remind you (though there is no legal necessity for
my doing so, as you are aware) that the bill at two months' date
drawn on yourself by mr. matthew bagnet, and by you accepted, for the
sum of ninety-seven pounds four shillings and ninepence, will become
due to-morrow, when you will please be prepared to take up the same
on presentation. yours, joshua smallweed.' what do you make of that,
phil?"

"mischief, guv'ner."

"why?"

"i think," replies phil after pensively tracing out a cross-wrinkle
in his forehead with the brush-handle, "that mischeevious
consequences is always meant when money's asked for."

"lookye, phil," says the trooper, sitting on
 
 ___________________________
 
 old lignum to you, and i am
sure you'll bring him through it."

the trooper returns that this is kindly said and that he will bring
lignum through it somehow. upon which mrs. bagnet, with her cloak,
basket, and umbrella, goes home, bright-eyed again, to the rest of
her family, and the comrades sally forth on the hopeful errand of
mollifying mr. smallweed.

whether there are two people in england less likely to come
satisfactorily out of any negotiation with mr. smallweed than mr.
george and mr. matthew bagnet may be very reasonably questioned.
also, notwithstanding their martial appearance, broad square
shoulders, and heavy tread, whether there are within the same limits
two more simple and unaccustomed children in all the smallweedy
affairs of life. as they proceed with great gravity through the
streets towards the region of mount pleasant, mr. bagnet, observing
his companion to be thoughtful, considers it a friendly part to refer
to mrs. bagnet's late sally.

"george, you know the old girl--she's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 honey lips that they can come in if they want to it. thus
privileged, they come in and find mr. smallweed with his feet in the
drawer of his chair as if it were a paper foot-bath and mrs.
smallweed obscured with the cushion like a bird that is not to sing.

"my dear friend," says grandfather smallweed with those two lean
affectionate arms of his stretched forth. "how de do? how de do? who
is our friend, my dear friend?"

"why this," returns george, not able to be very conciliatory at
first, "is matthew bagnet, who has obliged me in that matter of ours,
you know."

"oh! mr. bagnet? surely!" the old man looks at him under his hand.

"hope you're well, mr. bagnet? fine man, mr. george! military air,
sir!"

no chairs being offered, mr. george brings one forward for bagnet and
one for himself. they sit down, mr. bagnet as if he had no power of
bending himself, except at the hips, for that purpose.

"judy," says mr. smallweed, "bring the pipe."

"why, i don't know," mr. george interposes, "that the young 
 
 ___________________________
 
onfidentially as he
can, holding the open letter in one hand and resting the broad
knuckles of the other on his thigh, "a good lot of money has passed
between us, and we are face to face at the present moment, and are
both well aware of the understanding there has always been. i am
prepared to do the usual thing which i have done regularly and to
keep this matter going. i never got a letter like this from you
before, and i have been a little put about by it this morning,
because here's my friend matthew bagnet, who, you know, had none of
the money--"

"i don't know it, you know," says the old man quietly.

"why, con-found you--it, i mean--i tell you so, don't i?"

"oh, yes, you tell me so," returns grandfather smallweed. "but i
don't know it."

"well!" says the trooper, swallowing his fire. "i know it."

mr. smallweed replies with excellent temper, "ah! that's quite
another thing!" and adds, "but it don't matter. mr. bagnet's
situation is all one, whether or no."

the unfortunate george makes a great
 
 ___________________________
 
ad been opened to admit another soldier-looking man of less
prepossessing appearance at first sight and a weather-tanned,
bright-eyed wholesome woman with a basket, who, from her entrance,
had been exceedingly attentive to all mr. george had said. mr. george
had received them with a familiar nod and a friendly look, but
without any more particular greeting in the midst of his address. he
now shook them cordially by the hand and said, "miss summerson and
gentlemen, this is an old comrade of mine, matthew bagnet. and this
is his wife, mrs. bagnet."

mr. bagnet made us a stiff military bow, and mrs. bagnet dropped us a
curtsy.

"real good friends of mine, they are," sald mr. george. "it was at
their house i was taken."

"with a second-hand wiolinceller," mr. bagnet put in, twitching his
head angrily. "of a good tone. for a friend. that money was no object
to."

"mat," said mr. george, "you have heard pretty well all i have been
saying to this lady and these two gentlemen. i know it meets your
approval?"