f the gentleman whom we
had found in attendance on her. she answered for herself directly,
though he had put the question in a whisper.

"oh, decidedly unwell! oh, very unwell indeed," she said
confidentially. "not pain, you know--trouble. not bodily so much as
nervous, nervous! the truth is," in a subdued voice and trembling,
"we have had death here. there was poison in the house. i am very
susceptible to such horrid things. it frightened me. only mr.
woodcourt knows how much. my physician, mr. woodcourt!" with
great stateliness. "the wards in jarndyce--jarndyce of bleak
house--fitz-jarndyce!"

"miss flite," said mr. woodcourt in a grave kind of voice, as if he
were appealing to her while speaking to us, and laying his hand
gently on her arm, "miss flite describes her illness with her usual
accuracy. she was alarmed by an occurrence in the house which might
have alarmed a stronger person, and was made ill by the distress and
agitation. she brought me here in the first hurry of the discovery,
th
 
 ___________________________
 
ough too late for me to be of any use to the unfortunate man. i
have compensated myself for that disappointment by coming here since
and being of some small use to her."

"the kindest physician in the college," whispered miss flite to me.
"i expect a judgment. on the day of judgment. and shall then confer
estates."

"she will be as well in a day or two," said mr. woodcourt, looking at
her with an observant smile, "as she ever will be. in other words,
quite well of course. have you heard of her good fortune?"

"most extraordinary!" said miss flite, smiling brightly. "you never
heard of such a thing, my dear! every saturday, conversation kenge or
guppy (clerk to conversation k.) places in my hand a paper of
shillings. shillings. i assure you! always the same number in the
paper. always one for every day in the week. now you know, really! so
well-timed, is it not? y
 
 ___________________________
 
 lost by not being learned afore. i wouldn't like to lose
anything by being learned wrong now."

"wrong?" said my guardian with his good-humoured smile. "who do you
suppose would teach you wrong?"

"i don't know, mr. jarndyce of bleak house!" replied the old man,
turning up his spectacles on his forehead and rubbing his hands. "i
don't suppose as anybody would, but i'd rather trust my own self than
another!"

these answers and his manner were strange enough to cause my guardian
to inquire of mr. woodcourt, as we all walked across lincoln's inn
together, whether mr. krook were really, as his lodger represented
him, deranged. the young surgeon replied, no, he had seen no reason
to think so. he was exceedingly distrustful, as ignorance usually
was, and he was always more or less under the influence of raw gin,
of which he drank great quantities and of which he and his back-shop,
as we might have observed, smelt strongly; but he did not think him
mad as yet.

on our way home, i so conciliated peepy'
 
 ___________________________
 
 she
founded her supposition.

"my dear miss summerson," she replied, "on mr. carstone's character
and conduct. he is of such a very easy disposition that probably he
would never think it worth-while to mention how he really feels, but
he feels languid about the profession. he has not that positive
interest in it which makes it his vocation. if he has any decided
impression in reference to it, i should say it was that it is a
tiresome pursuit. now, this is not promising. young men like mr.
allan woodcourt who take it from a strong interest in all that it can
do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work for a
very little money and through years of considerable endurance and
disappointment. but i am quite convinced that this would never be the
case with mr. carstone."

"does mr. badger think so too?" asked ada timidly.

"why," said mr. badger, "to tell the truth, miss clare, this view of
the matter had not occurred to me until mrs. badger mentioned it. but
when mrs. badger put it in
 
 ___________________________
 
d readily understand!" no,
it was true. i did not understand it. not for many and many a day.

"take a fatherly good night, my dear," said he, kissing me on the
forehead, "and so to rest. these are late hours for working and
thinking. you do that for all of us, all day long, little
housekeeper!"

i neither worked nor thought any more that night. i opened my
grateful heart to heaven in thankfulness for its providence to me and
its care of me, and fell asleep.

we had a visitor next day. mr. allan woodcourt came. he came to take
leave of us; he had settled to do so beforehand. he was going to
china and to india as a surgeon on board ship. he was to be away a
long, long time.

i believe--at least i know--that he was not rich. all his widowed
mother could spare had been spent in qualifying him for his
profession. it was not lucrative to a young practitioner, with very
little influence in london; and although he was, night and day, at
the service of numbers of poor people and did wonders of gentlenes
 
 ___________________________
 
d had had, a long time
ago, an eminent person for an ancestor, of the name of morgan
ap-kerrig--of some place that sounded like gimlet--who was the most
illustrious person that ever was known and all of whose relations
were a sort of royal family. he appeared to have passed his life
in always getting up into mountains and fighting somebody; and
a bard whose name sounded like crumlinwallinwer had sung his
praises in a piece which was called, as nearly as i could catch it,
mewlinnwillinwodd.

mrs. woodcourt, after expatiating to us on the fame of her great
kinsman, said that no doubt wherever her son allan went he would
remember his pedigree and would on no account form an alliance below
it. she told him that there were many handsome english ladies in
india who went out on speculation, and that there were some to be
picked up with property, but that neither charms nor wealth would
suffice for the descendant from such a line without birth, which must
ever be the first consideration. she talked so m
 
 ___________________________
 
uch about birth that
for a moment i half fancied, and with pain--but what an idle fancy to
suppose that she could think or care what mine was!

mr. woodcourt seemed a little distressed by her prolixity, but he was
too considerate to let her see it and contrived delicately to bring
the conversation round to making his acknowledgments to my guardian
for his hospitality and for the very happy hours--he called them the
very happy hours--he had passed with us. the recollection of them, he
said, would go with him wherever he went and would be always
treasured. and so we gave him our hands, one after another--at least,
they did--and i did; and so he put hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 lady in her chamber to carry any faint
vibration to sir leicester's ears; and yet this cry is in the house,
going upward from a wild figure on its knees.

"o my child, my child! not dead in the first hours of her life, as my
cruel sister told me, but sternly nurtured by her, after she had
renounced me and my name! o my child, o my child!"




chapter xxx

esther's narrative


richard had been gone away some time when a visitor came to pass a
few days with us. it was an elderly lady. it was mrs. woodcourt, who,
having come from wales to stay with mrs. bayham badger and having
written to my guardian, "by her son allan's desire," to report that
she had heard from him and that he was well "and sent his kind
remembrances to all of us," had been invited by my guardian to make a
visit to bleak house. she stayed with us nearly three weeks. she took
very kindly to me and was extremely confidential, so much so that
sometimes she almost made me uncomfortable. i had no right, i knew
very well, to be uncomf
 
 ___________________________
 
 morgan ap-kerrig.

"so, miss summerson," she would say to me with stately triumph,
"this, you see, is the fortune inherited by my son. wherever my son
goes, he can claim kindred with ap-kerrig. he may not have money, but
he always has what is much better--family, my dear."

i had my doubts of their caring so very much for morgan ap-kerrig in
india and china, but of course i never expressed them. i used to say
it was a great thing to be so highly connected.

"it is, my dear, a great thing," mrs. woodcourt would reply. "it has
its disadvantages; my son's choice of a wife, for instance, is
limited by it, but the matrimonial choice of the royal family is
limited in much the same manner."

then she would pat me on the arm and smooth my dress, as much as to
assure me that she had a good opinion of me, the distance between us
notwithstanding.

"poor mr. woodcourt, my dear," she would say, and always with some
emotion, for with her lofty pedigree she had a very affectionate
heart, "was descended from a
 
 ___________________________
 
 great highland family, the maccoorts of
maccoort. he served his king and country as an officer in the royal
highlanders, and he died on the field. my son is one of the last
representatives of two old families. with the blessing of heaven he
will set them up again and unite them with another old family."

it was in vain for me to try to change the subject, as i used to try,
only for the sake of novelty or perhaps because--but i need not be so
particular. mrs. woodcourt never would let me change it.

"my dear," she said one night, "you have so much sense and you look
at the world in a quiet manner so superior to your time of life that
it is a comfort to me to talk to you about these family matters of
mine. you don't know much of my son, my dear; but you know enough of
him, i dare say, to recollect him?"

"yes, ma'am. i recollect him."

"yes, my dear. now, my dear, i think you are a judge of character,
and i should like to have your opinion of him."

"oh, mrs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
woodcourt," said i, "that is so difficult!"

"why is it so difficult, my dear?" she returned. "i don't see it
myself."

"to give an opinion--"

"on so slight an acquaintance, my dear. that's true."

i didn't mean that, because mr. woodcourt had been at our house a
good deal altogether and had become quite intimate with my guardian.
i said so, and added that he seemed to be very clever in his
profession--we thought--and that his kindness and gentleness to miss
flite were above all praise.

"you do him justice!" said mrs. woodcourt, pressing my hand. "you
define him exactly. allan is a dear fellow, and in his profession
faultless. i say it, though i am his mother. still, i must confess he
is not without faults, love."

"none of us a
 
 ___________________________
 
ice to others. and he
has always said, 'mother, i will be; but you know me better than
anybody else does, and you know i mean no harm--in short, mean
nothing.' all of which is very true, my dear, but is no
justification. however, as he is now gone so far away and for an
indefinite time, and as he will have good opportunities and
introductions, we may consider this past and gone. and you, my dear,"
said the old lady, who was now all nods and smiles, "regarding your
dear self, my love?"

"me, mrs. woodcourt?"

"not to be always selfish, talking of my son, who has gone to seek
his fortune and to find a wife--when do you mean to seek your fortune
and to find a husband, miss summerson? hey, look you! now you blush!"

i don't think i did blush--at all events, it was not important if i
did--and i said my present fortune perfectly contented me and i had
no wish to change it.

"shall i tell you what i always think of you and the fortune yet to
come for you, my love?" said mrs. woodcourt.

"if you believe
 
 ___________________________
 
fterwards, with actual distress and
pain, on every word she said and weigh it over and over again in
twenty scales? why was it so worrying to me to have her in our house,
and confidential to me every night, when i yet felt that it was
better and safer somehow that she should be there than anywhere else?
these were perplexities and contradictions that i could not account
for. at least, if i could--but i shall come to all that by and by,
and it is mere idleness to go on about it now.

so when mrs. woodcourt went away, i was sorry to lose her but was
relieved too. and then caddy jellyby came down, and caddy brought
such a packet of domestic news that it gave us abundant occupation.

first caddy declared (and would at first declare nothing else) that i
was the best adviser that ever was known. this, my pet said, was no
news at all; and this, i said, of course, was nonsense. then caddy
told us that she was going to be married in a month and that if ada
and i would be her bridesmaids, she was the happ
 
 ___________________________
 
es."

i was much impressed by her allusion to richard and by the sad
meaning, so sadly illustrated in her poor pinched form, that made its
way through all her incoherence. but happily for her, she was quite
complacent again now and beamed with nods and smiles.

"but, my dear," she said, gaily, reaching another hand to put it upon
mine. "you have not congratulated me on my physician. positively not
once, yet!"

i was obliged to confess that i did not quite know what she meant.

"my physician, mr. woodcourt, my dear, who was so exceedingly
attentive to me. though his services were rendered quite
gratuitously. until the day of judgment. i mean the judgment that
will dissolve the spell upon me of the mace and seal."

"mr. woodcourt is so far away, now," said i, "that i thought the time
for such congratulation was past, miss flite."

"but, my child," she returned, "is it possible that you don't know
what has happened?"

"no," said i.

"not what everybody has been talking of, my beloved fitz jarndyce!
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"no," said i. "you forget how long i have been here."

"true! my dear, for the moment--true. i blame myself. but my memory
has been drawn out of me, with everything else, by what i mentioned.
ve-ry strong influence, is it not? well, my dear, there has been a
terrible shipwreck over in those east indian seas."

"mr. woodcourt shipwrecked!"

"don't be agitated, my dear. he is safe. an awful scene. death in all
shapes. hundreds of dead and dying. fire, storm, and darkness.
numbers of the drowning thrown upon a rock. there, and through it
all, my dear physician was a hero. calm and brave through everything.
saved many lives, never complained in hunger and thirst, wrapped
naked people in his spare clothes, took the lead, showed them what to
do, governed them, tended the sick, buried the dead, and brought the
poor surviv
 
 ___________________________
 
t ornaments of england in
knowledge, imagination, active humanity, and improvement of every
sort are added to its nobility! look round you, my dear, and
consider. you must be rambling a little now, i think, if you don't
know that this is the great reason why titles will always last in the
land!"

i am afraid she believed what she said, for there were moments when
she was very mad indeed.

and now i must part with the little secret i have thus far tried to
keep. i had thought, sometimes, that mr. woodcourt loved me and that
if he had been richer he would perhaps have told me that he loved me
before he went away. i had thought, sometimes, that if he had done
so, i should have been glad of it. but how much better it was now
that this had never happened! what should i have suffered if i had
had to write to him and tell him that the poor face he had known as
mine was quite gone from me and that i freely released him from his
bondage to one whom he had never seen!

oh, it was so much better as it was!
 
 ___________________________
 
t was not like what i had expected, but i
had expected nothing definite, and i dare say anything definite would
have surprised me.

i had never been a beauty and had never thought myself one, but i had
been very different from this. it was all gone now. heaven was so
good to me that i could let it go with a few not bitter tears and
could stand there arranging my hair for the night quite thankfully.

one thing troubled me, and i considered it for a long time before i
went to sleep. i had kept mr. woodcourt's flowers. when they were
withered i had dried them and put them in a book that i was fond of.
nobody knew this, not even ada. i was doubtful whether i had a right
to preserve what he had sent to one so different--whether it was
generous towards him to do it. i wished to be generous to him, even
in the secret depths of my heart, which he would never know, because
i could have loved him--could have been devoted to him. at last i
came to the conclusion that i might keep them if i treasured them
o
 
 ___________________________
 
 new reasons why i
should be busy, busy, busy--useful, amiable, serviceable, in all
honest, unpretending ways. this was a good time, to be sure, to sit
down morbidly and cry! as to its seeming at all strange to me at
first (if that were any excuse for crying, which it was not) that i
was one day to be the mistress of bleak house, why should it seem
strange? other people had thought of such things, if i had not.
"don't you remember, my plain dear," i asked myself, looking at the
glass, "what mrs. woodcourt said before those scars were there about
your marrying--"

perhaps the name brought them to my remembrance. the dried remains of
the flowers. it would be better not to keep them now. they had only
been preserved in memory of something wholly past and gone, but it
would be better not to keep them now.

they were in a book, and it happened to be in the next room--our
sitting-room, dividing ada's chamber from mine. i took a candle and
went softly in to fetch it from its shelf. after i had it in my
 
 ___________________________
 
nd we stopped to look.

the gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking
good-humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing
about them as if they were glad to be in england again. "charley,
charley," said i, "come away!" and i hurried on so swiftly that my
little maid was surprised.

it was not until we were shut up in our cabin-room and i had had time
to take breath that i began to think why i had made such haste. in
one of the sunburnt faces i had recognized mr. allan woodcourt, and i
had been afraid of his recognizing me. i had been unwilling that he
should see my altered looks. i had been taken by surprise, and my
courage had quite failed me.

but i knew this would not do, and i now said to myself, "my dear,
there is no reason--there is and there can be no reason at all--why
it should be worse for you now than it ever has been. what you were
last month, you are to-day; you are no worse, you are no better. this
is not your resolution; call it up, esther, call it up!"
 
 ___________________________
 
 i was in a
great tremble--with running--and at first was quite unable to calm
myself; but i got better, and i was very glad to know it.

the party came to the hotel. i heard them speaking on the staircase.
i was sure it was the same gentlemen because i knew their voices
again--i mean i knew mr. woodcourt's. it would still have been a
great relief to me to have gone away without making myself known, but
i was determined not to do so. "no, my dear, no. no, no, no!"

i untied my bonnet and put my veil half up--i think i mean half down,
but it matters very little--and wrote on one of my cards that i
happened to be there with mr. richard carstone, and i sent it in to
mr. woodcourt. he came immediately. i told him i was rejoiced to be
by chance among the first to welcome him home to england. and i sa
 
 ___________________________
 
l since you left us, mr.
woodcourt," said i, "but we can hardly call that a misfortune which
enabled you to be so useful and so brave. we read of it with the
truest interest. it first came to my knowledge through your old
patient, poor miss flite, when i was recovering from my severe
illness."

"ah! little miss flite!" he said. "she lives the same life yet?"

"just the same."

i was so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to
be able to put it aside.

"her gratitude to you, mr. woodcourt, is delightful. she is a most
affectionate creature, as i have reason to say."

"you--you have found her so?" he returned. "i--i am glad of that." he
was so very sorry for me that he could scarcely speak.

"i assure you," said i, "that i was deeply touched by her sympathy
and pleasure at the time i have referred to."

"i was grieved to hear that you had been very ill."

"i was very ill."

"but you have quite recovered?"

"i have quite recovered my health and my cheerfulness," said i. "you
know 
 
 ___________________________
 
. he said that was very doubtful. he
had not found himself more favoured by fortune there than here. he
had gone out a poor ship's surgeon and had come home nothing better.
while we were talking, and when i was glad to believe that i had
alleviated (if i may use such a term) the shock he had had in seeing
me, richard came in. he had heard downstairs who was with me, and
they met with cordial pleasure.

i saw that after their first greetings were over, and when they spoke
of richard's career, mr. woodcourt had a perception that all was not
going well with him. he frequently glanced at his face as if there
were something in it that gave him pain, and more than once he looked
towards me as though he sought to ascertain whether i knew what the
truth was. yet richard was in one of his sanguine states and in good
spirits and was thoroughly pleased to see mr. woodcourt again, whom
he had always liked.

richard proposed that we all should go to london together; but mr.
woodcourt, having to remain by his
 
 ___________________________
 
 us, however, at an early hour, and became so
much more like what he used to be that i was still more at peace to
think i had been able to soften his regrets. yet his mind was not
relieved of richard. when the coach was almost ready and richard ran
down to look after his luggage, he spoke to me about him.

i was not sure that i had a right to lay his whole story open, but i
referred in a few words to his estrangement from mr jarndyce and to
his being entangled in the ill-fated chancery suit. mr. woodcourt
listened with interest and expressed his regret.

"i saw you observe him rather closely," said i, "do you think him so
changed?"

"he is changed," he returned, shaking his head.

i felt the blood rush into my face for the first time, but it was
only an instantaneous emotion. i turned my head aside, and it was
gone.

"it is not," said mr. woodcourt, "his being so much younger or older,
or thinner or fatter, or paler or ruddier, as there being upon his
face such a singular expression. i never saw
 
 ___________________________
 
 so remarkable a look in
a young person. one cannot say that it is all anxiety or all
weariness; yet it is both, and like ungrown despair."

"you do not think he is ill?" said i.

no. he looked robust in body.

"that he cannot be at peace in mind, we have too much reason to
know," i proceeded. "mr. woodcourt, you are going to london?"

"to-morrow or the next day."

"there is nothing richard wants so much as a friend. he always liked
you. pray see him when you get there. pray help him sometimes with
your companionship if you can. you do not know of what service it
might be. you cannot think how ada, and mr. jarndyce, and even i--how
we should all thank you, mr. woodcourt!"

"miss summerson," he said, more moved than he had been from the
first, "before heaven, i will be a true friend to him! i will a
 
 ___________________________
 
xchanging these hurried words and
gave me his arm to take me to the coach.

"woodcourt," he said, unconscious with what application, "pray let us
meet in london!"

"meet?" returned the other. "i have scarcely a friend there now but
you. where shall i find you?"

"why, i must get a lodging of some sort," said richard, pondering.
"say at vholes's, symond's inn."

"good! without loss of time."

they shook hands heartily. when i was seated in the coach and richard
was yet standing in the street, mr. woodcourt laid his friendly hand
on richard's shoulder and looked at me. i understood him and waved
mine in thanks.

and in his last look as we drove away, i saw that he was very sorry
for me. i was glad to see it. i felt for my old self as the dead may
feel if they ever revisit these scenes. i was glad to be tenderly
remembered, to be gently pitied, not to be quite forgotten.




chapter xlvi

stop him!


darkness rests upon tom-all-alone's. dilating and dilating since the
sun went down last night, it h
 
 ___________________________
 
ction, where he sees the solitary figure of a woman sitting on a
door-step. he walks that way. approaching, he observes that she has
journeyed a long distance and is footsore and travel-stained. she
sits on the door-step in the manner of one who is waiting, with her
elbow on her knee and her head upon her hand. beside her is a canvas
bag, or bundle, she has carried. she is dozing probably, for she
gives no heed to his steps as he comes toward her.

the broken footway is so narrow that when allan woodcourt comes to
where the woman sits, he has to turn into the road to pass her.
looking down at her face, his eye meets hers, and he stops.

"what is the matter?"

"nothing, sir."

"can't you make them hear? do you want to be let in?"

"i'm waiting till they get up at another house--a lodging-house--not
here," the woman patiently returns. "i'm waiting here because there
will be sun here presently to warm me."

"i am afraid you are tired. i am sorry to see you sitting in the
street."

"thank you, sir. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing along unseen that even the apparition of a stranger
in whole garments does not tempt him to look back. he shades his face
with his ragged elbow as he passes on the other side of the way, and
goes shrinking and creeping on with his anxious hand before him and
his shapeless clothes hanging in shreds. clothes made for what
purpose, or of what material, it would be impossible to say. they
look, in colour and in substance, like a bundle of rank leaves of
swampy growth that rotted long ago.

allan woodcourt pauses to look after him and note all this, with a
shadowy belief that he has seen the boy before. he cannot recall how
or where, but there is some association in his mind with such a form.
he imagines that he must have seen it in some hospital or refuge,
still, cannot make out why it comes with any special force on his
remembrance.

he is gradually emerging from tom-all-alone's in the morning light,
thinking about it, when he hears running feet behind him, and looking
round, sees the boy scour
 
 ___________________________
 
he wos wery good to me, he wos; he
wos the only one i knowed to speak to, as ever come across my
crossing. it ain't wery likely i should want him to be inkwhiched. i
only wish i wos, myself. i don't know why i don't go and make a hole
in the water, i'm sure i don't."

he says it with such a pitiable air, and his grimy tears appear so
real, and he lies in the corner up against the hoarding so like a
growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produced there in
neglect and impurity, that allan woodcourt is softened towards him.
he says to the woman, "miserable creature, what has he done?"

to which she only replies, shaking her head at the prostrate figure
more amazedly than angrily, "oh, you jo, you jo. i have found you at
last!"

"what has he done?" says allan. "has he robbed you?"

"no, sir, no. robbed me? he did nothing but what was kind-hearted by
me, and that's the wonder of it."

allan looks from jo to the woman, and from the woman to jo, waiting
for one of them to unravel the riddle.


 
 ___________________________
 
me."

jo suddenly comes out of his resignation and excitedly declares,
addressing the woman, that he never known about the young lady, that
he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, that he
would sooner have hurt his own self, that he'd sooner have had his
unfortnet ed chopped off than ever gone a-nigh her, and that she wos
wery good to him, she wos. conducting himself throughout as if in his
poor fashion he really meant it, and winding up with some very
miserable sobs.

allan woodcourt sees that this is not a sham. he constrains himself
to touch him. "come, jo. tell me."

"no. i dustn't," says jo, relapsing into the profile state. "i
dustn't, or i would."

"but i must know," returns the other, "all the same. come, jo."

after two or three such adjurations, jo lifts up his head again,
looks round the court again, and says in a low voice, "well, i'll
tell you something. i was took away. there!"

"took away? in the night?"

"ah!" very apprehensive of being overheard, jo looks ab
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and now rises and
takes it up. jo, repeating, "ony you tell the young lady as i never
went fur to hurt her and wot the genlmn ses!" nods and shambles and
shivers, and smears and blinks, and half laughs and half cries, a
farewell to her, and takes his creeping way along after allan
woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of the street. in
this order, the two come up out of tom-all-alone's into the broad
rays of the sunlight and the purer air.




chapter xlvii

jo's will


as allan woodcourt and jo proceed along the streets where the high
church spires and the distances are so near and clear in the morning
light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, allan revolves in
his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. "it surely is a
strange fact," he considers, "that in the heart of a civilized world
this creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of
than an unowned dog." but it is none the less a fact because of its
strangeness, and the difficulty remains.
 
 ___________________________
 
hen set before him, and he begins to gulp the coffee and to gnaw
the bread and butter, looking anxiously about him in all directions
as he eats and drinks, like a scared animal.

but he is so sick and miserable that even hunger has abandoned him.
"i thought i was amost a-starvin, sir," says jo, soon putting down
his food, "but i don't know nothink--not even that. i don't care for
eating wittles nor yet for drinking on 'em." and jo stands shivering
and looking at the breakfast wonderingly.

allan woodcourt lays his hand upon his pulse and on his chest. "draw
breath, jo!" "it draws," says jo, "as heavy as a cart." he might add,
"and rattles like it," but he only mutters, "i'm a-moving on, sir."

allan looks about for an apothecary's shop. there is none at hand,
but a tavern does as well or better. he obtains a little measure of
wine and gives the lad a portion of it very carefully. he begins to
revive almost as soon as it passes his lips. "we may repeat that
dose, jo," observes allan after watchin
 
 ___________________________
 
g him with his attentive face.
"so! now we will take five minutes' rest, and then go on again."

leaving the boy sitting on the bench of the breakfast-stall, with his
back against an iron railing, allan woodcourt paces up and down in
the early sunshine, casting an occasional look towards him without
appearing to watch him. it requires no discernment to perceive that
he is warmed and refreshed. if a face so shaded can brighten, his
face brightens somewhat; and by little and little he eats the slice
of bread he had so hopelessly laid down. observant of these signs of
improvement, allan engages him in conversation and elicits to his no
small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil, with all its
conseq
 
 ___________________________
 
her
disjointed manner on coming down in full array that general george,
whom she often calls upon, knows her dear fitz jarndyce and takes a
great interest in all connected with her, allan is induced to think
that they may be in the right way. so he tells jo, for his
encouragement, that this walking about will soon be over now; and
they repair to the general's. fortunately it is not far.

from the exterior of george's shooting gallery, and the long entry,
and the bare perspective beyond it, allan woodcourt augurs well. he
also descries promise in the figure of mr. george himself, striding
towards them in his morning exercise with his pipe in his mouth, no
stock on, and his muscular arms, developed by broadsword and
dumbbell, weightily asserting themselves through his light
shirt-sleeves.

"your servant, sir," says mr. george with a military salute.
good-humouredly smiling all over his broad forehead up into his crisp
hair, he then defers to miss flite, as, with great stateliness, and
at some leng
 
 ___________________________
 
 the humours he drives me into--he'd go down, sir!"

mr. george has been so excited that he finds it necessary to wipe his
forehead on his shirt-sleeve. even while he whistles his impetuosity
away with the national anthem, some involuntary shakings of his head
and heavings of his chest still linger behind, not to mention an
occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of his open shirt-collar,
as if it were scarcely open enough to prevent his being troubled by a
choking sensation. in short, allan woodcourt has not much doubt about
the going down of mr. tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

jo and his conductor presently return, and jo is assisted to his
mattress by the careful phil, to whom, after due administration of
medicine by his own hands, allan confides all needful means and
instructions. the morning is by this time getting on apace. he
repairs to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without
seeking rest, goes away to mr. jarndyce to communicate his discovery.

with him mr. jarn
 
 ___________________________
 
he awful monotony and save the
traveller from despair. mr snagsby puts up at one of these inky wells
and greets the stranger with his cough of general preparation for
business.

"you don't remember me, mr. snagsby?"

the stationer's heart begins to thump heavily, for his old
apprehensions have never abated. it is as much as he can do to
answer, "no, sir, i can't say i do. i should have considered--not to
put too fine a point upon it--that i never saw you before, sir."

"twice before," says allan woodcourt. "once at a poor bedside, and
once--"

"it's come at last!" thinks the afflicted stationer, as recollection
breaks upon him. "it's got to a head now and is going to burst!" but
he has sufficient presence of mind to conduct his visitor into the
little counting-house and to shut the door.

"are you a married man, sir?"

"no, i am not."

"would you make the attempt, though single," says mr. snagsby in a
melancholy whisper, "to speak as low as you can? for my little woman
is a-listening somewheres,
 
 ___________________________
 
rney's end and drags over
stony ground. all round the clock it labours up the broken steps,
shattered and worn. not many times can the sun rise and behold it
still upon its weary road.

phil squod, with his smoky gunpowder visage, at once acts as nurse
and works as armourer at his little table in a corner, often looking
round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an encouraging
elevation of his one eyebrow, "hold up, my boy! hold up!" there, too,
is mr. jarndyce many a time, and allan woodcourt almost always, both
thinking, much, how strangely fate has entangled this rough outcast
in the web of very different lives. there, too, the trooper is a
frequent visitor, filling the doorway with his athletic figure and,
from his superfluity of life and strength, seeming to shed down
temporary vigour upon jo, who never fails to speak more robustly in
answer to his cheerful words.

jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and allan woodcourt, newly
arrived, stands by him, looking down upon his wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ou call some time, now?" asked my guardian thoughtfully.

"some weeks, i am afraid."

"ah!" he began to walk about the room with his hands in his pockets,
showing that he had been thinking as much. "now, what do you say
about her doctor? is he a good doctor, my love?"

i felt obliged to confess that i knew nothing to the contrary but
that prince and i had agreed only that evening that we would like his
opinion to be confirmed by some one.

"well, you know," returned my guardian quickly, "there's woodcourt."

i had not meant that, and was rather taken by surprise. for a moment
all that i had had in my mind in connexion with mr. woodcourt seemed
to come back and confuse me.

"you don't object to him, little woman?"

"object to him, guardian? oh no!"

"and you don't think the patient would object to him?"

so far from that, i had no doubt of her being prepared to have a
great reliance on him and to like him very much. i said that he was
no stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in h
 
 ___________________________
 
rse, she was surely fondest
of me that night. and i was so rejoiced to know it and so comforted
by the sense of having done right in casting this last idle
reservation away that i was ten times happier than i had been before.
i had scarcely thought it a reservation a few hours ago, but now that
it was gone i felt as if i understood its nature better.

next day we went to london. we found our old lodging vacant, and in
half an hour were quietly established there, as if we had never gone
away. mr. woodcourt dined with us to celebrate my darling's birthday,
and we were as pleasant as we could be with the great blank among us
that richard's absence naturally made on such an occasion. after that
day i was for some weeks--eight or nine as i remember--very much with
caddy, and thus it fell out that i saw less of ada at this time than
any other since we had first come together, except the time of my own
illness. she often came to caddy's, but our function there was to
amuse and cheer her, and we did not
 
 ___________________________
 
s,
and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no attempt
to say anything more, i liked him very much. if he found me bustling
about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took his coat off, as
if with an intention of helping by a great exertion; but he never got
any further. his sole occupation was to sit with his head against the
wall, looking hard at the thoughtful baby; and i could not quite
divest my mind of a fancy that they understood one another.

i have not counted mr. woodcourt among our visitors because he was
now caddy's regular attendant. she soon began to improve under his
care, but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains he
took that it is not to be wondered at, i am sure. i saw a good deal
of mr. woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might be
supposed, for knowing caddy to be safe in his hands, i often slipped
home at about the hours when he was expected. we frequently met,
notwithstanding. i was quite reconciled to myself now, but i
 
 ___________________________
 
 breakfast, and he had a hundred times laughed and said
there must be two little women, for his little woman was never
missing--i resolved to be doubly diligent and gay. so i went about
the house humming all the tunes i knew, and i sat working and working
in a desperate manner, and i talked and talked, morning, noon, and
night.

and still there was the same shade between me and my darling.

"so, dame trot," observed my guardian, shutting up his book one night
when we were all three together, "so woodcourt has restored caddy
jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?"

"yes," i said; "and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be
made rich, guardian."

"i wish it was," he returned, "with all my heart."

so did i too, for that matter. i said so.

"aye! we would make him as rich as a jew if we knew how. would we
not, little woman?"

i laughed as i worked and replied that i was not sure about that, for
it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be
many who could ill s
 
 ___________________________
 
my guardian assented. "i doubt if he
expects much of the old world. do you know i have fancied that he
sometimes feels some particular disappointment or misfortune
encountered in it. you never heard of anything of that sort?"

i shook my head.

"humph," said my guardian. "i am mistaken, i dare say." as there was
a little pause here, which i thought, for my dear girl's
satisfaction, had better be filled up, i hummed an air as i worked
which was a favourite with my guardian.

"and do you think mr. woodcourt will make another voyage?" i asked
him when i had hummed it quietly all through.

"i don't quite know what to think, my dear, but i should say it was
likely at present that he will give a long trip to another country."

"i am sure he will take the best wishes of all our hearts with him
wherever he goes," said i; "and though they are not riches, he will
never be the poorer for them, guardian, at least."

"never, little woman," he replied.

i was sitting in my usual place, which was now beside my
 
 ___________________________
 
with one hand under
her pillow so that it was hidden.

how much less amiable i must have been than they thought me, how much
less amiable than i thought myself, to be so preoccupied with my own
cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rested with me
to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace!

but i lay down, self-deceived, in that belief. and i awoke in it next
day to find that there was still the same shade between me and my
darling.




chapter li

enlightened


when mr. woodcourt arrived in london, he went, that very same day, to
mr. vholes's in symond's inn. for he never once, from the moment when
i entreated him to be a friend to richard, neglected or forgot his
promise. he had told me that he accepted the charge as a sacred
trust, and he was ever true to it in that spirit.

he found mr. vholes in his office and informed mr. vholes of his
agreement with richard that he should call there to learn his
address.

"just so, sir," said mr. vholes. "mr. c.'s address is not a
 
 ___________________________
 
 hundred
miles from here, sir, mr. c.'s address is not a hundred miles from
here. would you take a seat, sir?"

mr. woodcourt thanked mr. vholes, but he had no business with him
beyond what he had mentioned.

"just so, sir. i believe, sir," said mr. vholes, still quietly
insisting on the seat by not giving the address, "that you have
influence with mr. c. indeed i am aware that you have."

"i was not aware of it myself," returned mr. woodcourt; "but i
suppose you know best."

"sir," rejoined mr. vholes, self-contained as usual, voice and all,
"it is a part of my professional duty to know best. it is a part of
my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who
confides his interests to me. in my professional duty i shall not be
wanting, sir, if i know it. i may, with the best intentions, be
wanting in it without knowing it; but not if i know it, sir."

mr. woodcourt again mentioned the address.

"give me leave, sir," said
 
 ___________________________
 
r. vholes, "to be honest with you (honesty being my
golden rule, whether i gain by it or lose, and i find that i
generally lose), money is the word. now, sir, upon the chances of mr.
c.'s game i express to you no opinion, no opinion. it might be highly
impolitic in mr. c., after playing so long and so high, to leave off;
it might be the reverse; i say nothing. no, sir," said mr. vholes,
bringing his hand flat down upon his desk in a positive manner,
"nothing."

"you seem to forget," returned mr. woodcourt, "that i ask you to say
nothing and have no interest in anything you say."

"pardon me, sir!" retorted mr. vholes. "you do yourself an injustice.
no, sir! pardon me! you shall not--shall not in my office, if i know
it--do yourself an injustice. you are interested in anything, and in
everything, that relates to your friend. i know human nature much
better, sir, than to admit for an instant that a gentleman of your
appearance is not interested in whatever concerns his friend."

"well," replied mr
 
 ___________________________
 
. woodcourt, "that may be. i am particularly
interested in his address."

"the number, sir," said mr. vholes parenthetically, "i believe i have
already mentioned. if mr. c. is to continue to play for this
considerable stake, sir, he must have funds. understand me! there are
funds in hand at present. i ask for nothing; there are funds in hand.
but for the onward play, more funds must be provided, unless mr. c.
is to throw away what he has already ventured, which is wholly and
solely a point for his consider
 
 ___________________________
 
 of stating openly to you as the friend of mr. c. without
funds i shall always be happy to appear and act for mr. c. to the
extent of all such costs as are safe to be allowed out of the estate,
not beyond that. i could not go beyond that, sir, without wronging
some one. i must either wrong my three dear girls or my venerable
father, who is entirely dependent on me, in the vale of taunton; or
some one. whereas, sir, my resolution is (call it weakness or folly
if you please) to wrong no one."

mr. woodcourt rather sternly rejoined that he was glad to hear it.

"i wish, sir," said mr. vholes, "to leave a good name behind me.
therefore i take every opportunity of openly stating to a friend of
mr. c. how mr. c. is situated. as to myself, sir, the labourer is
worthy of his hire. if i undertake to put my shoulder to the wheel, i
do it, and i earn what i get. i am here for that purpose. my name is
painted on the door outside, with that object."

"and mr. carstone's address, mr. vholes?"

"sir," returned
 
 ___________________________
 
 mr. vholes, "as i believe i have already mentioned,
it is next door. on the second story you will find mr. c.'s
apartments. mr. c. desires to be near his professional adviser, and i
am far from objecting, for i court inquiry."

upon this mr. woodcourt wished mr. vholes good day and went in search
of richard, the change in whose appearance he began to understand now
but too well.

he found him in a dull room, fadedly furnished, much as i had found
him in his barrack-room but a little while before, except that he was
not writing but was sitting with a book before him, from which his
eyes and thoughts were far astray. as the door chanced to be standing
open, mr. woodcourt was in his presence for some moments without
being perceived, and he told
 
 ___________________________
 
ejection of his manner before he was
aroused from his dream.

"woodcourt, my dear fellow," cried richard, starting up with extended
hands, "you come upon my vision like a ghost."

"a friendly one," he replied, "and only waiting, as they say ghosts
do, to be addressed. how does the mortal world go?" they were seated
now, near together.

"badly enough, and slowly enough," said richard, "speaking at least
for my part of it."

"what part is that?"

"the chancery part."

"i never heard," returned mr. woodcourt, shaking his head, "of its
going well yet."

"nor i," said richard moodily. "who ever did?" he brightened again in
a moment and said with his natural openness, "woodcourt, i should be
sorry to be misunderstood by you, even if i gained by it in your
estimation. you must know that i have done no good this long time. i
have not intended to do much harm, but i seem to have been capable of
nothing else. it may be that i should have done better by keeping out
of the net into which my destiny has work
 
 ___________________________
 
ed me, but i think not,
though i dare say you will soon hear, if you have not already heard,
a very different opinion. to make short of a long story, i am afraid
i have wanted an object; but i have an object now--or it has me--and
it is too late to discuss it. take me as i am, and make the best of
me."

"a bargain," said mr. woodcourt. "do as much by me in return."

"oh! you," returned richard, "you can pursue your art for its own
sake, and can put your hand upon the plough and never turn, and can
strike a purpose out of anything. you and i are very different
creatures."

he spoke regretfully and lapsed for a moment into his weary
condition.

"well, well!" he cried, shaking it off. "everything has an end. we
shall see! so you will take me as i am, and make the best of me?"

"aye! indeed i will." they shook hands upon it laug
 
 ___________________________
 
hingly, but in
deep earnestness. i can answer for one of them with my heart of
hearts.

"you come as a godsend," said richard, "for i have seen nobody here
yet but vholes. woodcourt, there is one subject i should like to
mention, for once and for all, in the beginning of our treaty. you
can hardly make the best of me if i don't. you know, i dare say, that
i have an attachment to my cousin ada?"

mr. woodcourt replied that i had hinted as much to him. "now pray,"
returned richard, "don't think me a heap of selfishness. don't
suppose that i am splitting my head and half breaking my heart over
this miserable chancery suit for my own rights and interests alone.
ada's are bound up with mine; they can't be separated; vholes works
for both of us. do think of that!"

he was so very solicitous on this head that mr. woodcourt gave him
the strongest assurances that he did him no injustice.

"you see," said ric
 
 ___________________________
 
hard, with something pathetic in his manner of
lingering on the point, though it was off-hand and unstudied, "to an
upright fellow like you, bringing a friendly face like yours here, i
cannot bear the thought of appearing selfish and mean. i want to see
ada righted, woodcourt, as well as myself; i want to do my utmost to
right her, as well as myself; i venture what i can scrape together to
extricate her, as well as myself. do, i beseech you, think of that!"

afterwards, when mr. woodcourt came to reflect on what had passed, he
was so very much impressed by the strength of richard's anxiety on
this point that in telling me generally of his first visit to
symond's inn he particularly dwelt upon it. it revived a fear i had
had before that my dear girl's little property would be absorbed by
mr. vholes and that richard's justification to himself would be
sincerely this. it was just as i began to take care of caddy that the
interview took place, and i now return to the time when caddy
 
 ___________________________
 
hard's name in great white letters on a hearse-like panel.

i should have knocked, but ada said perhaps we had better turn the
handle and go in. thus we came to richard, poring over a table
covered with dusty bundles of papers which seemed to me like dusty
mirrors reflecting his own mind. wherever i looked i saw the ominous
words that ran in it repeated. jarndyce and jarndyce.

he received us very affectionately, and we sat down. "if you had come
a little earlier," he said, "you would have found woodcourt here.
there never was such a good fellow as woodcourt is. he finds time to
look in between-whiles, when anybody else with half his work to do
would be thinking about not being able to come. and he is so cheery,
so fresh, so sensible, so earnest, so--everything that i am not, that
the place brightens whenever he comes, and darkens whenever he goes
again."

"god bless him," i thought, "for his truth to me!"

"he is not so sanguine, ada," continued richard, casting his dejected
look over the bundl
 
 ___________________________
 
w. he turned his old
bright fatherly look upon me, laid his hand on my hand in his old
way, and said again, "she will succeed, my dear. nevertheless, bleak
house is thinning fast, o little woman!"

i was sorry presently that this was all we said about that. i was
rather disappointed. i feared i might not quite have been all i had
meant to be since the letter and the answer.




chapter lii

obstinacy


but one other day had intervened when, early in the morning as we
were going to breakfast, mr. woodcourt came in haste with the
astounding news that a terrible murder had been committed for which
mr. george had been apprehended and was in custody. when he told us
that a large reward was offered by sir leicester dedlock for the
murderer's apprehension, i did not in my first consternation
understand why; but a few more words explained to me that the
murdered person was sir leicester's lawyer, and immediately my
mother's dread of him rushed into my remembrance.

this unforeseen and violent removal of
 
 ___________________________
 
rs were so strongly aroused in
his behalf that i was quite set up again.

"guardian, you don't think it possible that he is justly accused?"

"my dear, i can't think so. this man whom we have seen so
open-hearted and compassionate, who with the might of a giant has the
gentleness of a child, who looks as brave a fellow as ever lived and
is so simple and quiet with it, this man justly accused of such a
crime? i can't believe it. it's not that i don't or i won't. i
can't!"

"and i can't," said mr. woodcourt. "still, whatever we believe or
know of him, we had better not forget that some appearances are
against him. he bore an animosity towards the deceased gentleman. he
has openly mentioned it in many places. he is said to have expressed
himself violently towards him, and he certainly did about him, to my
knowledge. he admits that he was alone on the scene of the murder
within a few minutes of its commission. i sincerely believe him to be
as innocent of any participation in it as i am, but these ar
 
 ___________________________
 
to shut our eyes to the truth
in any of these respects."

i felt, of course, that we must admit, not only to ourselves but to
others, the full force of the circumstances against him. yet i knew
withal (i could not help saying) that their weight would not induce
us to desert him in his need.

"heaven forbid!" returned my guardian. "we will stand by him, as he
himself stood by the two poor creatures who are gone." he meant mr.
gridley and the boy, to both of whom mr. george had given shelter.

mr. woodcourt then told us that the trooper's man had been with him
before day, after wandering about the streets all night like a
distracted creature. that one of the trooper's first anxieties was
that we should not suppose him guilty. that he had charged his
messenger to represent his perfect innocence with every solemn
assurance he could send us. that mr. woodcourt had only quieted the
man by undertaking to come to our house very early in the morning
with these representations. he added that he was now up
 
 ___________________________
 
" returned the trooper.

"do you though, indeed?" said mrs. bagnet, continuing to grumble on
good-humouredly. "i'm sure i'm surprised at that. i wonder you don't
starve in your own way also. it would only be like you. perhaps
you'll set your mind upon that next." here she again looked at me,
and i now perceived from her glances at the door and at me, by turns,
that she wished us to retire and to await her following us outside
the prison. communicating this by similar means to my guardian and
mr. woodcourt, i rose.

"we hope you will think better of it, mr. george," said i, "and we
shall come to see you again, trusting to find you more reasonable."

"more grateful, miss summerson, you can't find me," he returned.

"but more persuadable we can, i hope," said i. "and let me entreat
you to consider that the clearing up of this mystery and the
discovery of the real perpetrator of this deed may be of the last
importance to others besides yourself."

he heard me respectfully but without much heeding th
 
 ___________________________
 
id mr. bucket. "do you know this turning?"

"it looks like chancery lane."

"and was christened so, my dear," said mr. bucket.

we turned down it, and as we went shuffling through the sleet, i
heard the clocks strike half-past five. we passed on in silence and
as quickly as we could with such a foot-hold, when some one coming
towards us on the narrow pavement, wrapped in a cloak, stopped and
stood aside to give me room. in the same moment i heard an
exclamation of wonder and my own name from mr. woodcourt. i knew his
voice very well.

it was so unexpected and so--i don't know what to call it, whether
pleasant or painful--to come upon it after my feverish wandering
journey, and in the midst of the night, that i could not keep back
the tears from my eyes. it was like hearing his voice in a strange
country.

"my dear miss summerson, that you should be out at this hour, and in
such weather!"

he had heard from my guardian of my having been called away on some
uncommon business and said so to dispens
 
 ___________________________
 
e with any explanation. i
told him that we had but just left a coach and were going--but then i
was obliged to look at my companion.

"why, you see, mr. woodcourt"--he had caught the name from me--"we
are a-going at present into the next street. inspector bucket."

mr. woodcourt, disregarding my remonstrances, had hurriedly taken off
his cloak and was putting it about me. "that's a good move, too,"
said mr. bucket, assisting, "a very good move."

"may i go with you?" said mr. woodcourt. i don't know whether to me
or to my companion.

"why, lord!" exclaimed mr. bucket, taking the answer on himself. "of
course you may."

it was all said in a moment, and they took me between them, wrapped
in the cloak.

"i have just left richard," said mr. woodcourt. "i have been sitting
with him since ten o'clock last night."

"oh, dear me, he is ill!"

"no, no, believe me; not ill, but not quite well. he was depressed
and faint--you know he gets so worried and so worn sometimes--and ada
sent t
 
 ___________________________
 
as she is
now, i hope!"

his friendly and familiar way of speaking of them, his unaffected
devotion to them, the grateful confidence with which i knew he had
inspired my darling, and the comfort he was to her; could i separate
all this from his promise to me? how thankless i must have been if it
had not recalled the words he said to me when he was so moved by the
change in my appearance: "i will accept him as a trust, and it shall
be a sacred one!"

we now turned into another narrow street. "mr. woodcourt," said mr.
bucket, who had eyed him closely as we came along, "our business
takes us to a law-stationer's here, a certain mr. snagsby's. what,
you know him, do you?" he was so quick that he saw it in an instant.

"yes, i know a little of him and have called upon him at this place."

"indeed, sir?" said mr. bucket. "then you will be so good as to let
me leave miss summerson with you for a moment while i go and have
half a word with him?"

the last police-officer with whom he had conferred was st
 
 ___________________________
 
 her, mr.
bucket," said the other man. "she's been at it pretty well all night,
sir."

"well, that's true," he returned. "my light's burnt out. show yours a
moment."

all this passed in a whisper a door or two from the house in which i
could faintly hear crying and moaning. in the little round of light
produced for the purpose, mr. bucket went up to the door and knocked.
the door was opened after he had knocked twice, and he went in,
leaving us standing in the street.

"miss summerson," said mr. woodcourt, "if without obtruding myself on
your confidence i may remain near you, pray let me do so."

"you are truly kind," i answered. "i need wish to keep no secret of
my own from you; if i keep any, it is another's."

"i quite understand. trust me, i will remain near you only so long as
i can fully respect it."

"i trust implicitly to you," i said. "i know and deeply feel how
sacredly you keep your promise."

after a short time the little round of light shone out again, and mr.
bucket advanced toward
 
 ___________________________
 
ter's bedroom, and in it she's a-carrying on, poor thing,
to a frightful extent!"

we went downstairs, followed by mr. snagsby, as i soon found the
little man to be. in the front kitchen, sitting by the fire, was mrs.
snagsby, with very red eyes and a very severe expression of face.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, entering behind us, "to
wave--not to put too fine a point upon it, my dear--hostilities for
one single moment in the course of this prolonged night, here is
inspector bucket, mr. woodcourt, and a lady."

she looked very much astonished, as she had reason for doing, and
looked particularly hard at me.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, sitting down in the remotest
corner by the door, as if he were taking a liberty, "it is not
unlikely that you may inquire of me why inspector bucket, mr.
woodcourt, and a lady call upon us in cook's court, cursitor street,
at the present hour. i don't know. i have not the least idea. if i
was to be informed, i should despair of understanding, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 i'd rather
not be told."

he appeared so miserable, sitting with his head upon his hand, and i
appeared so unwelcome, that i was going to offer an apology when mr.
bucket took the matter on himself.

"now, mr. snagsby," said he, "the best thing you can do is to go
along with mr. woodcourt to look after your guster--"

"my guster, mr. bucket!" cried mr. snagsby. "go on, sir, go on. i
shall be charged with that next."

"and to hold the candle," pursued mr. bucket without correcting
himself, "or hold her, or make yourself useful in any way you're
asked. which there's not a man alive more ready to do, for you're a
man of urbanity and suavity, you know, and you've got the sort of
heart that can feel for another. mr. woodcourt, would you be so good
as see to her, and if you can get th
 
 ___________________________
 
can be recognized. this paper i part
   with now. the place where i shall lie down, if i can get
   so far, has been often in my mind. farewell. forgive.


mr. bucket, supporting me with his arm, lowered me gently into my
chair. "cheer up! don't think me hard with you, my dear, but as soon
as ever you feel equal to it, get your shoes on and be ready."

i did as he required, but i was left there a long time, praying for
my unhappy mother. they were all occupied with the poor girl, and i
heard mr. woodcourt directing them and speaking to her often. at
length he came in with mr. bucket and said that as it was important
to address her gently, he thought it best that i should ask her for
whatever information we desired to obtain. there was no doubt that
she could now reply to questions if she were soothed and not alarmed.
the questions, mr. bucket said, were how she came by the letter, what
passed between her and the person who gave her the letter, and where
the person went. holding my mind as steadi
 
 ___________________________
 
ly as i could to these
points, i went into the next room with them. mr. woodcourt would have
remained outside, but at my solicitation went in with us.

the poor girl was sitting on the floor where they had laid her down.
they stood around her, though at a little distance, that she might
have air. she was not pretty and looked weak and poor, but she had a
plaintive and a good face, though it was still a little wild. i
kneeled on the ground beside her and put her poor head upon my
shoulder, whereupon she drew her arm round my neck and burst into
tears.

"my poor girl," said i,
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
messenger would be paid at the house. and so i said yes, if it was no
harm, and she said no--no harm. and so i took it from her, and she
said she had nothing to give me, and i said i was poor myself and
consequently wanted nothing. and so she said god bless you, and
went."

"and did she go--"

"yes," cried the girl, anticipating the inquiry. "yes! she went the
way i had shown her. then i came in, and mrs. snagsby came behind me
from somewhere and laid hold of me, and i was frightened."

mr. woodcourt took her kindly from me. mr. bucket wrapped me up, and
immediately we were in the street. mr. woodcourt hesitated, but i
said, "don't leave me now!" and mr. bucket added, "you'll be better
with us, we may want you; don't lose time!"

i have the most confused impressions of that walk. i recollect that
it was neither night nor day, that morning was dawning but the
street-lamps were not yet put out, that the sleet was still falling
and that all the ways were deep with it. i recollect a few chilled
 
 ___________________________
 
eadful spot in which the night was very slowly stirring, but where
i could dimly see heaps of dishonoured graves and stones, hemmed in
by filthy houses with a few dull lights in their windows and on whose
walls a thick humidity broke out like a disease. on the step at the
gate, drenched in the fearful wet of such a place, which oozed and
splashed down everywhere, i saw, with a cry of pity and horror, a
woman lying--jenny, the mother of the dead child.

i ran forward, but they stopped me, and mr. woodcourt entreated me
with the greatest earnestness, even with tears, before i went up to
the figure to listen for an instant to what mr. bucket said. i did
so, as i thought. i did so, as i am sure.

"miss summerson, you'll understand me, if you think a moment. they
changed clothes at the cottage."

they changed clothes at the cottage. i could repeat the words in my
mind, and i knew what they meant of themselves, but i attached no
meaning to them in any other connexion.

"and one returned," said mr. buc
 
 ___________________________
 
er. she lay there, a distressed, unsheltered,
senseless creature. she who had brought my mother's letter, who could
give me the only clue to where my mother was; she, who was to guide
us to rescue and save her whom we had sought so far, who had come to
this condition by some means connected with my mother that i could
not follow, and might be passing beyond our reach and help at that
moment; she lay there, and they stopped me! i saw but did not
comprehend the solemn and compassionate look in mr. woodcourt's face.
i saw but did not comprehend his touching the other on the breast to
keep him back. i saw him stand uncovered in the bitter air, with a
reverence for something. but my understanding for all this was gone.

i even heard it said between them, "shall she go?"

"she had better go. her hands should be the first to touch her. they
have a higher right than ours."

i passed on to the gate and stooped down. i lifted the heavy head,
put the long dank hair aside, and turned the face. and it was my
 
 ___________________________
 
a,
my dear, and ada stands much in need of you."

"it's like you, guardian," said i, "to have been taking that into
consideration for a happy surprise to both of us."

"not so disinterested either, my dear, if you mean to extol me for
that virtue, since if you were generally on the road, you could be
seldom with me. and besides, i wish to hear as much and as often of
ada as i can in this condition of estrangement from poor rick. not of
her alone, but of him too, poor fellow."

"have you seen mr. woodcourt, this morning, guardian?"

"i see mr. woodcourt every morning, dame durden."

"does he still say the same of richard?"

"just the same. he knows of no direct bodily illness that he has; on
the contrary, he believes that he has none. yet he is not easy about
him; who can be?"

my dear girl had been to see us lately every day, some times twice in
a day. but we had foreseen, all along, that this would only last
until i was quite myself. we knew full well that her fervent heart
was as full of affec
 
 ___________________________
 
ise moss-roses
from the powder they sow in their wigs, i shall begin to be
astonished too!"

he checked himself in glancing towards the window to look where the
wind was and leaned on the back of my chair instead.

"well, well, little woman! to go on, my dear. this rock we must leave
to time, chance, and hopeful circumstance. we must not shipwreck ada
upon it. she cannot afford, and he cannot afford, the remotest chance
of another separation from a friend. therefore i have particularly
begged of woodcourt, and i now particularly beg of you, my dear, not
to move this subject with rick. let it rest. next week, next month,
next year, sooner or later, he will see me with clearer eyes. i can
wait."

but i had already discussed it with him, i confessed; and so, i
thought, had mr. woodcourt.

"so he tells me," returned my guardian. "very good. he has made his
protest, and dame durden has made hers, and there is nothing more to
be said about it. now i come to mrs. woodcourt. how do you like her,
my dear
 
 ___________________________
 
o this question, which was oddly abrupt, i said i liked
her very much and thought she was more agreeable than she used to be.

"i think so too," said my guardian. "less pedigree? not so much of
morgan ap--what's his name?"

that was what i meant, i acknowledged, though he was a very harmless
person, even when we had had more of him.

"still, upon the whole, he is as well in his native mountains," said
my guardian. "i agree with you. then, little woman, can i do better
for a time than retain mrs. woodcourt here?"

no. and yet--

my guardian looked at me, waiting for what i had to say.

i had nothing to say. at least i had nothing in my mind that i could
say. i had an undefined impression that it might have been better if
we had had some other inmate, but i could hardly have explained why
even to myself. or, if to myself, certainly not to anybody else.

"you see," said my guardian, "our neighbourhood is in woodcourt's
way, and he can come here to see her as often as he likes, which is
agreeable to
 
 ___________________________
 
 guardian. "it shall be done. carried unanimously."

"carried unanimously," i repeated, going on with my work.

it was a cover for his book-table that i happened to be ornamenting.
it had been laid by on the night preceding my sad journey and never
resumed. i showed it to him now, and he admired it highly. after i
had explained the pattern to him and all the great effects that were
to come out by and by, i thought i would go back to our last theme.

"you said, dear guardian, when we spoke of mr. woodcourt before ada
left us, that you thought he would give a long trial to another
country. have you been advising him since?"

"yes, little woman, pretty often."

"has he decided to do so?"

"i rather think not."

"some other prospect has opened to him, perhaps?" said i.

"why--yes--perhaps," returned my guardian, beginning his answer in a
very deliberate manner. "about half a year hence or so, there is a
medical attendant for the poor to be appointed at a certain place in
yorkshire. it is a thriving 
 
 ___________________________
 
r--and seems to present an
opening for such a man. i mean a man whose hopes and aims may
sometimes lie (as most men's sometimes do, i dare say) above the
ordinary level, but to whom the ordinary level will be high enough
after all if it should prove to be a way of usefulness and good
service leading to no other. all generous spirits are ambitious, i
suppose, but the ambition that calmly trusts itself to such a road,
instead of spasmodically trying to fly over it, is of the kind i care
for. it is woodcourt's kind."

"and will he get this appointment?" i asked.

"why, little woman," returned my guardian, smiling, "not being an
oracle, i cannot confidently say, but i think so. his reputation
stands very high; there were people from that part of the country in
the shipwreck; and strange to say, i believe the best man has the
best chance. you must not suppose it to be a fine endowment. it is a
very, very commonplace affair, my dear, an appointment to a great
amount of work and a small amount of pay; 
 
 ___________________________
 
but better things will
gather about it, it may be fairly hoped."

"the poor of that place will have reason to bless the choice if it
falls on mr. woodcourt, guardian."

"you are right, little woman; that i am sure they will."

we said no more about it, nor did he say a word about the future of
bleak house. but it was the first time i had taken my seat at his
side in my mourning dress, and that accounted for it, i considered.

i now began to visit my dear girl every day in the dull dark corner
where she lived. the morning was my usual time, but whenever i found
i had an hour or so to spare, i put on my bonnet and bustled off to
chancery lane. they 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
evil report, and all kinds of prejudice (we are the victims of
prejudice), is to have everything openly carried on. how do you find
mr. c. looking, miss summerson?"

"he looks very ill. dreadfully anxious."

"just so," said mr. vholes.

he stood behind me with his long black figure reaching nearly to the
ceiling of those low rooms, feeling the pimples on his face as if
they were ornaments and speaking inwardly and evenly as though there
were not a human passion or emotion in his nature.

"mr. woodcourt is in attendance upon mr. c., i believe?" he resumed.

"mr. woodcourt is his disinterested friend," i answered.

"but i mean in professional attendance, medical attendance."

"that can do little for an unhappy mind," said i.

"just so," said mr. vholes.

so slow, so eager, so bloodless and gaunt, i felt as if richard were
wasting away beneath the eyes of this adviser and there were
something of the vampire in him.

"miss summerson," said mr. vholes, very slowly rubbing his gloved
hands, as if, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ul star in the
miserable corner. richard, more worn and haggard, haunted the court
day after day, listlessly sat there the whole day long when he knew
there was no remote chance of the suit being mentioned, and became
one of the stock sights of the place. i wonder whether any of the
gentlemen remembered him as he was when he first went there.

so completely was he absorbed in his fixed idea that he used to avow
in his cheerful moments that he should never have breathed the fresh
air now "but for woodcourt." it was only mr. woodcourt who could
occasionally divert his attention for a few hours at a time and rouse
him, even when he sunk into a lethargy of mind and body that alarmed
us greatly, and the returns of which became more frequent as the
months went on. my dear girl was right in saying that he only pursued
his errors the more desperately for her sake. i have no doubt that
his desire to retrieve what he had lost was rendered the more intense
by his grief for his young wife, and became like t
 
 ___________________________
 
t home with charley in a coach; sometimes my
guardian would meet me in the neighbourhood, and we would walk home
together. one evening he had arranged to meet me at eight o'clock. i
could not leave, as i usually did, quite punctually at the time, for
i was working for my dear girl and had a few stitches more to do to
finish what i was about; but it was within a few minutes of the hour
when i bundled up my little work-basket, gave my darling my last kiss
for the night, and hurried downstairs. mr. woodcourt went with me, as
it was dusk.

when we came to the usual place of meeting--it was close by, and mr.
woodcourt had often accompanied me before--my guardian was not there.
we waited half an hour, walking up and down, but there were no signs
of him. we agreed that he was either prevented from coming or that he
had come and gone away, and mr. woodcourt proposed to walk home with
me.

it was the first walk we had ever taken together, except that very
short one to the usual place of meeting. we spoke
 
 ___________________________
 
 of richard and ada
the whole way. i did not thank him in words for what he had done--my
appreciation of it had risen above all words then--but i hoped he
might not be without some understanding of what i felt so strongly.

arriving at home and going upstairs, we found that my guardian was
out and that mrs. woodcourt was out too. we were in the very same
room into which i had brought my blushing girl when her youthful
lover, now her so altered husband, was the choice of her young heart,
the very same room from which my guardian and i had watched them
going away through the sunlight in the fresh bloom of their hope and
promise.

we were standing by the opened window looking down into the street
when mr. woodcourt spoke to me. i learned in a moment that he loved
me. i learned in a moment that my scarred face 
 
 ___________________________
 
was all unchanged to
him. i learned in a moment that what i had thought was pity and
compassion was devoted, generous, faithful love. oh, too late to know
it now, too late, too late. that was the first ungrateful thought i
had. too late.

"when i returned," he told me, "when i came back, no richer than when
i went away, and found you newly risen from a sick bed, yet so
inspired by sweet consideration for others and so free from a selfish
thought--"

"oh, mr. woodcourt, forbear, forbear!" i entreated him. "i do not
deserve your high praise. i had many selfish thoughts at that time,
many!"

"heaven knows, beloved of my life," said he, "that my praise is not a
lover's praise, but the truth. you do not know what all around you
see in esther summerson, how many hearts she touches and awakens,
what sacred admiration and what love she wins."

"oh, mr. woodcourt," cried i, "it is a great thing to win love, it is
a great thing to win love! i am proud of it, and honou
 
 ___________________________
 
i have
always hoped, in the first hour when i seemed to stand in any ray of
good fortune, to tell you this. i have always feared that i should
tell it you in vain. my hopes and fears are both fulfilled to-night.
i distress you. i have said enough."

something seemed to pass into my place that was like the angel he
thought me, and i felt so sorrowful for the loss he had sustained! i
wished to help him in his trouble, as i had wished to do when he
showed that first commiseration for me.

"dear mr. woodcourt," said i, "before we part to-night, something is
left for me to say. i never could say it as i wish--i never
shall--but--"

i had to think again of being more deserving of his love and his
affliction before i could go on.

"--i am deeply sensible of your generosity, and i shall treasure its
remembrance to my dying hour. i know full well how changed i am, i
know you are not unacquainted with my history, and i know what a
noble love that is which is so faithful. what you have said to me
could hav
 
 ___________________________
 
"and heaven
bless you in all you do!"

"i shall do it better for the wish," he answered; "it will make me
enter on these new duties as on another sacred trust from you."

"ah! richard!" i exclaimed involuntarily, "what will he do when you
are gone!"

"i am not required to go yet; i would not desert him, dear miss
summerson, even if i were."

one other thing i felt it needful to touch upon before he left me. i
knew that i should not be worthier of the love i could not take if i
reserved it.

"mr. woodcourt," said i, "you will be glad to know from my lips
before i say good night that in the future, which is clear and bright
before me, i am most happy, most fortunate, have nothing to regret or
desire."

it was indeed a glad hearing to him, he replied.

"from my childhood i have been," said i, "the object of the untiring
goodness of the best of human beings, to whom i am so bound by every
tie of attachment, gratitude, and love, that nothing i could do in
the compass of a life could express the feeli
 
 ___________________________
 
the morning and called charley to come for a
walk. we bought flowers for the breakfast-table, and came back and
arranged them, and were as busy as possible. we were so early that i
had a good time still for charley's lesson before breakfast; charley
(who was not in the least improved in the old defective article of
grammar) came through it with great applause; and we were altogether
very notable. when my guardian appeared he said, "why, little woman,
you look fresher than your flowers!" and mrs. woodcourt repeated and
translated a passage from the mewlinnwillinwodd expressive of my
being like a mountain with the sun upon it.

this was all so pleasant that i hope it made me still more like the
mountain than i had been before. after breakfast i waited my
opportunity and peeped about a little until i saw my guardian in his
own room--the room of last night--by himself. then i made an excuse
to go in with my housekeeping keys, shutting the door after me.

"well, dame durden?" said my guardian; the po
 
 ___________________________
 
sorry and because my guardian was so quiet himself. i had no
doubt that under all the circumstances we should be married in the
most private and simple manner. perhaps i should only have to say to
ada, "would you like to come and see me married to-morrow, my pet?"
perhaps our wedding might even be as unpretending as her own, and i
might not find it necessary to say anything about it until it was
over. i thought that if i were to choose, i would like this best.

the only exception i made was mrs. woodcourt. i told her that i was
going to be married to my guardian and that we had been engaged some
time. she highly approved. she could never do enough for me and was
remarkably softened now in comparison with what she had been when we
first knew her. there was no trouble she would not have taken to have
been of use to me, but i need hardly say that i only allowed her to
take as little as gratified her kindness without tasking it.

of course this was not a time to neglect my guardian, and of course
it
 
 ___________________________
 
 even of hope now and seemed to me to
retain only its feverish anxieties. from something my guardian said
one day when we were talking about this, i understood that my
marriage would not take place until after the term-time we had been
told to look forward to; and i thought the more, for that, how
rejoiced i should be if i could be married when richard and ada were
a little more prosperous.

the term was very near indeed when my guardian was called out of town
and went down into yorkshire on mr. woodcourt's business. he had told
me beforehand that his presence there would be necessary. i had just
come in one night from my dear girl's and was sitting in the midst of
all my new clothes, looking at them all around me and thinking, when
a letter from my guardian was brought to me. it asked me to join him
in the country and mentioned by what stage-coach my place was taken
and at what time in the morning i should have to leave town. it added
in a postscript that i would not be many hours from ada.

i 
 
 ___________________________
 
tion to say that, because i knew that his
being there at all was an act of kindness.

supper was ready at the hotel, and when we were alone at table he
said, "full of curiosity, no doubt, little woman, to know why i have
brought you here?"

"well, guardian," said i, "without thinking myself a fatima or you a
blue beard, i am a little curious about it."

"then to ensure your night's rest, my love," he returned gaily, "i
won't wait until to-morrow to tell you. i have very much wished to
express to woodcourt, somehow, my sense of his humanity to poor
unfortunate jo, his inestimable services to my young cousins, and his
value to us all. when it was decided that he should settle here, it
came into my head that i might ask his acceptance of some
unpretending and suitable little place to lay his own head in. i
therefore caused such a place to be looked out for, and such a place
was found on very easy terms, and i have been touching it up for him
and making it habitable. however, when i walked over it t
 
 ___________________________
 
 you
brought your answer. you are following what i say, my child?"

i was cold, and i trembled violently, but not a word he uttered was
lost. as i sat looking fixedly at him and the sun's rays descended,
softly shining through the leaves upon his bare head, i felt as if
the brightness on him must be like the brightness of the angels.

"hear me, my love, but do not speak. it is for me to speak now. when
it was that i began to doubt whether what i had done would really
make you happy is no matter. woodcourt came home, and i soon had no
doubt at all."

i clasped him round the neck and hung my head upon his breast and
wept. "lie lightly, confidently here, my child," said he, pressing me
gently to him. "i am your guardian and your father now. rest
confidently here."

soothingly, like the gentle rustling of the leaves; and genially,
like the ripening weather; and radiantly and beneficently, like the
sunshine, he went on.

"understand me, my dear girl. i had no doubt of your being contented
and happy w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith me, being so dutiful and so devoted; but i saw with
whom you would be happier. that i penetrated his secret when dame
durden was blind to it is no wonder, for i knew the good that could
never change in her better far than she did. well! i have long been
in allan woodcourt's confidence, although he was not, until
yesterday, a few hours before you came here, in mine. but i would not
have my esther's bright example lost; i would not have a jot of my
dear girl's virtues unobserved and unhonoured; i would not have her
admitted on sufferance into the line of morgan ap-kerrig, no, not for
the weight in gold of all the mountains in wales!"

he stopped to kiss me on the forehead, and i sobbed and wept afresh.
for i felt as if i could not bear the painful delight of his p
 
 ___________________________
 
raise.

"hush, little woman! don't cry; this is to be a day of joy. i have
looked forward to it," he said exultingly, "for months on months! a
few words more, dame trot, and i have said my say. determined not to
throw away one atom of my esther's worth, i took mrs. woodcourt into
a separate confidence. 'now, madam,' said i, 'i clearly perceive--and
indeed i know, to boot--that your son loves my ward. i am further
very sure that my ward loves your son, but will sacrifice her love to
a sense of duty and affection, and will sacrifice it so completely,
so entirely, so religiously, that you should never suspect it though
you watched her night and day.' then i told her all our
story--ours--yours and mine. 'now, madam,' said i, 'come you, knowing
this, and live with us. c
 
 ___________________________
 
e what is the true legitimacy when
you shall have quite made up your mind on that subject.' why, honour
to her old welsh blood, my dear," cried my guardian with enthusiasm,
"i believe the heart it animates beats no less warmly, no less
admiringly, no less lovingly, towards dame durden than my own!"

he tenderly raised my head, and as i clung to him, kissed me in his
old fatherly way again and again. what a light, now, on the
protecting manner i had thought about!

"one more last word. when allan woodcourt spoke to you, my dear, he
spoke with my knowledge and consent--but i gave him no encouragement,
not i, for these surprises were my great reward, and i was too
miserly to part with a scrap of it. he was to come and tell me all
that passed, and he did. i have no more to say. my dearest, allan
woodcourt stood beside your father when he lay dead--stood beside
your mother. this is bleak house. this day i give this house its
little mistress; and before god, it is the brightest day in all my
life!"

h
 
 ___________________________
 
ughing. we glanced at the papers, and seeing
jarndyce and jarndyce everywhere, asked an official-looking person
who was standing in the midst of them whether the cause was over.
yes, he said, it was all up with it at last, and burst out laughing
too.

at this juncture we perceived mr. kenge coming out of court with an
affable dignity upon him, listening to mr. vholes, who was
deferential and carried his own bag. mr. vholes was the first to see
us. "here is miss summerson, sir," he said. "and mr. woodcourt."

"oh, indeed! yes. truly!" said mr. kenge, raising his hat to me with
polished politeness. "how do you do? glad to see you. mr. jarndyce is
not here?"

no. he never came there, i reminded him.

"really," returned mr. kenge, "it is as well that he is not here
to-day, for his--shall i say, in my good friend's absence, his
indomitable singularity of opinion?--might have been strengthened,
perhaps; not reasonably, but might have been strengthened."

"pray what has been done to-day?" asked allan.

 
 ___________________________
 
has been done," repeated mr. kenge. "quite so. yes. why, not
much has been done; not much. we have been checked--brought up
suddenly, i would say--upon the--shall i term it threshold?"

"is this will considered a genuine document, sir?" said allan. "will
you tell us that?"

"most certainly, if i could," said mr. kenge; "but we have not gone
into that, we have not gone into that."

"we have not gone into that," repeated mr. vholes as if his low
inward voice were an echo.

"you are to reflect, mr. woodcourt," observed mr. kenge, using his
silver trowel persuasively and smoothingly, "that this has been a
great cause, that this has been a protracted cause, that this has
been a complex cause. jarndyce and jarndyce has been termed, not
inaptly, a monument of chancery practice."

"and patience has sat upon it a long time," said allan.

"very well indeed, sir," returned mr. kenge with a certain
condescending laugh he had. "very well! you are further to reflect,
mr. woodcourt," becoming dignified almost 
 
 ___________________________
 
to severity, "that on the
numerous difficulties, contingencies, masterly fictions, and forms of
procedure in this great cause, there has been expended study,
ability, eloquence, knowledge, intellect, mr. woodcourt, high
intellect. for many years, the--a--i would say the flower of the bar,
and the--a--i would presume to add, the matured autumnal fruits of
the woolsack--have been lavished upon jarndyce and jarndyce. if the
public have the benefit, and if the country have the adornment, of
this great grasp, it must be paid for in money or money's worth,
sir."

"mr. kenge," said allan, appearing enlightened all in a moment.
"excuse me, our time presses. do i understand that the whole estate
is found to have 
 
 ___________________________
 
rest richard!" but as my darling answered him thus hopefully, so
serene and beautiful, with the help that was to come to her so
near--i knew--i knew!

it was not good for him to talk too much, and when he was silent, we
were silent too. sitting beside him, i made a pretence of working for
my dear, as he had always been used to joke about my being busy. ada
leaned upon his pillow, holding his head upon her arm. he dozed
often, and whenever he awoke without seeing him, said first of all,
"where is woodcourt?"

evening had come on when i lifted up my eyes and saw my guardian
standing in the little hall. "who is that, dame durden?" richard
asked me. the door was behind him, but he had observed in my face
that some one was there.

i looked to allan for advice, and as he nodded "yes," bent over
richard and told him. my guardian saw what passed, came softly by me
in a moment, and laid his hand on richard's. "oh, sir," said richard,
"you are a good man, you are a good man!" and burst into tears for
the 