 that's what you'd
do. phil squod, don't you go a-sidling round the gallery like
that"--the dirty little man was shuffling about with his shoulder
against the wall, and his eyes on the intruder, in a manner that
looked threatening--"because i know you and won't have it."

"phil!" said mr. george.

"yes, guv'ner."

"be quiet."

the little man, with a low growl, stood still.

"ladies and gentlemen," said mr. bucket, "you'll excuse anything that
may appear to be disagreeable in this, for my name's inspector bucket
of the detective, and i have a duty to perform. george, i know where
my man is because i was on the roof last night and saw him through
the skylight, and you along with him. he is in there, you know,"
pointing; "that's where he is--on a sofy. now i must see my man, and
i must tell my man to consider himself in custody; but you know me,
and you know i don't want to take any uncomfortable measures. you
give me your word, as from one man to another (and an old soldier,
mind you, likewise), that it
 
 ___________________________
 
n them upon the
matter that very night. now, only you put that to lady dedlock, sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, and ask her ladyship whether, even after
he had left here, she didn't go down to his chambers with the
intention of saying something further to him, dressed in a loose
black mantle with a deep fringe to it."

sir leicester sits like a statue, gazing at the cruel finger that is
probing the life-blood of his heart.

"you put that to her ladyship, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, from
me, inspector bucket of the detective. and if her ladyship makes any
difficulty about admitting of it, you tell her that it's no use, that
inspector bucket knows it and knows that she passed the soldier as
you called him (though he's not in the army now) and knows that she
knows she passed him on the staircase. now, sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, why do i relate all this?"

sir leicester, who has covered his face with his hands, uttering a
single groan, requests him to pause for a moment. by and by he takes
his ha
 
 ___________________________
 
r inarticulate sounds. with such sounds he now breaks silence,
soon, however, controlling himself to say that he does not comprehend
why a gentleman so faithful and zealous as the late mr. tulkinghorn
should have communicated to him nothing of this painful, this
distressing, this unlooked-for, this overwhelming, this incredible
intelligence.

"again, sir leicester dedlock, baronet," returns mr. bucket, "put it
to her ladyship to clear that up. put it to her ladyship, if you
think it right, from inspector bucket of the detective. you'll find,
or i'm much mistaken, that the deceased mr. tulkinghorn had the
intention of communicating the whole to you as soon as he considered
it ripe, and further, that he had given her ladyship so to
understand. why, he might have been going to reveal it the very
morning when i examined the body! you don't know what i'm going to
say and do five minutes from this present time, sir leicester
dedlock, baronet; and supposing i was to be picked off now, you might
wonder why i 
 
 ___________________________
 
s ahead of mercury
and a brother deity also powdered and in peach-blossomed smalls, who
bear between them a chair in which is an incapable old man. another
man and two women come behind. directing the pitching of the chair in
an affable and easy manner, mr. bucket dismisses the mercuries and
locks the door again. sir leicester looks on at this invasion of the
sacred precincts with an icy stare.

"now, perhaps you may know me, ladies and gentlemen," says mr. bucket
in a confidential voice. "i am inspector bucket of the detective, i
am; and this," producing the tip of his convenient little staff from
his breast-pocket, "is my authority. now, you wanted to see sir
leicester dedlock, baronet. well! you do see him, and mind you, it
ain't every one as is admitted to that honour. your name, old
gentleman, is smallweed; that's what your name is; i know it well."

"well, and you never heard any harm of it!" cries mr. smallweed in a
shrill loud voice.

"you don't happen to know why they killed the pig, do you?"
 
 ___________________________
 
enderness and love, susceptible as
nothing else is of being struck with the agony he feels. he sees her,
almost to the exclusion of himself, and cannot bear to look upon her
cast down from the high place she has graced so well.

and even to the point of his sinking on the ground, oblivious of his
suffering, he can yet pronounce her name with something like
distinctness in the midst of those intrusive sounds, and in a tone of
mourning and compassion rather than reproach.




chapter lv

flight


inspector bucket of the detective has not yet struck his great blow,
as just now chronicled, but is yet refreshing himself with sleep
preparatory to his field-day, when through the night and along the
freezing wintry roads a chaise and pair comes out of lincolnshire,
making its way towards london.

railroads shall soon traverse all this country, and with a rattle and
a glare the engine and train shall shoot like a meteor over the wide
night-landscape, turning the moon paler; but as yet such things are
non-exist
 
 ___________________________
 
n phil sitting by
the frosty fire staring at him open-mouthed, and gallops away again,
and gets out in a cloud of steam again.

mr. jarndyce, the only person up in the house, is just going to bed,
rises from his book on hearing the rapid ringing at the bell, and
comes down to the door in his dressing-gown.

"don't be alarmed, sir." in a moment his visitor is confidential with
him in the hall, has shut the door, and stands with his hand upon the
lock. "i've had the pleasure of seeing you before. inspector bucket.
look at that handkerchief, sir, miss esther summerson's. found it
myself put away in a drawer of lady dedlock's, quarter of an hour
ago. not a moment to lose. matter of life or death. you know lady
dedlock?"

"yes."

"there has been a discovery there to-day. family affairs have come
out. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, has had a fit--apoplexy or
paralysis--and couldn't be brought to, and precious time has been
lost. lady dedlock disappeared this afternoon and left a letter for
him that looks b
 
 ___________________________
 
mmerson?"

"now, mr. jarndyce"--mr. bucket has read his face with the greatest
attention all along--"i speak to you as a gentleman of a humane
heart, and under such pressing circumstances as don't often happen.
if ever delay was dangerous, it's dangerous now; and if ever you
couldn't afterwards forgive yourself for causing it, this is the
time. eight or ten hours, worth, as i tell you, a hundred pound
apiece at least, have been lost since lady dedlock disappeared. i am
charged to find her. i am inspector bucket. besides all the rest
that's heavy on her, she has upon her, as she believes, suspicion of
murder. if i follow her alone, she, being in ignorance of what sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, has communicated to me, may be driven to
desperation. but if i follow her in company with a young lady,
answering to the description of a young lady that she has a
tenderness for--i ask no question, and i say no more than that--she
will give me credit for being friendly. let me come up with her and
be able to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
, with his lighted lantern in his hand, an
excited and quite different man.

"what is it?" said i, starting. "is she here?"

"no, no. don't deceive yourself, my dear. nobody's here. but i've got
it!"

the crystallized snow was in his eyelashes, in his hair, lying in
ridges on his dress. he had to shake it from his face and get his
breath before he spoke to me.

"now, miss summerson," said he, beating his finger on the apron,
"don't you be disappointed at what i'm a-going to do. you know me.
i'm inspector bucket, and you can trust me. we've come a long way;
never mind. four horses out there for the next stage up! quick!"

there was a commotion in the yard, and a man came running out of the
stables to know if he meant up or down.

"up, i tell you! up! ain't it english? up!"

"up?" said i, astonished. "to london! are we going back?"

"miss summerson," he answered, "back. straight back as a die. you
know me. don't be afraid. i'll follow the other, by g----"

"the other?" i repeated. "who?"

"you called he
 
 ___________________________
 
'm too familiar--don't you fret and worry
yourself no more than you can help. i say nothing else at present;
but you know me, my dear; now, don't you?"

i endeavoured to say that i knew he was far more capable than i of
deciding what we ought to do, but was he sure that this was right?
could i not go forward by myself in search of--i grasped his hand
again in my distress and whispered it to him--of my own mother.

"my dear," he answered, "i know, i know, and would i put you wrong,
do you think? inspector bucket. now you know me, don't you?"

what could i say but yes!

"then you keep up as good a heart as you can, and you rely upon me
for standing by you, no less than by sir leicester dedlock, baronet.
now, are you right there?"

"all right, sir!"

"off she goes, then. and get on, my lads!"

we were again upon the melancholy road by which we had come, tearing
up the miry sleet and thawing snow as if they were torn up by a
waterwheel.




chapter lviii

a wintry day and night


still impassive, as behov
 
 ___________________________
 
y eyes. it was like hearing his voice in a strange
country.

"my dear miss summerson, that you should be out at this hour, and in
such weather!"

he had heard from my guardian of my having been called away on some
uncommon business and said so to dispense with any explanation. i
told him that we had but just left a coach and were going--but then i
was obliged to look at my companion.

"why, you see, mr. woodcourt"--he had caught the name from me--"we
are a-going at present into the next street. inspector bucket."

mr. woodcourt, disregarding my remonstrances, had hurriedly taken off
his cloak and was putting it about me. "that's a good move, too,"
said mr. bucket, assisting, "a very good move."

"may i go with you?" said mr. woodcourt. i don't know whether to me
or to my companion.

"why, lord!" exclaimed mr. bucket, taking the answer on himself. "of
course you may."

it was all said in a moment, and they took me between them, wrapped
in the cloak.

"i have just left richard," said mr. woodcourt. "i h
 
 ___________________________
 
room. the
back is guster's bedroom, and in it she's a-carrying on, poor thing,
to a frightful extent!"

we went downstairs, followed by mr. snagsby, as i soon found the
little man to be. in the front kitchen, sitting by the fire, was mrs.
snagsby, with very red eyes and a very severe expression of face.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, entering behind us, "to
wave--not to put too fine a point upon it, my dear--hostilities for
one single moment in the course of this prolonged night, here is
inspector bucket, mr. woodcourt, and a lady."

she looked very much astonished, as she had reason for doing, and
looked particularly hard at me.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, sitting down in the remotest
corner by the door, as if he were taking a liberty, "it is not
unlikely that you may inquire of me why inspector bucket, mr.
woodcourt, and a lady call upon us in cook's court, cursitor street,
at the present hour. i don't know. i have not the least idea. if i
was to be informed, i should despair of und
 
 ___________________________
 
me. i brought it with me to send from
these parts, as chesney wold might be a painful name just now to the
person it's written to. i am not much accustomed to correspondence
myself, and i am particular respecting this present letter because i
want it to be both straightforward and delicate."

herewith he hands a letter, closely written in somewhat pale ink but
in a neat round hand, to the ironmaster, who reads as follows:


   miss esther summerson,

   a communication having been made to me by inspector bucket
   of a letter to myself being found among the papers of a
   certain person, i take the liberty to make known to you
   that it was but a few lines of instruction from abroad,
   when, where, and how to deliver an enclosed letter to a
   young and beautiful lady, then unmarried, in england. i
   duly observed the same.

   i further take the liberty to make known to you that it
   was got from me as a proof of handwriting only and that
   otherwise i would not have given it up, as appearing to