ittle tottering bench of shabby old volumes outside the
door, labelled "law books, all at 9d." some of the inscriptions i
have enumerated were written in law-hand, like the papers i had seen
in kenge and carboy's office and the letters i had so long received
from the firm. among them was one, in the same writing, having
nothing to do with the business of the shop, but announcing that a
respectable man aged forty-five wanted engrossing or copying to
execute with neatness and dispatch: address to nemo, care of mr.
krook, within. there were several second-hand bags, blue and red,
hanging up. a little way within the shop-door lay heaps of old
crackled parchment scrolls and discoloured and dog's-eared
law-papers. i could have fancied that all the rusty keys, of which
there must have been hundreds huddled together as old iron, had once
belonged to doors of rooms or strong chests in lawyers' offices. the
litter of rags tumbled partly into and partly out of a one-legged
wooden scale, hanging witho
 
 ___________________________
 
d butter which seemed to have stopped short, eyes
the affidavit aside, and brings his right forefinger travelling down
a page of the book, "jewby--packer--jarndyce."

"jarndyce! here we are, sir," says mr. snagsby. "to be sure! i might
have remembered it. this was given out, sir, to a writer who lodges
just over on the opposite side of the lane."

mr. tulkinghorn has seen the entry, found it before the
law-stationer, read it while the forefinger was coming down the hill.

"what do you call him? nemo?" says mr. tulkinghorn. "nemo, sir. here
it is. forty-two folio. given out on the wednesday night at eight
o'clock, brought in on the thursday morning at half after nine."

"nemo!" repeats mr. tulkinghorn. "nemo is latin for no one."

"it must be english for some one, sir, i think," mr. snagsby submits
with his deferential cough. "it is a person's name. here it is, you
see, sir! forty-two folio. given out wednesday night, eight o'clock;
brought in thursday morning, half after nine."

the tail o
 
 ___________________________
 
eneral partial to
strangers, particular--not to put too fine a point upon it--when they
want anything. but she was rather took by something about this
person, whether by his being unshaved, or by his hair being in want
of attention, or by what other ladies' reasons, i leave you to judge;
and she accepted of the specimen, and likewise of the address. my
little woman hasn't a good ear for names," proceeds mr. snagsby after
consulting his cough of consideration behind his hand, "and she
considered nemo equally the same as nimrod. in consequence of which,
she got into a habit of saying to me at meals, 'mr. snagsby, you
haven't found nimrod any work yet!' or 'mr. snagsby, why didn't you
give that eight and thirty chancery folio in jarndyce to nimrod?' or
such like. and that is the way he gradually fell into job-work at our
place; and that is the most i know of him except that he was a quick
hand, and a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him
out, say, five and forty folio on th
 
 ___________________________
 
 what do you think the lawyer
making the inquiries wants?"

"a job," says mr. george.

"nothing of the kind!"

"can't be a lawyer, then," says mr. george, folding his arms with an
air of confirmed resolution.

"my dear friend, he is a lawyer, and a famous one. he wants to see
some fragment in captain hawdon's writing. he don't want to keep it.
he only wants to see it and compare it with a writing in his
possession."

"well?"

"well, mr. george. happening to remember the advertisement concerning
captain hawdon and any information that could be given respecting
him, he looked it up and came to me--just as you did, my dear friend.
will you shake hands? so glad you came that day! i should have missed
forming such a friendship if you hadn't come!"

"well, mr. smallweed?" says mr. george again after going through the
ceremony with some stiffness.

"i had no such thing. i have nothing but his signature. plague
pestilence and famine, battle murder and sudden death upon him," says
the old man, making a curse 
 
 ___________________________
 
is is so very trying to mr. smallweed's temper that he suddenly
breaks out with "you're a brimstone beast!" and as suddenly asks
pardon of mr. tulkinghorn, excusing himself for this slip of the
tongue by saying to judy, "i was thinking of your grandmother, my
dear."

"i supposed, sergeant," mr. tulkinghorn resumes as he leans on one
side of his chair and crosses his legs, "that mr. smallweed might
have sufficiently explained the matter. it lies in the smallest
compass, however. you served under captain hawdon at one time, and
were his attendant in illness, and rendered him many little services,
and were rather in his confidence, i am told. that is so, is it not?"

"yes, sir, that is so," says mr. george with military brevity.

"therefore you may happen to have in your possession
something--anything, no matter what; accounts, instructions, orders,
a letter, anything--in captain hawdon's writing. i wish to compare
his writing with some that i have. if you can give me the
opportunity, you shall be rewar