ormance.

ha, ha, ha! she, hortense, been in my lady's service since five years
and always kept at the distance, and this doll, this puppet,
caressed--absolutely caressed--by my lady on the moment of her
arriving at the house! ha, ha, ha! "and do you know how pretty you
are, child?" "no, my lady." you are right there! "and how old are
you, child! and take care they do not spoil you by flattery, child!"
oh, how droll! it is the best thing altogether.

in short, it is such an admirable thing that mademoiselle hortense
can't forget it; but at meals for days afterwards, even among her
countrywomen and others attached in like capacity to the troop of
visitors, relapses into silent enjoyment of the joke--an enjoyment
expressed, in her own convivial manner, by an additional tightness of
face, thin elongation of compressed lips, and sidewise look, which
intense appreciation of humour is frequently reflected in my lady's
mirrors when my lady is not among them.

all the mirrors in the house are brought into action n
 
 ___________________________
 
, when her own's up!"

we passed not far from the house a few minutes afterwards. peaceful
as it had looked when we first saw it, it looked even more so now,
with a diamond spray glittering all about it, a light wind blowing,
the birds no longer hushed but singing strongly, everything refreshed
by the late rain, and the little carriage shining at the doorway like
a fairy carriage made of silver. still, very steadfastly and quietly
walking towards it, a peaceful figure too in the landscape, went
mademoiselle hortense, shoeless, through the wet grass.




chapter xix

moving on


it is the long vacation in the regions of chancery lane. the good
ships law and equity, those teak-built, copper-bottomed,
iron-fastened, brazen-faced, and not by any means fast-sailing
clippers are laid up in ordinary. the flying dutchman, with a crew of
ghostly clients imploring all whom they may encounter to peruse their
papers, has drifted, for the time being, heaven knows where. the
courts are all shut up; the public offices li
 
 ___________________________
 
he other like counters--which is
a way he has, his principal use of them being in these games of
skill--and then puts them, in a little pile, into the boy's hand and
takes him out to the door, leaving mr. snagsby, not by any means
comfortable under these mysterious circumstances, alone with the
veiled figure. but on mr. tulkinghorn's coming into the room, the
veil is raised and a sufficiently good-looking frenchwoman is
revealed, though her expression is something of the intensest.

"thank you, mademoiselle hortense," says mr. tulkinghorn with his
usual equanimity. "i will give you no further trouble about this
little wager."

"you will do me the kindness to remember, sir, that i am not at
present placed?" says mademoiselle.

"certainly, certainly!"

"and to confer upon me the favour of your distinguished
recommendation?"

"by all means, mademoiselle hortense."

"a word from mr. tulkinghorn is so powerful."

"it shall not be wanting, mademoiselle."

"receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude, dear sir.
 
 ___________________________
 
terious low voice, "it is
relating--not to put too fine a point upon it--to the foreigner,
sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn eyes him with some surprise. "what foreigner?"

"the foreign female, sir. french, if i don't mistake? i am not
acquainted with that language myself, but i should judge from her
manners and appearance that she was french; anyways, certainly
foreign. her that was upstairs, sir, when mr. bucket and me had the
honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping-boy that night."

"oh! yes, yes. mademoiselle hortense."

"indeed, sir?" mr. snagsby coughs his cough of submission behind his
hat. "i am not acquainted myself with the names of foreigners in
general, but i have no doubt it would be that." mr. snagsby appears
to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of repeating
the name, but on reflection coughs again to excuse himself.

"and what can you have to say, snagsby," demands mr. tulkinghorn,
"about her?"

"well, sir," returns the stationer, shading his communication with
his hat, "it fal
 
 ___________________________
 
gsby, shaking his head, "i never had an idea of a foreign female,
except as being formerly connected with a bunch of brooms and a baby,
or at the present time with a tambourine and earrings. i never had, i
do assure you, sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn had listened gravely to this complaint and inquires
when the stationer has finished, "and that's all, is it, snagsby?"

"why yes, sir, that's all," says mr. snagsby, ending with a cough
that plainly adds, "and it's enough too--for me."

"i don't know what mademoiselle hortense may want or mean, unless she
is mad," says the lawyer.

"even if she was, you know, sir," mr. snagsby pleads, "it wouldn't be
a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a foreign
dagger planted in the family."

"no," says the other. "well, well! this shall be stopped. i am sorry
you have been inconvenienced. if she comes again, send her here."

mr. snagsby, with much bowing and short apologetic coughing, takes
his leave, lightened in heart. mr. tulkinghorn goes upstairs, saying
 
 ___________________________
 
 key, which unlocks a chest in which there is
another, and so comes to the cellar-key, with which he prepares to
descend to the regions of old wine. he is going towards the door with
a candle in his hand when a knock comes.

"who's this? aye, aye, mistress, it's you, is it? you appear at a
good time. i have just been hearing of you. now! what do you want?"

he stands the candle on the chimney-piece in the clerk's hall and
taps his dry cheek with the key as he addresses these words of
welcome to mademoiselle hortense. that feline personage, with her
lips tightly shut and her eyes looking out at him sideways, softly
closes the door before replying.

"i have had great deal of trouble to find you, sir."

"have you!"

"i have been here very often, sir. it has always been said to me, he
is not at home, he is engage, he is this and that, he is not for
you."

"quite right, and quite true."

"not true. lies!"

at times there is a suddenness in the manner of mademoiselle hortense
so like a bodily spring upon the sub
 
 ___________________________
 
ject of it that such subject
involuntarily starts and fails back. it is mr. tulkinghorn's case at
present, though mademoiselle hortense, with her eyes almost shut up
(but still looking out sideways), is only smiling contemptuously and
shaking her head.

"now, mistress," says the lawyer, tapping the key hastily upon the
chimney-piece. "if you have anything to say, say it, say it."

"sir, you have not use me well. you have been mean and shabby."

"mean and shabby, eh?" returns the lawyer, rubbing his nose with the
key.

"yes. what is it that i tell you? you know you have. you have
attrapped me--catched me--to give you information
 
 ___________________________
 
; you have asked me
to show you the dress of mine my lady must have wore that night, you
have prayed me to come in it here to meet that boy. say! is it not?"
mademoiselle hortense makes another spring.

"you are a vixen, a vixen!" mr. tulkinghorn seems to meditate as he
looks distrustfully at her, then he replies, "well, wench, well. i
paid you."

"you paid me!" she repeats with fierce disdain. "two sovereign! i
have not change them, i re-fuse them, i des-pise them, i throw them
from me!" which she literally does, taking them out of her bosom as
she speaks and flinging them with such violence on the floor that
they jerk up again into the light before they roll away into 
 
 ___________________________
 
corners
and slowly settle down there after spinning vehemently.

"now!" says mademoiselle hortense, darkening her large eyes again.
"you have paid me? eh, my god, oh yes!"

mr. tulkinghorn rubs his head with the key while she entertains
herself with a sarcastic laugh.

"you must be rich, my fair friend," he composedly observes, "to throw
money about in that way!"

"i am rich," she returns. "i am very rich in hate. i hate my lady, of
all my heart. you know that."

"know it? how should i know it?"

"because you have known it perfectly before you prayed me to give you
that information. because 
 
 ___________________________
 
you have
just stated, and it not being conceded, you will come again."

"and again," says mademoiselle with more tight and angry nods. "and
yet again. and yet again. and many times again. in effect, for ever!"

"and not only here, but you will go to mr. snagsby's too, perhaps?
that visit not succeeding either, you will go again perhaps?"

"and again," repeats mademoiselle, cataleptic with determination.
"and yet again. and yet again. and many times again. in effect, for
ever!"

"very well. now, mademoiselle hortense, let me recommend you to take
the candle and pick up that money of yours. i think you will find it
behind the clerk's partition in the corner yonder."

she merely throws a laugh over her shoulder and stands her ground
with folded arms.

"you will not, eh?"

"no, i will not!"

"so much the poorer you; so much the richer i! look, mistress, this
is the key of my wine-cellar. it is a large key, but the keys of
prisons are larger. in this city there are houses of correction
(where the treadmills are
 
 ___________________________
 
o you, and endeavour to meet
your wishes respecting this unfortunate family matter and the
nobbiest way of keeping it quiet. now, sir leicester dedlock,
baronet, don't you be nervous on account of the apprehension at
present coming off. you shall see the whole case clear, from first to
last."

mr. bucket rings, goes to the door, briefly whispers mercury, shuts
the door, and stands behind it with his arms folded. after a suspense
of a minute or two the door slowly opens and a frenchwoman enters.
mademoiselle hortense.

the moment she is in the room mr. bucket claps the door to and puts
his back against it. the suddenness of the noise occasions her to
turn, and then for the first time she sees sir leicester dedlock in
his chair.

"i ask you pardon," she mutters hurriedly. "they tell me there was no
one here."

her step towards the door brings her front to front with mr. bucket.
suddenly a spasm shoots across her face and she turns deadly pale.

"this is my lodger, sir leicester dedlock," says mr. bucket, nod
 
 ___________________________
 
ding
at her. "this foreign young woman has been my lodger for some weeks
back."

"what do sir leicester care for that, you think, my angel?" returns
mademoiselle in a jocular strain.

"why, my angel," returns mr. bucket, "we shall see."

mademoiselle hortense eyes him with a scowl upon her tight face,
which gradually changes into a smile of scorn, "you are very
mysterieuse. are you drunk?"

"tolerable sober, my angel," returns mr. bucket.

"i come from arriving at this so detestable house with your wife.
your wife have left me since some minutes. they tell me downstairs
that your wife is here. i come here, and your wife is not here. what
is the intention of this fool's play, say then?" mademoiselle
demands, with her arms composedly crossed, but with
 
 ___________________________
 
h the deceased
on former occasions--even threatening him, as the witness made out.
if you ask me, sir leicester dedlock, whether from the first i
believed george to be the murderer, i tell you candidly no, but he
might be, notwithstanding, and there was enough against him to make
it my duty to take him and get him kept under remand. now, observe!"

as mr. bucket bends forward in some excitement--for him--and
inaugurates what he is going to say with one ghostly beat of his
forefinger in the air, mademoiselle hortense fixes her black eyes
upon him with a dark frown and sets her dry lips closely and firmly
together.

"i went home, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, at night and found this
young woman having supper with my wife, mrs. bucket. she had made a
mighty show of being fond of mrs. bucket from her first offering
herself as our lodger, but that night she made more than ever--in
fact, overdid it. likewise she overdid her respect, and all that, for
the lamented memory of the deceased mr. tulkinghorn. by the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it steady, and i shan't hurt you!"

in a trice mr. bucket snaps a handcuff on her wrist. "that's one,"
says mr. bucket. "now the other, darling. two, and all told!"

he rises; she rises too. "where," she asks him, darkening her large
eyes until their drooping lids almost conceal them--and yet they
stare, "where is your false, your treacherous, and cursed wife?"

"she's gone forrard to the police office," returns mr. bucket.
"you'll see her there, my dear."

"i would like to kiss her!" exclaims mademoiselle hortense, panting
tigress-like.

"you'd bite her, i suspect," says mr. bucket.

"i would!" making her eyes very large. "i would love to tear her limb
from limb."

"bless you, darling," says mr. bucket with the greatest composure,
"i'm fully prepared to hear that. your sex have such a surprising
animosity against one another when you do differ. you don't mind me
half so much, do you?"

"no. though you are a devil still."

"angel and devil by turns, eh?" cries mr. bucket. "but i am in my
regular employmen
 
 ___________________________
 
t, you must consider. let me put your shawl tidy.
i've been lady's maid to a good many before now. anything wanting to
the bonnet? there's a cab at the door."

mademoiselle hortense, casting an indignant eye at the glass, shakes
herself perfectly neat in one shake and looks, to do her justice,
uncommonly genteel.

"listen then, my angel," says she after several sarcastic nods. "you
are very spiritual. but can you restore him back to life?"

mr. bucket answers, "not exactly."

"that is droll. listen yet one time. you are very spiritual. can you
make a honourable lady of her?"

"don't be so malicious," says mr. bucket.

"or a haughty gentleman of him?" cries mademoiselle, re