ess shall find when you have made
the tour of it and are come to the brink of the void beyond), it is a
very little speck. there is much good in it; there are many good and
true people in it; it has its appointed place. but the evil of it is
that it is a world wrapped up in too much jeweller's cotton and fine
wool, and cannot hear the rushing of the larger worlds, and cannot
see them as they circle round the sun. it is a deadened world, and
its growth is sometimes unhealthy for want of air.

my lady dedlock has returned to her house in town for a few days
previous to her departure for paris, where her ladyship intends to
stay some weeks, after which her movements are uncertain. the
fashionable intelligence says so for the comfort of the parisians,
and it knows all fashionable things. to know things otherwise were to
be unfashionable. my lady dedlock has been down at what she calls, in
familiar conversation, her "place" in lincolnshire. the waters are
out in lincolnshire. an arch of the bridge in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he park has been
sapped and sopped away. the adjacent low-lying ground for half a mile
in breadth is a stagnant river with melancholy trees for islands in
it and a surface punctured all over, all day long, with falling rain.
my lady dedlock's place has been extremely dreary. the weather for
many a day and night has been so wet that the trees seem wet through,
and the soft loppings and prunings of the woodman's axe can make no
crash or crackle as they fall. the deer, looking soaked, leave
quagmires where they pass. the shot of a rifle loses its sharpness in
the moist air, and its smoke moves in a tardy little cloud towards
the green rise, coppice-topped, that makes a background for the
falling rain. the view from my lady dedlock's 
 
 ___________________________
 
own windows is
alternately a lead-coloured view and a view in indian ink. the vases
on the stone terrace in the foreground catch the rain all day; and
the heavy drops fall--drip, drip, drip--upon the broad flagged
pavement, called from old time the ghost's walk, all night. on
sundays the little church in the park is mouldy; the oaken pulpit
breaks out into a cold sweat; and there is a general smell and taste
as of the ancient dedlocks in their graves. my lady dedlock (who is
childless), looking out in the early twilight from her boudoir at a
keeper's lodge and seeing the light of a fire upon the latticed
panes, and smoke rising from the chimney, and a child, chased by a
woman, running out into the rain to meet the shining figure of a
wrapped-up man coming through the gate, has been put quite out of
temper. my lady dedlock says she has been "bored to death."

therefore my lady dedlock has come away from the place in
lincolnshire and has left it to the rain, 
 
 ___________________________
 
try to my
lady, which has never changed since he courted her, is the one little
touch of romantic fancy in him.

indeed, he married her for love. a whisper still goes about that she
had not even family; howbeit, sir leicester had so much family that
perhaps he had enough and could dispense with any more. but she had
beauty, pride, ambition, insolent resolve, and sense enough to
portion out a legion of fine ladies. wealth and station, added to
these, soon floated her upward, and for years now my lady dedlock has
been at the centre of the fashionable intelligence and at the top of
the fashionable tree.

how alexander wept when he had no more worlds to conquer, everybody
knows--or has some reason to know by this time, the matter having
been rather frequently mentioned. my lady dedlock, having conquered
her world, fell not into the melting, but rather into the freezing,
mood. an exhausted composure, a worn-out placidity, an equanimity of
fatigue not to be ruffled by interest or satisfaction, are the
t
 
 ___________________________
 
retty than handsome, but improved into
classicality by the acquired expression of her fashionable state. her
figure is elegant and has the effect of being tall. not that she is
so, but that "the most is made," as the honourable bob stables has
frequently asserted upon oath, "of all her points." the same
authority observes that she is perfectly got up and remarks in
commendation of her hair especially that she is the best-groomed
woman in the whole stud.

with all her perfections on her head, my lady dedlock has come up
from her place in lincolnshire (hotly pursued by the fashionable
intelligence) to pass a few days at her house in town previous to her
departure for paris, where her ladyship intends to stay some weeks,
after which her movements are uncertain. and at her house in town,
upon this muddy, murky afternoon, presents himself an old-fashioned
old gentleman, attorney-at-law and eke solicitor of the high court of
chancery, who has the honour of acting as legal adviser of the
dedlocks and has
 
 ___________________________
 
 is
always agreeable to sir leicester; he receives it as a kind of
tribute. he likes mr. tulkinghorn's dress; there is a kind of tribute
in that too. it is eminently respectable, and likewise, in a general
way, retainer-like. it expresses, as it were, the steward of the
legal mysteries, the butler of the legal cellar, of the dedlocks.

has mr. tulkinghorn any idea of this himself? it may be so, or it may
not, but there is this remarkable circumstance to be noted in
everything associated with my lady dedlock as one of a class--as one
of the leaders and representatives of her little world. she supposes
herself to be an inscrutable being, quite out of the reach and ken of
ordinary mortals--seeing herself in her glass, where indeed she looks
so. yet every dim little star revolving about her, from her maid to
the manager of the italian opera, knows her weaknesses, prejudices,
follies, haughtinesses, and caprices and lives upon as accurate a
calculation and as nice a measure of her moral nature as her
d
 
 ___________________________
 
ressmaker takes of her physical proportions. is a new dress, a new
custom, a new singer, a new dancer, a new form of jewellery, a new
dwarf or giant, a new chapel, a new anything, to be set up? there are
deferential people in a dozen callings whom my lady dedlock suspects
of nothing but prostration before her, who can tell you how to manage
her as if she were a baby, who do nothing but nurse her all their
lives, who, humbly affecting to follow with profound subservience,
lead her and her whole troop after them; who, in hooking one, hook
all and bear them off as lemuel gulliver bore away the stately fleet
of the majestic lilliput. "if you want to address our people, sir,"
say blaze and sparkle, the jewellers--meaning by our people lady
dedlock and the re
 
 ___________________________
 
 careless way again and toying with her screen.

"not quite. probably"--mr. tulkinghorn examines it as he speaks--"the
legal character which it has was acquired after the original hand was
formed. why do you ask?"

"anything to vary this detestable monotony. oh, go on, do!"

mr. tulkinghorn reads again. the heat is greater; my lady screens her
face. sir leicester dozes, starts up suddenly, and cries, "eh? what
do you say?"

"i say i am afraid," says mr. tulkinghorn, who had risen hastily,
"that lady dedlock is ill."

"faint," my lady murmurs with white lips, "only that; but it is like
the faintness of death. don't speak to me. ring, and take me to my
room!"

mr. tulkinghorn retires into another chamber; bells ring, feet
shuffle and patter, silence ensues. mercury at last begs mr.
tulkinghorn to return.

"better now," quoth sir leicester, motioning the lawyer to sit down
and read to him alone. "i have been quite alarmed. i never knew my
lady swoon before. but the weather is extremely trying, and sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e long drawing-room of chesney wold cannot revive mr. guppy's
spirits. he is so low that he droops on the threshold and has hardly
strength of mind to enter. but a portrait over the chimney-piece,
painted by the fashionable artist of the day, acts upon him like a
charm. he recovers in a moment. he stares at it with uncommon
interest; he seems to be fixed and fascinated by it.

"dear me!" says mr. guppy. "who's that?"

"the picture over the fire-place," says rosa, "is the portrait of the
present lady dedlock. it is considered a perfect likeness, and the
best work of the master."

"blest," says mr. guppy, staring in a kind of dismay at his friend,
"if i can ever have seen her. yet i know her! has the picture been
engraved, miss?"

"the picture has never been engraved. sir leicester has always
refused permission."

"well!" says mr. guppy in a low voice. "i'll be shot if it ain't very
curious how well i know that picture! so that's lady dedlock, is it!"

"the picture on the right is the present sir le
 
 ___________________________
 
t think i must have had a dream of that picture, you know!"

as no one present takes any especial interest in mr. guppy's dreams,
the probability is not pursued. but he still remains so absorbed by
the portrait that he stands immovable before it until the young
gardener has closed the shutters, when he comes out of the room in a
dazed state that is an odd though a sufficient substitute for
interest and follows into the succeeding rooms with a confused stare,
as if he were looking everywhere for lady dedlock again.

he sees no more of her. he sees her rooms, which are the last shown,
as being very elegant, and he looks out of the windows from which she
looked out, not long ago, upon the weather that bored her to death.
all things have an end, even houses that people take infinite pains
to see and are tired of before they begin to see them. he has come to
the end of the sight, and the fresh village beauty to the end of her
description; which is always this: "the terrace below is much
admired. it is 
 
 ___________________________
 
lth, sir
leicester?"

"in excellent health, mrs. rouncewell."

"my lady is looking charmingly well," says mrs. rouncewell with
another curtsy.

my lady signifies, without profuse expenditure of words, that she is
as wearily well as she can hope to be.

but rosa is in the distance, behind the housekeeper; and my lady, who
has not subdued the quickness of her observation, whatever else she
may have conquered, asks, "who is that girl?"

"a young scholar of mine, my lady. rosa."

"come here, rosa!" lady dedlock beckons her, with even an appearance
of interest. "why, do you know how pretty you are, child?" she says,
touching her shoulder with her two forefingers.

rosa, very much abashed, says, "no, if you please, my lady!" and
glances up, and glances down, and don't know where to look, but looks
all the prettier.

"how old are you?"

"nineteen, my lady."

"nineteen," repeats my lady thoughtfully. "take care they don't spoil
you by flattery."

"yes, my lady."

my lady taps her dimpled cheek with the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
me delicate gloved fingers
and goes on to the foot of the oak staircase, where sir leicester
pauses for her as her knightly escort. a staring old dedlock in a
panel, as large as life and as dull, looks as if he didn't know what
to make of it, which was probably his general state of mind in the
days of queen elizabeth.

that evening, in the housekeeper's room, rosa can do nothing but
murmur lady dedlock's praises. she is so affable, so graceful, so
beautiful, so elegant; has such a sweet voice and such a thrilling
touch that rosa can feel it yet! mrs. rouncewell confirms all this,
not without personal pride, reserving only the one point of
affability. mrs. rouncewell is not quite sure as to that. heaven
forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of
that excellent family, above all, of my lady, whom the whole world
admires; but if my lady would only be "a little more free,
 
 ___________________________
 
d most, my dear," returns the housekeeper with dignity, "are
words it's not my place to use--nor so much as to hear--applied to
any drawback on my lady."

"i beg your pardon, grandmother. but she is proud, is she not?"

"if she is, she has reason to be. the dedlock family have always
reason to be."

"well," says watt, "it's to be hoped they line out of their
prayer-books a certain passage for the common people about pride and
vainglory. forgive me, grandmother! only a joke!"

"sir leicester and lady dedlock, my dear, are not fit subjects for
joking."

"sir leicester is no joke by any means," says watt, "and i humbly ask
his pardon. i suppose, grandmother, that even with the family and
their guests down here, there is no objection to my prolonging my
stay at the dedlock arms for a day or two, as any other traveller
might?"

"surely, none in the world, child."

"i am glad of that," says watt, "because i have an inexpressible
desire to extend my knowledge of this beautiful neighbourhood."

he happens
 
 ___________________________
 
go, would probably have
been tried at the old bailey for some demagogue proceeding, and
severely punished--if not," adds sir leicester after a moment's
pause, "if not hanged, drawn, and quartered."

sir leicester appears to discharge his stately breast of a burden in
passing this capital sentence, as if it were the next satisfactory
thing to having the sentence executed.

"but night is coming on," says he, "and my lady will take cold. my
dear, let us go in."

as they turn towards the hall-door, lady dedlock addresses mr.
tulkinghorn for the first time.

"you sent me a message respecting the person whose writing i happened
to inquire about. it was like you to remember the circumstance; i had
quite forgotten it. your message reminded me of it again. i can't
imagine what association i had with a hand like that, but i surely
had some."

"you had some?" mr. tulkinghorn repeats.

"oh, yes!" returns my lady carelessly. "i think i must have had some.
and did you really take the trouble to find out the wri
 
 ___________________________
 
er landscape
shudders in the wind and a grey mist creeps along, the only traveller
besides the waste of clouds.

my lady lounges in a great chair in the chimney-corner, and sir
leicester takes another great chair opposite. the lawyer stands
before the fire with his hand out at arm's length, shading his face.
he looks across his arm at my lady.

"yes," he says, "i inquired about the man, and found him. and, what
is very strange, i found him--"

"not to be any out-of-the-way person, i am afraid!" lady dedlock
languidly anticipates.

"i found him dead."

"oh, dear me!" remonstrated sir leicester. not so much shocked by the
fact as by the fact of the fact being mentioned.

"i was directed to his lodging--a miserable, poverty-stricken
place--and i found him dead."

"you will excuse me, mr. tulkinghorn," observes sir leicester. "i
think the less said--"

"pray, sir leicester, let me hear the story out" (it is my lady
speaking). "it is quite a story for twilight. how very shocking!
dead?"

mr. tulkinghor
 
 ___________________________
 
sts to hear no more about a
subject so far removed from my lady's station.

"certainly, a collection of horrors," says my lady, gathering up her
mantles and furs, "but they interest one for the moment! have the
kindness, mr. tulkinghorn, to open the door for me."

mr. tulkinghorn does so with deference and holds it open while she
passes out. she passes close to him, with her usual fatigued manner
and insolent grace. they meet again at dinner--again, next
day--again, for many days in succession. lady dedlock is always the
same exhausted deity, surrounded by worshippers, and terribly liable
to be bored to death, even while presiding at her own shrine. mr.
tulkinghorn is always the same speechless repository of noble
confidences, so oddly out of place and yet so perfectly at home. they
appear to take as little note of one another as any two people
enclosed within the same walls could. but whether each evermore
watches and suspects the other, evermore mistrustful of some great
reservation; whether eac
 
 ___________________________
 
en, that he made my guardian smile even
as he turned towards us from a little private talk with mrs. blinder.
we kissed charley, and took her downstairs with us, and stopped
outside the house to see her run away to her work. i don't know where
she was going, but we saw her run, such a little, little creature in
her womanly bonnet and apron, through a covered way at the bottom of
the court and melt into the city's strife and sound like a dewdrop in
an ocean.




chapter xvi

tom-all-alone's


my lady dedlock is restless, very restless. the astonished
fashionable intelligence hardly knows where to have her. to-day she
is at chesney wold; yesterday she was at her house in town; to-morrow
she may be abroad, for anything the fashionable intelligence can with
confidence predict. even sir leicester's gallantry has some trouble
to keep pace with her. it would have more but that his other faithful
ally, for better and for worse--the gout--darts into the old oak
bed-chamber at chesney wold and grips him by 
 
 ___________________________
 
hip and left these
flowers behind. no, no! don't take them out. let the pretty little
things lie here," said caddy, adjusting them with a careful hand,
"because i was present myself, and i shouldn't wonder if somebody
left them on purpose!"

"do they look like that sort of thing?" said ada, coming laughingly
behind me and clasping me merrily round the waist. "oh, yes, indeed
they do, dame durden! they look very, very like that sort of thing.
oh, very like it indeed, my dear!"




chapter xviii

lady dedlock


it was not so easy as it had appeared at first to arrange for
richard's making a trial of mr. kenge's office. richard himself was
the chief impediment. as soon as he had it in his power to leave mr.
badger at any moment, he began to doubt whether he wanted to leave
him at all. he didn't know, he said, really. it wasn't a bad
profession; he couldn't assert that he disliked it; perhaps he liked
it as well as he liked any other--suppose he gave it one more chance!
upon that, he shut himself up f
 
 ___________________________
 
strangely, there was something quickened within me,
associated with the lonely days at my godmother's; yes, away even to
the days when i had stood on tiptoe to dress myself at my little
glass after dressing my doll. and this, although i had never seen
this lady's face before in all my life--i was quite sure of
it--absolutely certain.

it was easy to know that the ceremonious, gouty, grey-haired
gentleman, the only other occupant of the great pew, was sir
leicester dedlock, and that the lady was lady dedlock. but why her
face should be, in a confused way, like a broken glass to me, in
which i saw scraps of old remembrances, and why i should be so
fluttered and troubled (for i was still) by having casually met her
eyes, i could not think.

i felt it to be an unmeaning weakness in me and tried to overcome it
by attending to the words i heard. then, very strangely, i seemed to
hear them, not in the reader's voice, but in the well-remembered
voice of my godmother. this made me think, did lady dedlock's
 
 ___________________________
 
 face
accidentally resemble my godmother's? it might be that it did, a
little; but the expression was so different, and the stern decision
which had worn into my godmother's face, like weather into rocks, was
so completely wanting in the face before me that it could not be that
resemblance which had struck me. neither did i know the loftiness and
haughtiness of lady dedlock's face, at all, in any one. and yet i--i,
little esther summerson, the child who lived a life apart and on
whose birthday there was no rejoicing--seemed to arise before my own
eyes, evoked out of the past by some power in this fashionable lady,
whom i not only entertained no fancy that i had ever seen, but whom i
perfectly well knew i had never seen until that hour.

it made me tremble so to be thrown into this unaccountable agitation
that i was conscious of being distressed even by the observa
 
 ___________________________
 
tion of
the french maid, though i knew she had been looking watchfully here,
and there, and everywhere, from the moment of her coming into the
church. by degrees, though very slowly, i at last overcame my strange
emotion. after a long time, i looked towards lady dedlock again. it
was while they were preparing to sing, before the sermon. she took no
heed of me, and the beating at my heart was gone. neither did it
revive for more than a few moments when she once or twice afterwards
glanced at ada or at me through her glass.

the service being concluded, sir leicester gave his arm with much
taste and gallantry to lady dedlock--though he was obliged to walk by
the help of a thick stick--and escorted her out of church to the pony
carriage in which they had come. th
 
 ___________________________
 
pon the smallest flower and
leaf there was already a freshness poured from all this seeming rage
which seemed to make creation new again.

"is it not dangerous to sit in so exposed a place?"

"oh, no, esther dear!" said ada quietly.

ada said it to me, but i had not spoken.

the beating of my heart came back again. i had never heard the voice,
as i had never seen the face, but it affected me in the same strange
way. again, in a moment, there arose before my mind innumerable
pictures of myself.

lady dedlock had taken shelter in the lodge before our arrival there
and had come out of the gloom within. she stood behind my chair with
her hand upon it. i saw her with her hand close to my shoulder when i
turned my head.

"i have frightened you?" she said.

no. it was not fright. why should i be frightened!

"i believe," said lady dedlock to my guardian, "i have the pleasure
of speaking to mr. jarndyce."

"your remembrance does me more honour than i had supposed it would,
lady dedlock," he returned.

"i 
 
 ___________________________
 
in his
power to advance in any way?" she said over her shoulder to my
guardian.

"i hope so," said he.

she seemed to respect him and even to wish to conciliate him. there
was something very winning in her haughty manner, and it became more
familiar--i was going to say more easy, but that could hardly be--as
she spoke to him over her shoulder.

"i presume this is your other ward, miss clare?"

he presented ada, in form.

"you will lose the disinterested part of your don quixote character,"
said lady dedlock to mr. jarndyce over her shoulder again, "if you
only redress the wrongs of beauty like this. but present me," and she
turned full upon me, "to this young lady too!"

"miss summerson really is my ward," said mr. jarndyce. "i am
responsible to no lord chancellor in her case."

"has miss summerson lost both her parents?" said my lady.

"yes."

"she is very fortunate in her guardian."

lady dedlock looked at me, and i looked at her and said i was indeed.
all at once she turned from me with a hasty
 
 ___________________________
 
 air, almost expressive of
displeasure or dislike, and spoke to him over her shoulder again.

"ages have passed since we were in the habit of meeting, mr.
jarndyce."

"a long time. at least i thought it was a long time, until i saw you
last sunday," he returned.

"what! even you are a courtier, or think it necessary to become one
to me!" she said with some disdain. "i have achieved that reputation,
i suppose."

"you have achieved so much, lady dedlock," said my guardian, "that
you pay some little penalty, i dare say. but none to me."

"so much!" she repeated, slightly laughing. "yes!"

with her air of superiority, and power, and fascination, and i know
not what, she seemed to regard ada and me as little more than
children. so, as she slightly laughed and afterwards sat looking at
the rain, she was as self-possessed and as free to occupy herself
with her own thoughts as if she had been alone.

"i think you knew my sister when we were abroad t
 
 ___________________________
 
ogether better than
you know me?" she said, looking at him again.

"yes, we happened to meet oftener," he returned.

"we went our several ways," said lady dedlock, "and had little in
common even before we agreed to differ. it is to be regretted, i
suppose, but it could not be helped."

lady dedlock again sat looking at the rain. the storm soon began to
pass upon its way. the shower greatly abated, the lightning ceased,
the thunder rolled among the distant hills, and the sun began to
glisten on the wet leaves and the falling rain. as we sat there,
silently, we saw a little pony phaeton coming towards us at a merry
pace.

"the messenger is coming back, my lady," said the keeper, "with the
carriage."

as it drove up, we saw that there were two people inside. there
alighted from it, with some
 
 ___________________________
 
 cloaks and wrappers, first the
frenchwoman whom i had seen in church, and secondly the pretty girl,
the frenchwoman with a defiant confidence, the pretty girl confused
and hesitating.

"what now?" said lady dedlock. "two!"

"i am your maid, my lady, at the present," said the frenchwoman. "the
message was for the attendant."

"i was afraid you might mean me, my lady," said the pretty girl.

"i did mean you, child," replied her mistress calmly. "put that shawl
on me."

she slightly stooped her shoulders to receive it, and the pretty girl
lightly dropped it in its place. the frenchwoman stood unnoticed,
looking on with her lips very tightly set.

"i am sorry," said lady dedlock to mr. jarndyce, "that we are 
 
 ___________________________
 
icial intelligence of her husband's being
made away with, and who within the last two hours has passed through
every stage of swooning with the greatest decorum. but as the little
woman feelingly says, many thanks she gets for it!




chapter xxiii

esther's narrative


we came home from mr. boythorn's after six pleasant weeks. we were
often in the park and in the woods and seldom passed the lodge where
we had taken shelter without looking in to speak to the keeper's
wife; but we saw no more of lady dedlock, except at church on
sundays. there was company at chesney wold; and although several
beautiful faces surrounded her, her face retained the same influence
on me as at first. i do not quite know even now whether it was
painful or pleasurable, whether it drew me towards her or made me
shrink from her. i think i admired her with a kind of fear, and i
know that in her presence my thoughts always wandered back, as they
had done at first, to that old time of my life.

i had a fancy, on more than one 
 
 ___________________________
 
s of faggot and
coal--dedlock timber and antediluvian forest--that blaze upon the
broad wide hearths and wink in the twilight on the frowning woods,
sullen to see how trees are sacrificed, do not exclude the enemy. the
hot-water pipes that trail themselves all over the house, the
cushioned doors and windows, and the screens and curtains fail to
supply the fires' deficiencies and to satisfy sir leicester's need.
hence the fashionable intelligence proclaims one morning to the
listening earth that lady dedlock is expected shortly to return to
town for a few weeks.

it is a melancholy truth that even great men have their poor
relations. indeed great men have often more than their fair share of
poor relations, inasmuch as very red blood of the superior quality,
like inferior blood unlawfully shed, will cry aloud and will be
heard. sir leicester's cousins, in the remotest degree, are so many
murders in the respect that they "will out." among whom there are
cousins who are so poor that one might almost d
 
 ___________________________
 
im that the
country was going to pieces.

the rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages and
capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have
done well enough in life if they could have overcome their
cousinship; as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, and
lounge in purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite as
much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be
how to dispose of them.

in this society, and where not, my lady dedlock reigns supreme.
beautiful, elegant, accomplished, and powerful in her little world
(for the world of fashion does not stretch all the way from pole to
pole), her influence in sir leicester's house, however haughty and
indifferent her manner, is greatly to improve it and refine it. the
cousins, even those older cousins who were paralysed when sir
leicester married her, do her feudal homage; and the honourable bob
stables daily repeats to some chosen person between breakfast and
lunch his favouri
 
 ___________________________
 
ard all this with slight attention outwardly,
looks towards mr. rouncewell as he comes in. he is a little over
fifty perhaps, of a good figure, like his mother, and has a clear
voice, a broad forehead from which his dark hair has retired, and a
shrewd though open face. he is a responsible-looking gentleman
dressed in black, portly enough, but strong and active. has a
perfectly natural and easy air and is not in the least embarrassed by
the great presence into which he comes.

"sir leicester and lady dedlock, as i have already apologized for
intruding on you, i cannot do better than be very brief. i thank you,
sir leicester."

the head of the dedlocks has motioned towards a sofa between himself
and my lady. mr. rouncewell quietly takes his seat there.

"in these busy times, when so many great undertakings are in
progress, people like myself have so many workmen in so many places
that we are always on the flight."

sir leicester is content enough that the ironmaster should feel that
there is no hurr
 
 ___________________________
 
nt house, rooted in that
quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to mature, and
the gnarled and warted elms and the umbrageous oaks stand deep in the
fern and leaves of a hundred years; and where the sun-dial on the
terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time which was as much
the property of every dedlock--while he lasted--as the house and
lands. sir leicester sits down in an easy-chair, opposing his repose
and that of chesney wold to the restless flights of ironmasters.

"lady dedlock has been so kind," proceeds mr. rouncewell with a
respectful glance and a bow that way, "as to place near her a young
beauty of the name of rosa. now, my son has fallen in love with rosa
and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and to
their becoming engaged if she will take him--which i suppose she
will. i have never seen rosa until to-day, but i have some confidence
in my son's good sense--even in love. i find her what he represents
her, to the best of my judgment; and my moth
 
 ___________________________
 
er speaks of her with
great commendation."

"she in all respects deserves it," says my lady.

"i am happy, lady dedlock, that you say so, and i need not comment on
the value to me of your kind opinion of her."

"that," observes sir leicester with unspeakable grandeur, for he
thinks the ironmaster a little too glib, "must be quite unnecessary."

"quite unnecessary, sir leicester. now, my son is a very young man,
and rosa is a very young woman. as i made my way, so my son must make
his; and his being married at present is out of the question. but
supposing i gave my consent to his engaging himself to this pretty
g
 
 ___________________________
 
point of prudence, having great reliance on
her sense--"am i to understand, mr. rouncewell, and is my lady to
understand, sir, that you consider this young woman too good for
chesney wold or likely to be injured by remaining here?"

"certainly not, sir leicester,"

"i am glad to hear it." sir leicester very lofty indeed.

"pray, mr. rouncewell," says my lady, warning sir leicester off with
the slightest gesture of her pretty hand, as if he were a fly,
"explain to me what you mean."

"willingly, lady dedlock. there is nothing i could desire more."

addressing her composed face, whose intelligence, however, is too
quick and active to be concealed by any studied impassiveness,
however habitual, to the strong saxon face of the visitor, a picture
of resolution and perseverance, my lady listens with attention,
occasionally slightly bending her head.

"i am the son of your housekeeper, lady dedlock, and passed my
childhood about this house. my mother has lived here half a
century and will die here i have
 
 ___________________________
 
ught up. we have three
daughters besides this son of whom i have spoken, and being
fortunately able to give them greater advantages than we have had
ourselves, we have educated them well, very well. it has been one of
our great cares and pleasures to make them worthy of any station."

a little boastfulness in his fatherly tone here, as if he added in
his heart, "even of the chesney wold station." not a little more
magnificence, therefore, on the part of sir leicester.

"all this is so frequent, lady dedlock, where i live, and among the
class to which i belong, that what would be generally called unequal
marriages are not of such rare occurrence with us as elsewhere. a son
will sometimes make it known to his father that he has fallen in
love, say, with a young woman in the factory. the father, who once
worked in a factory himself, will be a little disappointed at first
very possibly. it may be that he had other views for his son.
however, the chances are that having ascertained the young woman to
b
 
 ___________________________
 
host's walk, looks at rosa, writing in
an inner room. presently my lady calls her.

"come to me, child. tell me the truth. are you in love?"

"oh! my lady!"

my lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling,
"who is it? is it mrs. rouncewell's grandson?"

"yes, if you please, my lady. but i don't know that i am in love with
him--yet."

"yet, you silly little thing! do you know that he loves you, yet?"

"i think he likes me a little, my lady." and rosa bursts into tears.

is this lady dedlock standing beside the village beauty, smoothing
her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so
full of musing interest? aye, indeed it is!

"listen to me, child. you are young and true, and i believe you are
attached to me."

"indeed i am, my lady. indeed there is nothing in the world i
wouldn't do to show how much."

"and i don't think you would wish to leave me just yet, rosa, even
for a lover?"

"no, my lady! oh, no!" rosa looks up for the first time, quite
frightened at
 
 ___________________________
 
and indignant look at
the young man of the name of guppy which plainly says, "what do you
come calling here for and getting me into a row?"

"it's quite right. i gave him those directions," says my lady. "let
the young man wait."

"by no means, my lady. since he has your orders to come, i will not
interrupt you." sir leicester in his gallantry retires, rather
declining to accept a bow from the young man as he goes out and
majestically supposing him to be some shoemaker of intrusive
appearance.

lady dedlock looks imperiously at her visitor when the servant has
left the room, casting her eyes over him from head to foot. she
suffers him to stand by the door and asks him what he wants.

"that your ladyship would have the kindness to oblige me with a
little conversation," returns mr. guppy, embarrassed.

"you are, of course, the person who has written me so many letters?"

"several, your ladyship. several before your ladyship condescended to
favour me with an answer."

"and could you not take the same
 
 ___________________________
 
ad. "very good! now, this
miss barbary was extremely close--seems to have been extraordinarily
close for a female, females being generally (in common life at least)
rather given to conversation--and my witness never had an idea
whether she possessed a single relative. on one occasion, and only
one, she seems to have been confidential to my witness on a single
point, and she then told her that the little girl's real name was not
esther summerson, but esther hawdon."

"my god!"

mr. guppy stares. lady dedlock sits before him looking him through,
with the same dark shade upon her face, in the same attitude even to
the holding of the screen, with her lips a little apart, her brow a
little contracted, but for the moment dead. he sees her consciousness
return, sees a tremor pass across her frame like a ripple over water,
sees her lips shake, sees her compose them by a great effort, sees
her force herself back to the knowledge of his presence and of what
he has said. all this, so quickly, that her exclam
 
 ___________________________
 
 guppy, "and thought it as well
that he shouldn't see me, so i waited till he was gone."

"there we go again, william g.!" cried tony, looking up for an
instant. "so mysterious and secret! by george, if we were going to
commit a murder, we couldn't have more mystery about it!"

mr. guppy affects to smile, and with the view of changing the
conversation, looks with an admiration, real or pretended, round the
room at the galaxy gallery of british beauty, terminating his survey
with the portrait of lady dedlock over the mantelshelf, in which she
is represented on a terrace, with a pedestal upon the terrace, and a
vase upon the pedestal, and her shawl upon the vase, and a prodigious
piece of fur upon the shawl, and her arm on the prodigious piece of
fur, and a bracelet on her arm.

"that's very like lady dedlock," says mr. guppy. "it's a speaking
likeness."

"i wish it was," growls tony, without changing his position. "i
should have some fashionable conversation, here, then."

finding by this time that
 
 ___________________________
 
ut any sound at all,
forming with his lips only the words, "what do you know?"

"i know three things. first, i know that here we are whispering in
secrecy, a pair of conspirators."

"well!" says mr. guppy. "and we had better be that than a pair of
noodles, which we should be if we were doing anything else, for it's
the only way of doing what we want to do. secondly?"

"secondly, it's not made out to me how it's likely to be profitable,
after all."

mr. guppy casts up his eyes at the portrait of lady dedlock over the
mantelshelf and replies, "tony, you are asked to leave that to the
honour of your friend. besides its being calculated to serve that
friend in those chords of the human mind which--which need not be
called into agonizing vibration on the present occasion--your friend
is no fool. what's that?"

"it's eleven o'clock striking by the bell of saint paul's. listen and
you'll hear all the bells in the city jangling."

both sit silent, listening to the metal voices, near and distant,
resoundin
 
 ___________________________
 
 a
grain of its effect on any one. as she looks at him so steadily and
coldly, he not only feels conscious that he has no guide in the least
perception of what is really the complexion of her thoughts, but also
that he is being every moment, as it were, removed further and
further from her.

she will not speak, it is plain. so he must.

"in short, your ladyship," says mr. guppy like a meanly penitent
thief, "the person i was to have had the letters of, has come to a
sudden end, and--" he stops. lady dedlock calmly finishes the
sentence.

"and the letters are destroyed with the person?"

mr. guppy would say no if he could--as he is unable to hide.

"i believe so, your ladyship."

if he could see the least sparkle of relief in her face now? no, he
could see no such thing, even if that brave outside did not utterly
put him away, and he were not looking beyond it and about it.

he falters an awkward excuse or two for his failure.

"is this all you have to say?" inquires lady dedlock, having heard
him 
 
 ___________________________
 

out.

but in that house, in that same moment, there happens to be an old
man of the name of tulkinghorn. and that old man, coming with his
quiet footstep to the library, has his hand at that moment on the
handle of the door--comes in--and comes face to face with the young
man as he is leaving the room.

one glance between the old man and the lady, and for an instant the
blind that is always down flies up. suspicion, eager and sharp, looks
out. another instant, close again.

"i beg your pardon, lady dedlock. i beg your pardon a thousand times.
it is so very unusual to find you here at this hour. i supposed the
room was empty. i beg your pardon!"

"stay!" she negligently calls him back. "remain here, i beg. i am
going out to dinner. i have nothing more to say to this young man!"

the disconcerted young man bows, as he goes out, and cringingly hopes
that mr. tulkinghorn of the fields is well.

"aye, aye?" says the lawyer, looking at him from under his bent
brows, though he has no need to look again-
 
 ___________________________
 
-not he. "from kenge and
carboy's, surely?"

"kenge and carboy's, mr. tulkinghorn. name of guppy, sir."

"to be sure. why, thank you, mr. guppy, i am very well!"

"happy to hear it, sir. you can't be too well, sir, for the credit of
the profession."

"thank you, mr. guppy!"

mr. guppy sneaks away. mr. tulkinghorn, such a foil in his
old-fashioned rusty black to lady dedlock's brightness, hands her
down the staircase to her carriage. he returns rubbing his chin, and
rubs it a good deal in the course of the evening.




chapter xxxiv

a turn of the screw


"now, what," says mr. george, "may this be? is it blank cartridge or
ball? a flash in the pan or a shot?"

an open letter is the subject of the trooper's speculations, and it
seems to perplex him mightily. he looks at it at arm's length, brings
it close to him, holds it in his right hand, holds it in his left
hand
 
 ___________________________
 
he took as much to the spot as i did.

it would be idle to inquire now why i never went close to the house
or never went inside it. the family were not there, i had heard on my
arrival, and were not expected. i was far from being incurious or
uninterested about the building; on the contrary, i often sat in this
place wondering how the rooms ranged and whether any echo like a
footstep really did resound at times, as the story said, upon the
lonely ghost's walk. the indefinable feeling with which lady dedlock
had impressed me may have had some influence in keeping me from the
house even when she was absent. i am not sure. her face and figure
were associated with it, naturally; but i cannot say that they
repelled me from it, though something did. for whatever reason or no
reason, i had never once gone near it, down to the day at which my
story now arrives.

i was resting at my favourite point after a long ramble, and charley
was gathering violets at a little distance from me. i had been
looking at th
 
 ___________________________
 
e ghost's walk lying in a deep shade of masonry afar off
and picturing to myself the female shape that was said to haunt it
when i became aware of a figure approaching through the wood. the
perspective was so long and so darkened by leaves, and the shadows of
the branches on the ground made it so much more intricate to the eye,
that at first i could not discern what figure it was. by little and
little it revealed itself to be a woman's--a lady's--lady dedlock's.
she was alone and coming to where i sat with a much quicker step, i
observed to my surprise, than was usual with her.

i was fluttered by her being unexpectedly so near (she was almost
within speaking distance before i knew her) and would have risen to
continue my walk. but i could not. i was rendered motionless. not so
much by her hurried gesture of entreaty, not so much by her quick
advance and outstretched hands, not so much by the great change in
her manner and the absence of her haughty
 
 ___________________________
 
u can scarcely be strong yet. you have been very
ill, i know. i have been much concerned to hear it."

i could no more have removed my eyes from her pale face than i could
have stirred from the bench on which i sat. she gave me her hand, and
its deadly coldness, so at variance with the enforced composure of
her features, deepened the fascination that overpowered me. i cannot
say what was in my whirling thoughts.

"you are recovering again?" she asked kindly.

"i was quite well but a moment ago, lady dedlock."

"is this your young attendant?"

"yes."

"will you send her on before and walk towards your house with me?"

"charley," said i, "take your flowers home, and i will follow you
directly."

charley, with her best curtsy, blushingly tied on her bonnet and went
her way. when she was gone, lady dedlock sat down on the seat beside
me.

i cannot tell in any words what the state of my mind was when i saw
in her hand my handkerchief with which i had covered the dead baby.

i looked at her, but i could
 
 ___________________________
 
on, did me service. i took
such precautions as i could to hide from charley that i had been
crying, and i constrained myself to think of every sacred obligation
that there was upon me to be careful and collected. it was not a
little while before i could succeed or could even restrain bursts of
grief, but after an hour or so i was better and felt that i might
return. i went home very slowly and told charley, whom i found at the
gate looking for me, that i had been tempted to extend my walk after
lady dedlock had left me and that i was over-tired and would lie
down. safe in my own room, i read the letter. i clearly derived from
it--and that was much then--that i had not been abandoned by my
mother. her elder and only sister, the godmother of my childhood,
discovering signs of life in me when i had been laid aside as dead,
had in her stern sense of duty, with no desire or willingness that i
should live, reared me in rigid secrecy and had never again beheld my
mother's face from within a few hours of 
 
 ___________________________
 
s quiet, the remembrance of my
mother kept me waking and made the night sorrowful, i did not yield
to it at another time; and ada found me what i used to be--except, of
course, in that particular of which i have said enough and which i
have no intention of mentioning any more just now, if i can help it.

the difficulty that i felt in being quite composed that first evening
when ada asked me, over our work, if the family were at the house,
and when i was obliged to answer yes, i believed so, for lady dedlock
had spoken to me in the woods the day before yesterday, was great.
greater still when ada asked me what she had said, and when i replied
that she had been kind and interested, and when ada, while admitting
her beauty and elegance, remarked upon her proud manner and her
imperious chilling air. but charley helped me through, unconsciously,
by telling us that lady dedlock had only stayed at the house two
nights on her way from london to visit at some other great house in
the next county and that s
 
 ___________________________
 

"oh, certainly!"

"--i don't intend to do it."

"quite so," says mr. tulkinghorn with a calm nod. "very good; i see
by these portraits that you take a strong interest in the fashionable
great, sir?"

he addresses this to the astounded tony, who admits the soft
impeachment.

"a virtue in which few englishmen are deficient," observes mr.
tulkinghorn. he has been standing on the hearthstone with his back to
the smoked chimney-piece, and now turns round with his glasses to his
eyes. "who is this? 'lady dedlock.' ha! a very good likeness in its
way, but it wants force of character. good day to you, gentlemen;
good day!"

when he has walked out, mr. guppy, in a great perspiration, nerves
himself to the hasty completion of the taking down of the galaxy
gallery, concluding with lady dedlock.

"tony," he says hurriedly to his astonished companion, "let us be
quick in putting the things together and in getting out of this
place. it were in vain longer to conceal from you, tony, that between
myself and one 
 
 ___________________________
 

has been worked to death."

"i don't know," says sir leicester, opening his eyes, "why mr.
tulkinghorn should be worked to death. i don't know what mr.
tulkinghorn's engagements may be. he is not a candidate."

volumnia had thought he might have been employed. sir leicester could
desire to know by whom, and what for. volumnia, abashed again,
suggests, by somebody--to advise and make arrangements. sir leicester
is not aware that any client of mr. tulkinghorn has been in need of
his assistance.

lady dedlock, seated at an open window with her arm upon its
cushioned ledge and looking out at the evening shadows falling on the
park, has seemed to attend since the lawyer's name was mentioned.

a languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility now
observes from his couch that man told him ya'as'dy that tulkinghorn
had gone down t' that iron place t' give legal 'pinion 'bout
something, and that contest being over t' day, 'twould be highly
jawlly thing if tulkinghorn should 'pear with news 
 
 ___________________________
 
ever, that these
people are, in their way, very proud."

"proud?" sir leicester doubts his hearing.

"i should not be surprised if they all voluntarily abandoned the
girl--yes, lover and all--instead of her abandoning them, supposing
she remained at chesney wold under such circumstances."

"well!" says sir leicester tremulously. "well! you should know, mr.
tulkinghorn. you have been among them."

"really, sir leicester," returns the lawyer, "i state the fact. why,
i could tell you a story--with lady dedlock's permission."

her head concedes it, and volumnia is enchanted. a story! oh, he is
going to tell something at last! a ghost in it, volumnia hopes?

"no. real flesh and blood." mr. tulkinghorn stops for an instant and
repeats with some little emphasis grafted upon his usual monotony,
"real flesh and blood, miss dedlock. sir leicester, these particulars
have only lately become known to me. they are very brief. they
exemplify what i have said. i suppress names for the present. lady
dedlock will n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot think me ill-bred, i hope?"

by the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking
towards the moonlight. by the light of the moon lady dedlock can be
seen, perfectly still.

"a townsman of this mrs. rouncewell, a man in exactly parallel
circumstances as i am told, had the good fortune to have a daughter
who attracted the notice of a great lady. i speak of really a great
lady, not merely great to him, but married to a gentleman of your
condition, sir leicester."

sir leicester condescendingly says, "yes, mr. tulkinghorn," implying
that then she must have appeared of very considerable moral
dimensions indeed in the eyes of an iron-maste
 
 ___________________________
 
ing for the girl,
and treated her with great kindness, and kept her always near her.
now this lady preserved a secret under all her greatness, which she
had preserved for many years. in fact, she had in early life been
engaged to marry a young rake--he was a captain in the army--nothing
connected with whom came to any good. she never did marry him, but
she gave birth to a child of which he was the father."

by the light of the fire he can be seen looking towards the
moonlight. by the moonlight, lady dedlock can be seen in profile,
perfectly still.

"the captain in the army being dead, she believed herself safe; but a
train of circumstances with which i need not trouble you led to
discovery. as i received the story, they began in an imprudence on
her own part one day when she was taken by surprise, which shows how
difficult it is for the firmest of us (she was very firm) to be
always guarded. there was great domestic trouble and amazement, you
may suppose; i leave you to imagine, sir leicester, the
 
 ___________________________
 
esent point. when mr. rouncewell's
townsman heard of the disclosure, he no more allowed the girl to be
patronized and honoured than he would have suffered her to be trodden
underfoot before his eyes. such was his pride, that he indignantly
took her away, as if from reproach and disgrace. he had no sense of
the honour done him and his daughter by the lady's condescension; not
the least. he resented the girl's position, as if the lady had been
the commonest of commoners. that is the story. i hope lady dedlock
will excuse its painful nature."

there are various opinions on the merits, more or less conflicting
with volumnia's. that fair young creature cannot believe there ever
was any such lady and rejects the whole history on the threshold. the
majority incline to the debilitated cousin's sentiment, which is in
few words--"no business--rouncewell's fernal townsman." sir leicester
generally refers back in his mind to wat tyler and arranges a
sequence of events on a plan of his own.

there is not much 
 
 ___________________________
 
conversation in all, for late hours have been kept
at chesney wold since the necessary expenses elsewhere began, and
this is the first night in many on which the family have been alone.
it is past ten when sir leicester begs mr. tulkinghorn to ring for
candles. then the stream of moonlight has swelled into a lake, and
then lady dedlock for the first time moves, and rises, and comes
forward to a table for a glass of water. winking cousins, bat-like in
the candle glare, crowd round to give it; volumnia (always ready for
something better if procurable) takes another, a very mild sip of
which contents her; lady dedlock, graceful, self-possessed, looked
after by admiring eyes, passes away slowly down the long perspective
by the side of that nymph, not at all improving her as a question of
contrast.




chapter xli

in mr. tulkingh
 
 ___________________________
 
uddenly stopped in
passing the window by two eyes that meet his own. the ceiling of his
room is rather low; and the upper part of the door, which is opposite
the window, is of glass. there is an inner baize door, too, but the
night being warm he did not close it when he came upstairs. these
eyes that meet his own are looking in through the glass from the
corridor outside. he knows them well. the blood has not flushed into
his face so suddenly and redly for many a long year as when he
recognizes lady dedlock.

he steps into the room, and she comes in too, closing both the doors
behind her. there is a wild disturbance--is it fear or anger?--in her
eyes. in her carriage and all else she looks as she looked downstairs
two hours ago.

is it fear or is it anger now? he cannot be sure. both might be as
pale, both as intent.

"lady dedlock?"

she does not speak at first, nor even when she has slowly dropped
into the easy-chair by the table. they look at each other, like two
pictures.

"why have you told m
 
 ___________________________
 
y story to so many persons?"

"lady dedlock, it was necessary for me to inform you that i knew it."

"how long have you known it?"

"i have suspected it a long while--fully known it a little while."

"months?"

"days."

he stands before her with one hand on a chair-back and the other in
his old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill, exactly as he has stood
before her at any time since her marriage. the same formal
politeness, the same composed deference that might as well be
defiance; the whole man the same dark, cold object, at the same
d
 
 ___________________________
 
ines and advances his head as not quite understanding
the question.

"you know what you related. is it true? do her friends know my story
also? is it the town-talk yet? is it chalked upon the walls and cried
in the streets?"

so! anger, and fear, and shame. all three contending. what power this
woman has to keep these raging passions down! mr. tulkinghorn's
thoughts take such form as he looks at her, with his ragged grey
eyebrows a hair's breadth more contracted than usual under her gaze.

"no, lady dedlock. that was a hypothetical case, arising out of sir
leicester's unconsciously carrying the matter with so high a hand.
but it would be a real case if they knew--what we know."

"then they do not know it yet?"

"no."

"can i save the poor girl from injury before they know it?"

"really, lady dedlock," mr. tulkinghorn replies, "i cannot give a
satisfactory opinion on that point."

and he thinks, with the interest of attentive curiosity, as he
watches the struggle in her breast, "the power and force
 
 ___________________________
 
s a little more.

"you have prepared me for my exposure, and i thank you for that too.
is there anything that you require of me? is there any claim that i
can release or any charge or trouble that i can spare my husband in
obtaining his release by certifying to the exactness of your
discovery? i will write anything, here and now, that you will
dictate. i am ready to do it."

and she would do it, thinks the lawyer, watchful of the firm hand
with which she takes the pen!

"i will not trouble you, lady dedlock. pray spare yourself."

"i have long expected this, as you know. i neither wish to spare
myself nor to be spared. you can do nothing worse to me than you have
done. do what remains now."

"lady dedlock, there is nothing to be done. i will take leave to say
a few words when you have finished."

their need for watching one another should be over now, but they do
it all this time, and the stars watch them both through the opened
window. away in the moonlight lie the woodland fields at rest, and
th
 
 ___________________________
 
e wide house is as quiet as the narrow one. the narrow one! where
are the digger and the spade, this peaceful night, destined to add
the last great secret to the many secrets of the tulkinghorn
existence? is the man born yet, is the spade wrought yet? curious
questions to consider, more curious perhaps not to consider, under
the watching stars upon a summer night.

"of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine," lady dedlock
presently proceeds, "i say not a word. if i were not dumb, you would
be deaf. let that go by. it is not for your ears."

he makes a feint of offering a protest, but she sweeps it away with
her disdainful hand.

"of other and very different things i come to speak to you. my jewels
are all in their proper places of keeping. they will be found there.
so, my dresses. so, all the valuables i have. some ready money i had
with me, please to say, but no large amount. i did not wear my own
dress, in ord
 
 ___________________________
 
er that i might avoid observation. i went to be
henceforward lost. make this known. i leave no other charge with
you."

"excuse me, lady dedlock," says mr. tulkinghorn, quite unmoved. "i am
not sure that i understand you. you want--"

"to be lost to all here. i leave chesney wold to-night. i go this
hour."

mr. tulkinghorn shakes his head. she rises, but he, without moving
hand from chair-back or from old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill,
shakes his head.

"what? not go as i have said?"

"no, lady dedlock," he very calmly replies.

"do you know the relief that my disappearance will be? have you
forgotten the stain and blot upon this 
 
 ___________________________
 
place, and where it is, and
who it is?"

"no, lady dedlock, not by any means."

without deigning to rejoin, she moves to the inner door and has it in
her hand when he says to her, without himself stirring hand or foot
or raising his voice, "lady dedlock, have the goodness to stop and
hear me, or before you reach the staircase i shall ring the
alarm-bell and rouse the house. and then i must speak out before
every guest and servant, every man and woman, in it."

he has conquered her. she falters, trembles, and puts her hand
confusedly to her head. slight tokens these in any one else, but when
so practised an eye as mr. tulkinghorn's sees indecision for a moment
in such a subject, he thoroughly knows its value.

he promptly says again, "have the 
 
 ___________________________
 
goodness to hear me, lady dedlock,"
and motions to the chair from which she has risen. she hesitates, but
he motions again, and she sits down.

"the relations between us are of an unfortunate description, lady
dedlock; but as they are not of my making, i will not apologize for
them. the position i hold in reference to sir leicester is so well
known to you that i can hardly imagine but that i must long have
appeared in your eyes the natural person to make this discovery."

"sir," she returns without looking up from the ground on
 
 ___________________________
 
 which her
eyes are now fixed, "i had better have gone. it would have been far
better not to have detained me. i have no more to say."

"excuse me, lady dedlock, if i add a little more to hear."

"i wish to hear it at the window, then. i can't breathe where i am."

his jealous glance as she walks that way betrays an instant's
misgiving that she may have it in her thoughts to leap over, and
dashing against ledge and cornice, strike her life out upon the
terrace below. but a moment's observation of her figure as she stands
in the window without any support, looking out at the stars--not
up--gloomily out at those stars which are low in the heavens,
reassu
 
 ___________________________
 
res him. by facing round as she has moved, he stands a little
behind her.

"lady dedlock, i have not yet been able to come to a decision
satisfactory to myself on the course before me. i am not clear what
to do or how to act next. i must request you, in the meantime, to
keep your secret as you have kept it so long and not to wonder that i
keep it too."

he pauses, but she makes no reply.

"pardon me, lady dedlock. this is an important subject. you are
honouring me with your attention?"

"i am."

"thank you. i might have known it from what i have seen of your
strength of character. i ought not to have asked the question, but i
have the habit of making sure of my ground, step by step, as i go on.
the sole consideration in this unhappy case is sir leicester."

"then why," she asks in a low voice and without removing her gloomy
look from those distant stars, "do you detain me in his house?"

"because he is 
 
 ___________________________
 
the consideration. lady dedlock, i have no occasion to
tell you that sir leicester is a very proud man, that his reliance
upon you is implicit, that the fall of that moon out of the sky would
not amaze him more than your fall from your high position as his
wife."

she breathes quickly and heavily, but she stands as unflinchingly as
ever he has seen her in the midst of her grandest company.

"i declare to you, lady dedlock, that with anything short of this
case that i have, i would as soon have hoped to root up by means of
my own strength and my own hands the oldest tree on this estate as to
shake your hold upon sir leicester and sir leicester's trust and
confidence in you. and even now, with this case, i hesitate. not that
he could doubt (that, even with him, is impossible), but that nothing
can prepare him for the blow."

"not my flight?" she returned. "think of it again."

"your flight, lady dedlock, would spr
 
 ___________________________
 
 whole truth, and a
hundred times the whole truth, far and wide. it would be impossible
to save the family credit for a day. it is not to be thought of."

there is a quiet decision in his reply which admits of no
remonstrance.

"when i speak of sir leicester being the sole consideration, he and
the family credit are one. sir leicester and the baronetcy, sir
leicester and chesney wold, sir leicester and his ancestors and his
patrimony"--mr. tulkinghorn very dry here--"are, i need not say to
you, lady dedlock, inseparable."

"go on!"

"therefore," says mr. tulkinghorn, pursuing his case in his jog-trot
style, "i have much to consider. this is to be hushed up if it can
be. how can it be, if sir leicester is driven out of his wits or laid
upon a death-bed? if i inflicted this shock upon him to-morrow
morning, how could the immediate change in him be accounted for? what
could have caused it? what could have divided you? lady dedlock, the
wall-chalking and the street-crying would come on directly, and y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou
are to remember that it would not affect you merely (whom i cannot at
all consider in this business) but your husband, lady dedlock, your
husband."

he gets plainer as he gets on, but not an atom more emphatic or
animated.

"there is another point of view," he continues, "in which the case
presents itself. sir leicester is devoted to you almost to
infatuation. he might not be able to overcome that infatuation, even
knowing what we know. i am putting an extreme case, but it might be
so. if so, it were better that he knew nothing. better for common
sense, better for him, better for me. i must take all this into
account, and i
 
 ___________________________
 
t combines to render a decision very difficult."

she stands looking out at the same stars without a word. they are
beginning to pale, and she looks as if their coldness froze her.

"my experience teaches me," says mr. tulkinghorn, who has by this
time got his hands in his pockets and is going on in his business
consideration of the matter like a machine. "my experience teaches
me, lady dedlock, that most of the people i know would do far better
to leave marriage alone. it is at the bottom of three fourths of
their troubles. so i thought when sir leicester married, and so i
always have thought since. no more about that. i must now be guided
by circumstances. in the meanwhile i must beg you to keep your own
counsel, and i will keep mine."

"i am to drag my present life on, holding its pains at your pleasure,
day by day?" she asks, still looking at the distant sky.

"yes, i am afraid so
 
 ___________________________
 
, lady dedlock."

"it is necessary, you think, that i should be so tied to the stake?"

"i am sure that what i recommend is necessary."

"i am to remain on this gaudy platform on which my miserable
deception has been so long acted, and it is to fall beneath me when
you give the signal?" she said slowly.

"not without notice, lady dedlock. i shall take no step without
forewarning you."

she asks all her questions as if she were repeating them from memory
or calling them over in her sleep.

"we are to meet as usual?"

"precisely as usual, if you please."

"and i am to hide my guilt, as i have done so many years?"

"as you have done so many years. i should not have made that
reference myself, lady dedlock, but i may now remind you that your
secret can be no heavier to you than it was, and is no worse and no
better than it was. i k
 
 ___________________________
 
now it certainly, but i believe we have never
wholly trusted each other."

she stands absorbed in the same frozen way for some little time
before asking, "is there anything more to be said to-night?"

"why," mr. tulkinghorn returns methodically as he softly rubs his
hands, "i should like to be assured of your acquiescence in my
arrangements, lady dedlock."

"you may be assured of it."

"good. and i would wish in conclusion to remind you, as a business
precaution, in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in any
communication with sir leicester, that throughout our interview i
have expressly stated my sole consideration to be sir leicester's
feelings and honour and the family reputation. i should have been
happy to have made lady dedlock a prominent consideration, too, if
the case had admitted of it; but unfortunately it does not."

"i c
 
 ___________________________
 
with will or sally. up comes the bright sun, drawing
everything up with it--the wills and sallys, the latent vapour in the
earth, the drooping leaves and flowers, the birds and beasts and
creeping things, the gardeners to sweep the dewy turf and unfold
emerald velvet where the roller passes, the smoke of the great
kitchen fire wreathing itself straight and high into the lightsome
air. lastly, up comes the flag over mr. tulkinghorn's unconscious
head cheerfully proclaiming that sir leicester and lady dedlock are
in their happy home and that there is hospitality at the place in
lincolnshire.




chapter xlii

in mr. tulkinghorn's chambers


from the verdant undulations and the spreading oaks of the dedlock
property, mr. tulkinghorn transfers himself to the stale heat and
dust of london. his manner of coming and going between the two places
is one of his impenetrabilities. he walks into chesney wold as if it
were next door to his chambers and returns to his chambers as if he
had never been out of lin
 
 ___________________________
 
y--"

("that is, when i walked through the house the other day, on the
occasion of my going down to visit miss summerson and miss clare,"
mr. skimpole airily explained to us.)

"--that the friend with whom he had formerly been staying there was
mr. jarndyce." sir leicester bowed to the bearer of that name. "and
hence i became aware of the circumstance for which i have professed
my regret. that this should have occurred to any gentleman, mr.
jarndyce, but especially a gentleman formerly known to lady dedlock,
and indeed claiming some distant connexion with her, and for whom (as
i learn from my lady herself) she entertains a high respect, does, i
assure you, give--me--pain."

"pray say no more about it, sir leicester," returned my guardian. "i
am very sensible, as i am sure we all are, of your consideration.
indeed the mistake was mine, and i ought to apologize for it."

i had not once looked up. i had not seen the visitor and had not even
appeared to myself to hear the conversation. it surprises me
 
 ___________________________
 
 to find
that i can recall it, for it seemed to make no impression on me as it
passed. i heard them speaking, but my mind was so confused and my
instinctive avoidance of this gentleman made his presence so
distressing to me that i thought i understood nothing, through the
rushing in my head and the beating of my heart.

"i mentioned the subject to lady dedlock," said sir leicester,
rising, "and my lady informed me that she had had the pleasure of
exchanging a few words with mr. jarndyce and his wards on the
occasion of an accidental meeting during their sojourn in the
vicinity. permit me, mr. jarndyce, to repeat to yourself, and to
these ladies, the assurance i have already tendered to mr. skimpole.
circumstances undoubtedly prevent my saying that it would afford me
any gratification to hear that mr. boythorn had favoured my house
with his presence, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t
know how to prepare him.

"why, esther," said he, breaking into a smile, "our visitor and you
are the two last persons on earth i should have thought of connecting
together!"

"oh, yes, guardian, i know it. and i too, but a little while ago."

the smile passed from his face, and he became graver than before. he
crossed to the door to see that it was shut (but i had seen to that)
and resumed his seat before me.

"guardian," said i, "do you remember, when we were overtaken by the
thunder-storm, lady dedlock's speaking to you of her sister?"

"of course. of course i do."

"and reminding you that she and her sister had differed, had gone
their several ways?"

"of course."

"why did they separate, guardian?"

his face quite altered as he looked at me. "my child, what questions
are these! i never knew. no one but themselves ever did know, i
believe. who could tell what the secrets of those two handsome and
proud women were! you have seen lady dedlock. if you had ever seen
her sister, you would know he
 
 ___________________________
 
olute and haughty
as she."

"oh, guardian, i have seen her many and many a time!"

"seen her?"

he paused a little, biting his lip. "then, esther, when you spoke to
me long ago of boythorn, and when i told you that he was all but
married once, and that the lady did not die, but died to him, and
that that time had had its influence on his later life--did you know
it all, and know who the lady was?"

"no, guardian," i returned, fearful of the light that dimly broke
upon me. "nor do i know yet."

"lady dedlock's sister."

"and why," i could scarcely ask him, "why, guardian, pray tell me why
were they parted?"

"it was her act, and she kept its motives in her inflexible heart. he
afterwards did conjecture (but it was mere conjecture) that some
injury which her haughty spirit had received in her cause of quarrel
with her sister had wounded her beyond all reason, but she wrote him
that from the date of that letter she died to him--as in literal
truth she did--and that the resolution was exacted from her
 
 ___________________________
 
ough
the darkness of the night, and the dedlock mercuries, with ashes (or
hair-powder) on their heads, symptomatic of their great humility,
loll away the drowsy mornings in the little windows of the hall. the
fashionable world--tremendous orb, nearly five miles round--is in
full swing, and the solar system works respectfully at its appointed
distances.

where the throng is thickest, where the lights are brightest, where
all the senses are ministered to with the greatest delicacy and
refinement, lady dedlock is. from the shining heights she has scaled
and taken, she is never absent. though the belief she of old reposed
in herself as one able to reserve whatsoever she would under
her mantle of pride is beaten down, though she has no assurance
that what she is to those around her she will remain another day,
it is not in her nature when envious eyes are looking on to
yield or to droop. they say of her that she has lately grown
more handsome and more haughty. the debilitated cousin says of
her that sh
 
 ___________________________
 
n, seeing how serious
my lady is, looks puzzled and surprised.

"see to the door. is it shut?"

yes. she goes to it and returns, and looks yet more surprised.

"i am about to place confidence in you, child, for i know i may trust
your attachment, if not your judgment. in what i am going to do, i
will not disguise myself to you at least. but i confide in you. say
nothing to any one of what passes between us."

the timid little beauty promises in all earnestness to be
trustworthy.

"do you know," lady dedlock asks her, signing to her to bring her
chair nearer, "do you know, rosa, that i am different to you from
what i am to any one?"

"yes, my lady. much kinder. but then i often think i know you as you
really are."

"you often think you know me as i really am? poor child, poor child!"

she says it with a kind of scorn--though not of rosa--and sits
brooding, looking dreamily at her.

"do you think, rosa, you are any relief or comfort to me? do you
suppose your being young and natural, and fond of me 
 
 ___________________________
 
es of the world and had perished from its surface with its
other departed monsters.

mercury has announced mr. rouncewell, which is the cause of her
appearance. mr. rouncewell is not in the library, but she repairs to
the library. sir leicester is there, and she wishes to speak to him
first.

"sir leicester, i am desirous--but you are engaged."

oh, dear no! not at all. only mr. tulkinghorn.

always at hand. haunting every place. no relief or security from him
for a moment.

"i beg your pardon, lady dedlock. will you allow me to retire?"

with a look that plainly says, "you know you have the power to remain
if you will," she tells him it is not necessary and moves towards a
chair. mr. tulkinghorn brings it a little forward for her with his
clumsy bow and retires into a window opposite. interposed between her
and the fading light of day in the now quiet street, his shadow falls
upon her, and he darkens all before her. even so does he darken her
life.

it is a dull street under the best conditions, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e flambeaux gasp at the
upstart gas. here and there a weak little iron hoop, through which
bold boys aspire to throw their friends' caps (its only present use),
retains its place among the rusty foliage, sacred to the memory of
departed oil. nay, even oil itself, yet lingering at long intervals
in a little absurd glass pot, with a knob in the bottom like an
oyster, blinks and sulks at newer lights every night, like its high
and dry master in the house of lords.

therefore there is not much that lady dedlock, seated in her chair,
could wish to see through the window in which mr. tulkinghorn stands.
and yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if it were
her heart's desire to have that figure moved out of the way.

sir leicester begs his lady's pardon. she was about to say?

"only that mr. rouncewell is here (he has called by my appointment)
and that we had better make an end of the question of that girl. i am
tired to death of the matter."

"what can i do--to--assist?" demands sir leices
 
 ___________________________
 
est the iron gentleman to walk this way."

mercury departs in search of the iron gentleman, finds, and produces
him. sir leicester receives that ferruginous person graciously.

"i hope you are well, mr. rouncewell. be seated. (my solicitor, mr.
tulkinghorn.) my lady was desirous, mr. rouncewell," sir leicester
skilfully transfers him with a solemn wave of his hand, "was desirous
to speak with you. hem!"

"i shall be very happy," returns the iron gentleman, "to give my best
attention to anything lady dedlock does me the honour to say."

as he turns towards her, he finds that the impression she makes upon
him is less agreeable than on the former occasion. a distant
supercilious air makes a cold atmosphere about her, and there is
nothing in her bearing, as there was before, to encourage openness.

"pray, sir," says lady dedlock listlessly, "may i be allowed to
inquire whether anything has passed between you and your son
respecting your son's fancy?"

it is almost too troublesome to her languid eyes t
 
 ___________________________
 
o bestow a look
upon him as she asks this question.

"if my memory serves me, lady dedlock, i said, when i had the
pleasure of seeing you before, that i should seriously advise my son
to conquer that--fancy." the ironmaster repeats her expression with a
little emphasis.

"and did you?"

"oh! of course i did."

sir leicester gives a nod, approving and confirmatory. very proper.
the iron gentleman, having said that he would do it, was bound to do
it. no difference in this respect between the base metals and the
precious. highly proper.

"and pray has he done so?"

"really, lady dedlock
 
 ___________________________
 
 is
perfectly good-humoured and polite, but within such limits, evidently
adapts his tone to his reception.

"because," proceeds my lady, "i have been thinking of the subject,
which is tiresome to me."

"i am very sorry, i am sure."

"and also of what sir leicester said upon it, in which i quite
concur"--sir leicester flattered--"and if you cannot give us the
assurance that this fancy is at an end, i have come to the conclusion
that the girl had better leave me."

"i can give no such assurance, lady dedlock. nothing of the kind."

"then she had better go."

"excuse me, my lady," sir leicester considerately interposes, "but
perhaps this may be doing an injury to the young woman which she has
not merited. here is a young woman," says sir leicester,
magnificently laying out the matter with his right hand like a
service of plate, "whose good fortune it is to have attracted the
notice and favour of an eminent lady and to live, under the
protection of that eminent lady, surrounded by the various advanta
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst her, but she is so far insensible to her many
advantages and her good fortune that she is in love--or supposes she
is, poor little fool--and unable to appreciate them."

sir leicester begs to observe that wholly alters the case. he might
have been sure that my lady had the best grounds and reasons in
support of her view. he entirely agrees with my lady. the young woman
had better go.

"as sir leicester observed, mr. rouncewell, on the last occasion when
we were fatigued by this business," lady dedlock languidly proceeds,
"we cannot make conditions with you. without conditions, and under
present circumstances, the girl is quite misplaced here and had
better go. i have told her so. would you wish to have her sent back
to the village, or would you like to take her with you, or what would
you prefer?"

"lady dedlock, if i may speak plainly--"

"by all means."

"--i should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of
the incumbrance and remove her from her present position."

"and to s
 
 ___________________________
 
!"
says the ironmaster, checking her in a low voice, though not angrily.
"have a spirit, if you're fond of watt!" my lady merely waves her off
with indifference, saying, "there, there, child! you are a good girl.
go away!" sir leicester has magnificently disengaged himself from the
subject and retired into the sanctuary of his blue coat. mr.
tulkinghorn, an indistinct form against the dark street now dotted
with lamps, looms in my lady's view, bigger and blacker than before.

"sir leicester and lady dedlock," says mr. rouncewell after a pause
of a few moments, "i beg to take my leave, with an apology for having
again troubled you, though not of my own act, on this tiresome
subject. i can very well understand, i assure you, how tiresome so
small a matter must have become to lady dedlock. if i am doubtful of
my dealing with it, it is only because i did not at first quietly
exert my influence to take my young friend here away without
troubling you at all. but it appeared to me--i dare say magnifying

 
 ___________________________
 
uncewell," he returns, "do not mention it.
justifications are unnecessary, i hope, on either side."

"i am glad to hear it, sir leicester; and if i may, by way of a last
word, revert to what i said before of my mother's long connexion with
the family and the worth it bespeaks on both sides, i would point out
this little instance here on my arm who shows herself so affectionate
and faithful in parting and in whom my mother, i dare say, has done
something to awaken such feelings--though of course lady dedlock, by
her heartfelt interest and her genial condescension, has done much
more."

if he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks. he points
it, however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner of
speech, though in saying it he turns towards that part of the dim
room where my lady sits. sir leicester stands to return his parting
salutation, mr. tulkinghorn again rings, mercury takes another
flight, and mr. rouncewell and rosa leave the house.

then lights are brought in, discove
 
 ___________________________
 
im and my lady still
sitting with his figure before her, closing up her view of the night
as well as of the day. she is very pale. mr. tulkinghorn, observing
it as she rises to retire, thinks, "well she may be! the power of
this woman is astonishing. she has been acting a part the whole
time." but he can act a part too--his one unchanging character--and
as he holds the door open for this woman, fifty pairs of eyes, each
fifty times sharper than sir leicester's pair, should find no flaw in
him.

lady dedlock dines alone in her own room to-day. sir leicester is
whipped in to the rescue of the doodle party and the discomfiture of
the coodle faction. lady dedlock asks on sitting down to dinner,
still deadly pale (and quite an illustration of the debilitated
cousin's text), whether he is gone out? yes. whether mr. tulkinghorn
is gone yet? no. presently she asks again, is he gone yet? no. what
is he doing? mercury thinks he is writing letters in the library.
would my lady wish to see him? anything but t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat.

but he wishes to see my lady. within a few more minutes he is
reported as sending his respects, and could my lady please to receive
him for a word or two after her dinner? my lady will receive him now.
he comes now, apologizing for intruding, even by her permission,
while she is at table. when they are alone, my lady waves her hand to
dispense with such mockeries.

"what do you want, sir?"

"why, lady dedlock," says the lawyer, taking a chair at a little
distance from her and slowly rubbing his rusty legs up and down, up
and down, up and down, "i am rather surprised by the course you have
taken."

"indeed?"

"yes, decidedly. i was not prepared for it. i consider it a departure
from our agreement and your promise. it puts us in a new position,
lady dedlock. i feel myself under the necessity of saying that i
don't approve of it."

he stops in his rubbing and looks at her, with his hands on his
knees. 
 
 ___________________________
 
imperturbable and unchangeable as he is, there is still an
indefinable freedom in his manner which is new and which does not
escape this woman's observation.

"i do not quite understand you."

"oh, yes you do, i think. i think you do. come, come, lady dedlock,
we must not fence and parry now. you know you like this girl."

"well, sir?"

"and you know--and i know--that you have not sent her away for the
reasons you have assigned, but for the purpose of separating her as
much as possible from--excuse my mentioning it as a matter of
business--any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself."

"well, sir?"

"well, lady dedlock," returns the lawyer, crossing his legs and
nursing the uppermost knee. "i object to that. i consider that a
dangerous proce
 
 ___________________________
 
eding. i know it to be unnecessary and calculated to
awaken speculation, doubt, rumour, i don't know what, in the house.
besides, it is a violation of our agreement. you were to be exactly
what you were before. whereas, it must be evident to yourself, as it
is to me, that you have been this evening very different from what
you were before. why, bless my soul, lady dedlock, transparently so!"

"if, sir," she begins, "in my knowledge of my secret--" but he
interrupts her.

"now, lady dedlock, this is a matter of business, and in a matter of
business the ground cannot be kept too clear. it is no longer your
secret. excuse me. that is just the mistake. it is my secret, in
trust for sir leicester and the family. if it were your secret, lady
dedlock, we should not be here holding this conversation."

"that is very true. if in my knowledge of the secret i do what i can
to spare an innocent girl (especially, remembering your own reference
to her when you told my story to the assembled gu
 
 ___________________________
 
ests at chesney
wold) from the taint of my impending shame, i act upon a resolution i
have taken. nothing in the world, and no one in the world, could
shake it or could move me." this she says with great deliberation and
distinctness and with no more outward passion than himself. as for
him, he methodically discusses his matter of business as if she were
any insensible instrument used in business.

"really? then you see, lady dedlock," he returns, "you are not to be
trusted. you have put the case in a perfectly plain way, and
according to the literal fact; and that being the case, you are not
to be trusted."

"perhaps you may remember that i expressed some anxiety on this same
point when we spoke at night at chesney wold?"

"yes," says mr. tulkinghorn, coolly getting up and standing on the
hearth. "yes. i recollect, lady dedlock, that you certainly referred
to the girl, but that was before we came to our arrangement, and bo
 
 ___________________________
 
th
the letter and the spirit of our arrangement altogether precluded any
action on your part founded upon my discovery. there can be no doubt
about that. as to sparing the girl, of what importance or value is
she? spare! lady dedlock, here is a family name compromised. one
might have supposed that the course was straight on--over everything,
neither to the right nor to the left, regardless of all
considerations in the way, sparing nothing, treading everything under
foot."

she has been looking at the table. she lifts up her eyes and looks at
him. there is a stern expression on her face and a part of her lower
lip is compressed under her teeth. "this woman understands me," mr.
tulkinghorn thinks as she lets her glance fall a
 
 ___________________________
 
gain. "she cannot be
spared. why should she spare others?"

for a little while they are silent. lady dedlock has eaten no dinner,
but has twice or thrice poured out water with a steady hand and drunk
it. she rises from table, takes a lounging-chair, and reclines in it,
shading her face. there is nothing in her manner to express weakness
or excite compassion. it is thoughtful, gloomy, concentrated. "this
woman," thinks mr. tulkinghorn, standing on the hearth, again a dark
object closing up her view, "is a study."

he studies her at his leisure, not speaking for a time. she too
studies something at her 
 
 ___________________________
 
leisure. she is not the first to speak,
appearing indeed so unlikely to be so, though he stood there until
midnight, that even he is driven upon breaking silence.

"lady dedlock, the most disagreeable part of this business interview
remains, but it is business. our agreement is broken. a lady of your
sense and strength of character will be prepared for my now declaring
it void and taking my own course."

"i am quite prepared."

mr. tulkinghorn inclines his head. "that is all i have to trouble you
with, lady dedlock."

she stops him as he is moving out of the room by asking, "this is the
notice i was to receive? i wish not to misapprehend you."

"not exactly the notice 
 
 ___________________________
 
you were to receive, lady dedlock, because
the contemplated notice supposed the agreement to have been observed.
but virtually the same, virtually the same. the difference is merely
in a lawyer's mind."

"you intend to give me no other notice?"

"you are right. no."

"do you contemplate undeceiving sir leicester to-night?"

"a home question!" says mr. tulkinghorn with a slight smile and
cautiously shaking his head at the shaded face. "no, not to-night."

"to-morrow?"

"all things considered, i had better decline answering that 
 
 ___________________________
 
question,
lady dedlock. if i were to say i don't know when, exactly, you would
not believe me, and it would answer no purpose. it may be to-morrow.
i would rather say no more. you are prepared, and i hold out no
expectations which circumstances might fail to justify. i wish you
good evening."

she removes her hand, turns her pale face towards him as he walks
silently to the door, and stops him once again as he is about to open
it.

"do you intend to remain in the house any time? i heard you were
writing in the librar
 
 ___________________________
 
eflect that it was a green thing to write them. for
these reasons he has very little to do with letters, either as sender
or receiver. and yet he has received a round half-dozen within the
last twenty-four hours.

"and this," says mr. bucket, spreading it out on the table, "is in
the same hand, and consists of the same two words."

what two words?

he turns the key in the door, ungirdles his black pocket-book (book
of fate to many), lays another letter by it, and reads, boldly
written in each, "lady dedlock."

"yes, yes," says mr. bucket. "but i could have made the money without
this anonymous information."

having put the letters in his book of fate and girdled it up again,
he unlocks the door just in time to admit his dinner, which is
brought upon a goodly tray with a decanter of sherry. mr. bucket
frequently observes, in friendly circles where there is no restraint,
that he likes a toothful of your fine old brown east inder sherry
better than anything you can offer him. consequently he fills an
 
 ___________________________
 
ily
affairs."

"i thank you for your preparation," returns sir leicester after a
silence, without moving hand, foot, or feature, "which i hope is not
necessary; though i give it credit for being well intended. be so
good as to go on. also"--sir leicester seems to shrink in the shadow
of his figure--"also, to take a seat, if you have no objection."

none at all. mr. bucket brings a chair and diminishes his shadow.
"now, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, with this short preface i come
to the point. lady dedlock--"

sir leicester raises himself in his seat and stares at him fiercely.
mr. bucket brings the finger into play as an emollient.

"lady dedlock, you see she's universally admired. that's what her
ladyship is; she's universally admired," says mr. bucket.

"i would greatly prefer, officer," sir leicester returns stiffly, "my
lady's name being entirely omitted from this discussion."

"so would i, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, but--it's impossible."

"impossible?"

mr. bucket shakes his relentles
 
 ___________________________
 
on persons
to trifle with!"

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i say what i must say, and no more."

"i hope it may prove so. very well. go on. go on, sir!" glancing at
the angry eyes which now avoid him and at the angry figure trembling
from head to foot, yet striving to be still, mr. bucket feels his way
with his forefinger and in a low voice proceeds.

"sir leicester dedlock, baronet, it becomes my duty to tell you that
the deceased mr. tulkinghorn long entertained mistrusts and
suspicions of lady dedlock."

"if he had dared to breathe them to me, sir--which he never did--i
would have killed him myself!" exclaims sir leicester, striking his
hand upon the table. but in the very heat and fury of the act he
stops, fixed by the knowing eyes of mr. bucket, whose forefinger is
slowly going and who, with mingled confidence and patience, shakes
his head.

"sir leicester dedlock, the deceased mr. tulkinghorn was deep and
close, and what he fully had in his mind in the very beginning i
can't quite take up
 
 ___________________________
 
on myself to say. but i know from his lips that he
long ago suspected lady dedlock of having discovered, through the
sight of some handwriting--in this very house, and when you yourself,
sir leicester dedlock, were present--the existence, in great poverty,
of a certain person who had been her lover before you courted her and
who ought to have been her husband." mr. bucket stops and
deliberately repeats, "ought to have been her husband, not a doubt
about it. i know from his lips that when that person soon afterwards
died, he suspected lady dedlock of visiting his wretched lodg
 
 ___________________________
 
ing and
his wretched grave, alone and in secret. i know from my own inquiries
and through my eyes and ears that lady dedlock did make such visit in
the dress of her own maid, for the deceased mr. tulkinghorn employed
me to reckon up her ladyship--if you'll excuse my making use of the
term we commonly employ--and i reckoned her up, so far, completely. i
confronted the maid in the chambers in lincoln's inn fields with a
witness who had been lady dedlock's guide, and there couldn't be the
shadow of a doubt that she had worn the young woman's dress, unknown
to her. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i did endeavour to pave the
way a little towards these unpleasant disclosures yesterday by saying
that very strange things happened even in high families sometimes.
all this, and more, has happened in your own family, and to and
through your own lady. it's my belief that the deceased mr.
tulkinghorn followed up these inquiries to the hour of his death a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
that he and lady dedlock even had bad blood between them upon the
matter that very night. now, only you put that to lady dedlock, sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, and ask her ladyship whether, even after
he had left here, she didn't go down to his chambers with the
intention of saying something further to him, dressed in a loose
black mantle with a deep fringe to it."

sir leicester sits like a statue, gazing at the cruel finger that is
probing the life-blood of his heart.

"you put that to her ladyship, sir leicester dedlock, baronet, from
me, inspector bucket of the detective. and if her ladyship makes any
difficulty ab
 
 ___________________________
 
oman would overdo it in new directions, was i wrong or right?
i was right. what does she try to do? don't let it give you a turn?
to throw the murder on her ladyship."

sir leicester rises from his chair and staggers down again.

"and she got encouragement in it from hearing that i was always here,
which was done a-purpose. now, open that pocket-book of mine, sir
leicester dedlock, if i may take the liberty of throwing it towards
you, and look at the letters sent to me, each with the two words
'lady dedlock' in it. open the one directed to yourself, which i
stopped this very morning, and read the three words 'lady dedlock,
murderess' in it. these letters have been falling about like a shower
of lady-birds. what do you say now to mrs. bucket, from her spy-place
having seen them all 'written by this young woman? what do you say to
mrs. bucket having, within this half-hour, secured the corresponding
ink and paper, fellow half-sheets and what not? what do you say to
mrs. bucket having watched the post
 
 ___________________________
 
 down and take your breath."

"oh, my lady, my lady. i have found my son--my youngest, who went
away for a soldier so long ago. and he is in prison."

"for debt?"

"oh, no, my lady; i would have paid any debt, and joyful."

"for what is he in prison then?"

"charged with a murder, my lady, of which he is as innocent as--as i
am. accused of the murder of mr. tulkinghorn."

what does she mean by this look and this imploring gesture? why does
she come so close? what is the letter that she holds?

"lady dedlock, my dear lady, my good lady, my kind lady! you must
have a heart to feel for me, you must have a heart to forgive me. i
was in this family before you were born. i am devoted to it. but
think of my dear son wrongfully accused."

"i do not accuse him."

"no, my lady, no. but others do, and he is in prison and in danger.
oh, lady dedlock, if you can say but a word to help to clear him, say
it!"

what delusion can this be? what power does she suppose is in the
person she petitions to avert this unj
 
 ___________________________
 
think of a faithful servant whose whole life has been
passed in this family which she dearly loves, and relent, and help to
clear my son! my lady, my good lady," the old housekeeper pleads with
genuine simplicity, "i am so humble in my place and you are by nature
so high and distant that you may not think what i feel for my child,
but i feel so much that i have come here to make so bold as to beg
and pray you not to be scornful of us if you can do us any right or
justice at this fearful time!"

lady dedlock raises her without one word, until she takes the letter
from her hand.

"am i to read this?"

"when i am gone, my lady, if you please, and then remembering the
most that i consider possible."

"i know of nothing i can do. i know of nothing i reserve that can
affect your son. i have never accused him."

"my lady, you may pity him the more under a false accusation after
reading the letter."

the old housekeeper leaves her with the letter in her hand. in truth
she is not a hard lady naturally, and
 
 ___________________________
 
tached.

it falls out of her hand. how long it may have lain upon the ground
she knows not, but it lies where it fell when a servant stands before
her announcing the young man of the name of guppy. the words have
probably been repeated several times, for they are ringing in her
head before she begins to understand them.

"let him come in!"

he comes in. holding the letter in her hand, which she has taken from
the floor, she tries to collect her thoughts. in the eyes of mr.
guppy she is the same lady dedlock, holding the same prepared, proud,
chilling state.

"your ladyship may not be at first disposed to excuse this visit from
one who has never been welcome to your ladyship"--which he don't
complain of, for he is bound to confess that there never has been any
particular reason on the face of things why he should be--"but i hope
when i mention my motives to your ladyship you will not find fault
with me," says mr. guppy.

"do so."

"thank your ladyship. i ought first to explain to your ladyship," mr
 
 ___________________________
 
fe imprinted on my 'eart
until erased by circumstances over which i had no control,
communicated to me, after i had the pleasure of waiting on your
ladyship last, that she particularly wished me to take no steps
whatever in any manner at all relating to her. and miss summerson's
wishes being to me a law (except as connected with circumstances over
which i have no control), i consequently never expected to have the
distinguished honour of waiting on your ladyship again."

and yet he is here now, lady dedlock moodily reminds him.

"and yet i am here now," mr. guppy admits. "my object being to
communicate to your ladyship, under the seal of confidence, why i am
here."

he cannot do so, she tells him, too plainly or too briefly. "nor can
i," mr. guppy returns with a sense of injury upon him, "too
particularly request your ladyship to take particular notice that
it's no personal affair of mine that brings me here. i have no
interested views of my own to serve in coming here. if it was not for
my promis
 
 ___________________________
 
last time i
was here i run against a party very eminent in our profession and
whose loss we all deplore. that party certainly did from that time
apply himself to cutting in against me in a way that i will call
sharp practice, and did make it, at every turn and point, extremely
difficult for me to be sure that i hadn't inadvertently led up to
something contrary to miss summerson's wishes. self-praise is no
recommendation, but i may say for myself that i am not so bad a man
of business neither."

lady dedlock looks at him in stern inquiry. mr. guppy immediately
withdraws his eyes from her face and looks anywhere else.

"indeed, it has been made so hard," he goes on, "to have any idea
what that party was up to in combination with others that until the
loss which we all deplore i was gravelled--an expression which your
ladyship, moving in the higher circles, will be so good as to
consider tantamount to knocked over. small likewise--a name by which
i refer to another party, a friend of mine that your l
 
 ___________________________
 
at document, and hopping about from table to table with her glass
at her eye in an inquisitive and restless manner. in the course of
these researches she stumbles over something, and turning her glass
in that direction, sees her kinsman lying on the ground like a felled
tree.

volumnia's pet little scream acquires a considerable augmentation of
reality from this surprise, and the house is quickly in commotion.
servants tear up and down stairs, bells are violently rung, doctors
are sent for, and lady dedlock is sought in all directions, but not
found. nobody has seen or heard her since she last rang her bell. her
letter to sir leicester is discovered on her table, but it is
doubtful yet whether he has not received another missive from another
world requiring to be personally answered, and all the living
languages, and all the dead, are as one to him.

they lay him down upon his bed, and chafe, and rub, and fan, and put
ice to his head, and try every means of restoration. howbeit, the day
has ebbed 
 
 ___________________________
 
shave till i have found
what i go in search of. say everything as is kind and forgiving on
your part? sir leicester dedlock, baronet, i will. and i wish you
better, and these family affairs smoothed over--as, lord, many other
family affairs equally has been, and equally will be, to the end of
time."

with this peroration, mr. bucket, buttoned up, goes quietly out,
looking steadily before him as if he were already piercing the night
in quest of the fugitive.

his first step is to take himself to lady dedlock's rooms and look
all over them for any trifling indication that may help him. the
rooms are in darkness now; and to see mr. bucket with a wax-light in
his hand, holding it above his head and taking a sharp mental
inventory of the many delicate objects so curiously at variance with
himself, would be to see a sight--which nobody does see, as he is
particular to lock himself in.

"a spicy boudoir, this," says mr. bucket, who feels in a manner
furbished up in his french by the blow of the morning. 
 
 ___________________________
 
team again.

mr. jarndyce, the only person up in the house, is just going to bed,
rises from his book on hearing the rapid ringing at the bell, and
comes down to the door in his dressing-gown.

"don't be alarmed, sir." in a moment his visitor is confidential with
him in the hall, has shut the door, and stands with his hand upon the
lock. "i've had the pleasure of seeing you before. inspector bucket.
look at that handkerchief, sir, miss esther summerson's. found it
myself put away in a drawer of lady dedlock's, quarter of an hour
ago. not a moment to lose. matter of life or death. you know lady
dedlock?"

"yes."

"there has been a discovery there to-day. family affairs have come
out. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, has had a fit--apoplexy or
paralysis--and couldn't be brought to, and precious time has been
lost. lady dedlock disappeared this afternoon and left a letter for
him that looks bad. run your eye over it. here it is!"

mr. jarndyce, having read it, asks him what he thinks.

"i don't know. 
 
 ___________________________
 
son."

mr. jarndyce in a troubled voice repeats, "miss summerson?"

"now, mr. jarndyce"--mr. bucket has read his face with the greatest
attention all along--"i speak to you as a gentleman of a humane
heart, and under such pressing circumstances as don't often happen.
if ever delay was dangerous, it's dangerous now; and if ever you
couldn't afterwards forgive yourself for causing it, this is the
time. eight or ten hours, worth, as i tell you, a hundred pound
apiece at least, have been lost since lady dedlock disappeared. i am
charged to find her. i am inspector bucket. besides all the rest
that's heavy on her, she has upon her, as she believes, suspicion of
murder. if i follow her alone, she, being in ignorance of what sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, has communicated to me, may be driven to
desperation. but if i follow her in company with a young lady,
answering to the description of a young lady that she has a
tenderness for--i ask no question, and i say no more than that--she
will give me credit 
 
 ___________________________
 
an's candle, read to
me in the hall a letter that my mother had left upon her table; and i
suppose within ten minutes of my having been aroused i was sitting
beside him, rolling swiftly through the streets.

his manner was very keen, and yet considerate when he explained to me
that a great deal might depend on my being able to answer, without
confusion, a few questions that he wished to ask me. these were,
chiefly, whether i had had much communication with my mother (to whom
he only referred as lady dedlock), when and where i had spoken with
her last, and how she had become possessed of my handkerchief. when i
had satisfied him on these points, he asked me particularly to
consider--taking time to think--whether within my knowledge there was
any one, no matter where, in whom she might be at all likely to
confide under circumstances of the last necessity. i could think of
no one but my guardian. but by and by i mentioned mr. boythorn. he
came into my mind as connected with his old chivalrous manner 
 
 ___________________________
 
" he asked me as his eyes
met mine. "it's a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out
in."

i told him i cared for no weather and was warmly clothed.

"it may be a long job," he observed; "but so that it ends well, never
mind, miss."

"i pray to heaven it may end well!" said i.

he nodded comfortingly. "you see, whatever you do, don't you go and
fret yourself. you keep yourself cool and equal for anything that may
happen, and it'll be the better for you, the better for me, the
better for lady dedlock, and the better for sir leicester dedlock,
baronet."

he was really very kind and gentle, and as he stood before the fire
warming his boots and rubbing his face with his forefinger, i felt a
confidence in his sagacity which reassured me. it was not yet a
quarter to two when i heard horses' feet and wheels outside. "now,
miss summerson," said he, "we are off, if you please!"

he gave me his arm, and the two officers courteously bowed me out,
and we found at the door a phaeton or barouche with a 
 
 ___________________________
 
p--mere sheep.
where two or three marked ones go, all the rest follow. keep those
two or three in your eye, mr. jones, and you have the flock." so,
likewise, sheen and gloss to their jones, in reference to knowing
where to have the fashionable people and how to bring what they
(sheen and gloss) choose into fashion. on similar unerring
principles, mr. sladdery the librarian, and indeed the great farmer
of gorgeous sheep, admits this very day, "why yes, sir, there
certainly are reports concerning lady dedlock, very current indeed
among my high connexion, sir. you see, my high connexion must talk
about something, sir; and it's only to get a subject into vogue with
one or two ladies i could name to make it go down with the whole.
just what i should have done with those ladies, sir, in the case of
any novelty you had left to me to bring in, they have done of
themselves in this case through knowing lady dedlock and being
perhaps a little innocently jealous of her too, sir. you'll find,
sir, that this to
 
 ___________________________
 
-in case i should relapse,
in case i should not recover, in case i should lose both my speech
and the power of writing, though i hope for better things--"

the old housekeeper weeping silently; volumnia in the greatest
agitation, with the freshest bloom on her cheeks; the trooper with
his arms folded and his head a little bent, respectfully attentive.

"therefore i desire to say, and to call you all to
witness--beginning, volumnia, with yourself, most solemnly--that i am
on unaltered terms with lady dedlock. that i assert no cause whatever
of complaint against her. that i have ever had the strongest
affection for her, and that i retain it undiminished. say this to
herself, and to every one. if you ever say less than this, you will
be guilty of deliberate falsehood to me."

volumnia tremblingly protests that she will observe his injunctions
to the letter.

"my lady is too high in position, too handsome, too accomplished, too
superior in most respects to the best of those by whom she is
surrounded, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e hour, poor crazed miss flite came
weeping to me and told me she had given her birds their liberty.




chapter lxvi

down in lincolnshire


there is a hush upon chesney wold in these altered days, as there is
upon a portion of the family history. the story goes that sir
leicester paid some who could have spoken out to hold their peace;
but it is a lame story, feebly whispering and creeping about, and any
brighter spark of life it shows soon dies away. it is known for
certain that the handsome lady dedlock lies in the mausoleum in the
park, where the trees arch darkly overhead, and the owl is heard at
night making the woods ring; but whence she was brought home to be
laid among the echoes of that solitary place, or how she died, is all
mystery. some of her old friends, principally to be found among the
peachy-cheeked charmers with the skeleton throats, did once
occasionally say, as they toyed in a ghastly manner with large
fans--like charmers reduced to flirting with grim death, after losing
all 