thing else
suits."

mr. jobling, mr. guppy, and mr. smallweed all lean their elbows on
the table and their chins upon their hands, and look at the ceiling.
after a time, they all drink, slowly lean back, put their hands in
their pockets, and look at one another.

"if i had the energy i once possessed, tony!" says mr. guppy with a
sigh. "but there are chords in the human mind--"

expressing the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum-and-water,
mr. guppy concludes by resigning the adventure to tony jobling and
informing him that during the vacation and while things are slack,
his purse, "as far as three or four or even five pound goes," will be
at his disposal. "for never shall it be said," mr. guppy adds with
emphasis, "that william guppy turned his back upon his friend!"

the latter part of the proposal is so directly to the purpose that
mr. jobling says with emotion, "guppy, my trump, your fist!" mr.
guppy presents it, saying, "jobling, my boy, there it is!" mr.
jobling returns, "guppy, we have
 
 ___________________________
 
beloved grandchild and pats it tenderly.

"but, i say," he whispers, with his eyes screwed up, after tasting
it, "this ain't the lord chancellor's fourteenpenny. this is
eighteenpenny!"

"i thought you might like that better," says mr. guppy.

"you're a nobleman, sir," returns krook with another taste, and his
hot breath seems to come towards them like a flame. "you're a baron
of the land."

taking advantage of this auspicious moment, mr. guppy presents his
friend under the impromptu name of mr. weevle and states the object
of their visit. krook, with his bottle under his arm (he never gets
beyond a certain point of either drunkenness or sobriety), takes time
to survey his proposed lodger and seems to approve of him. "you'd
like to see the room, young man?" he says. "ah! it's a good room!
been whitewashed. been cleaned down with soft soap and soda. hi! it's
worth twice the rent, letting alone my company when you want it and
such a cat to keep the mice away."

commending the room after this ma
 
 ___________________________
 
nner, the old man takes them
upstairs, where indeed they do find it cleaner than it used to be and
also containing some old articles of furniture which he has dug up
from his inexhaustible stores. the terms are easily concluded--for
the lord chancellor cannot be hard on mr. guppy, associated as he is
with kenge and carboy, jarndyce and jarndyce, and other famous claims
on his professional consideration--and it is agreed that mr. weevle
shall take possession on the morrow. mr. weevle and mr. guppy then
repair to cook's court, cursitor street, where the personal
introduction of the former to mr. snagsby is effected and (more
important) the vote and interest of mrs. snagsby are secured. they
then report progress to the eminent smallweed, waiting at the office
in his tall hat for that purpose, and separate, mr. guppy explaining
that he would terminate his little entertainment by standing treat at
the play but that there are chords in the human mind which would
render it a holl
 
 ___________________________
 
ow mockery.

on the morrow, in the dusk of evening, mr. weevle modestly appears at
krook's, by no means incommoded with luggage, and establishes himself
in his new lodging, where the two eyes in the shutters stare at him
in his sleep, as if they were full of wonder. on the following day
mr. weevle, who is a handy good-for-nothing kind of young fellow,
borrows a needle and thread of miss flite and a hammer of his
landlord and goes to work devising apologies for window-curtains, and
knocking up apologies for shelves, and hanging up his two teacups,
milkpot, and crockery sundries on a pennyworth of little hooks, like
a shipwrecked sailor making the best of it.

but what mr. weevle prizes most of all his few possessions (next
after his light whiskers, for which he has an attachment that only
 
 ___________________________
 
 that art, combined
with capital, is capable of producing. with these magnificent
portraits, unworthily confined in a band-box during his seclusion
among the market-gardens, he decorates his apartment; and as the
galaxy gallery of british beauty wears every variety of fancy dress,
plays every variety of musical instrument, fondles every variety of
dog, ogles every variety of prospect, and is backed up by every
variety of flower-pot and balustrade, the result is very imposing.

but fashion is mr. weevle's, as it was tony jobling's, weakness. to
borrow yesterday's paper from the sol's arms of an evening and read
about the brilliant and distinguished meteors that are shooting
across the fashionable sky in every direction is unspeakable
consolation to him. to know what member of what brilliant and
distinguished circle accomplished the brilliant and distinguished
feat of joining it yesterday or contemplates the no less brilliant
and distinguished feat of leaving it to-morrow gives him a thrill of

 
 ___________________________
 
joy. to be informed what the galaxy gallery of british beauty is
about, and means to be about, and what galaxy marriages are on the
tapis, and what galaxy rumours are in circulation, is to become
acquainted with the most glorious destinies of mankind. mr. weevle
reverts from this intelligence to the galaxy portraits implicated,
and seems to know the originals, and to be known of them.

for the rest he is a quiet lodger, full of handy shifts and devices
as before mentioned, able to cook and clean for himself as well as to
carpenter, and developing social inclinations after the shades of
evening have fallen on the court. at those times, when he is not
visited by mr. guppy or by a small light in his likeness quenched in
a dark hat, he comes out of his dul
 
 ___________________________
 
is beat, on the hypothesis
that every one is either robbing or being robbed.

it is a close night, though the damp cold is searching too, and there
is a laggard mist a little way up in the air. it is a fine steaming
night to turn the slaughter-houses, the unwholesome trades, the
sewerage, bad water, and burial-grounds to account, and give the
registrar of deaths some extra business. it may be something in the
air--there is plenty in it--or it may be something in himself that is
in fault; but mr. weevle, otherwise jobling, is very ill at ease. he
comes and goes between his own room and the open street door twenty
times an hour. he has been doing so ever since it fell dark. since
the chancellor shut up his shop, which he did very early to-night,
mr. weevle has been down and up, and down and up (with a cheap tight
velvet skull-cap on his head, making his whiskers look out of all
proportion), oftener than before.

it is no phenomenon that mr. snagsby should be ill at ease too, for
he always is so
 
 ___________________________
 
on him. impelled by the mystery of which he is a
partaker and yet in which he is not a sharer, mr. snagsby haunts what
seems to be its fountain-head--the rag and bottle shop in the court.
it has an irresistible attraction for him. even now, coming round by
the sol's arms with the intention of passing down the court, and out
at the chancery lane end, and so terminating his unpremeditated
after-supper stroll of ten minutes' long from his own door and back
again, mr. snagsby approaches.

"what, mr. weevle?" says the stationer, stopping to speak. "are you
there?"

"aye!" says weevle, "here i am, mr. snagsby."

"airing yourself, as i am doing, before you go to bed?" the stationer
inquires.

"why, there's not much air to be got here; and what there is, is not
very freshening," weevle answers, glancing up and down the court.

"very true, sir. don't you observe," says mr. snagsby, pausing to
sniff and taste the air a little, "don't you observe, mr. weevle,
that you're--not to put too fine a point upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n it--that you're rather
greasy here, sir?"

"why, i have noticed myself that there is a queer kind of flavour in
the place to-night," mr. weevle rejoins. "i suppose it's chops at the
sol's arms."

"chops, do you think? oh! chops, eh?" mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes
again. "well, sir, i suppose it is. but i should say their cook at
the sol wanted a little looking after. she has been burning 'em, sir!
and i don't think"--mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes again and then
spits and wipes his mouth--"i don't think--not to put too fine a
point upon it--that they were quite fresh when they were shown the
gridiron."

"that's very likely. it's a taint
 
 ___________________________
 
ing sort of weather."

"it is a tainting sort of weather," says mr. snagsby, "and i find it
sinking to the spirits."

"by george! i find it gives me the horrors," returns mr. weevle.

"then, you see, you live in a lonesome way, and in a lonesome room,
with a black circumstance hanging over it," says mr. snagsby, looking
in past the other's shoulder along the dark passage and then falling
back a step to look up at the house. "i couldn't live in that room
alone, as you do, sir. i should get so fidgety and worried of an
evening, sometimes, that i should be driven to come to the door and
stand here sooner than sit there. but then it's very true that you
didn't see, in your roo
 
 ___________________________
 
 it?" pursues mr. snagsby, coughing his cough
of mild persuasion behind his hand. "mr. krook ought to consider it
in the rent. i hope he does, i am sure."

"i hope he does," says tony. "but i doubt it."

"you find the rent too high, do you, sir?" returns the stationer.
"rents are high about here. i don't know how it is exactly, but the
law seems to put things up in price. not," adds mr. snagsby with his
apologetic cough, "that i mean to say a word against the profession i
get my living by."

mr. weevle again glances up and down the court and then looks at the
stationer. mr. snagsby, blankly catching his eye, looks upward for a
star or so and coughs a cough expressive of not exactly seeing his
way out of this conversation.

"it's a curious fact, sir," he observes, slowly rubbing his hands,
"that he should have been--"

"who's he?" interrupts mr. weevle.

"the deceased, you know," says mr. snagsby, twitching his head and
right eyebrow towards the staircase and tapping his acquaintance on
the bu
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"ah, to be sure!" returns the other as if he were not over-fond of
the subject. "i thought we had done with him."

"i was only going to say it's a curious fact, sir, that he should
have come and lived here, and been one of my writers, and then that
you should come and live here, and be one of my writers too. which
there is nothing derogatory, but far from it in the appellation,"
says mr. snagsby, breaking off with a mistrust that he may have
unpolitely asserted a kind of proprietorship in mr. weevle, "because
i have known writers that have gone into brewers' houses and done
really very respectable indeed. eminently respectable, sir," adds mr.
snagsby with a misgiving that he has not improved the matter.

"it's a curious coincidence, as you say," answers weevle, once more
glancing up and down the court.

"seems a fate in it, don't there?" suggests the stationer.

"there does."

"just so," observes the stationer with his confirmatory cough. "quite
a fate in it. quite a fate. well, mr. weevle
 
 ___________________________
 
. snagsby speaks as if it made him desolate to go,
though he has been casting about for any means of escape ever since
he stopped to speak--"my little woman will be looking for me else.
good night, sir!"

if mr. snagsby hastens home to save his little woman the trouble of
looking for him, he might set his mind at rest on that score. his
little woman has had her eye upon him round the sol's arms all this
time and now glides after him with a pocket handkerchief wrapped over
her head, honouring mr. weevle and his doorway with a searching
glance as she goes past.

"you'll know me again, ma'am, at all events," says mr. weevle to
himself; "and i can't compliment you on your appearance, whoever you
are, with your head tied up in a bundle. is this fellow never
coming!"

this fellow approaches as he speaks. mr. weevle softly holds up his
finger, and draws him into the passage, and closes the street door.
then they go upstairs, mr. weevle heavily, and mr. guppy (for it is
he) very lightly indeed. when 
 
 ___________________________
 
g winding-sheet.

"that's easily improved," mr. guppy observes as he takes the snuffers
in hand.

"is it?" returns his friend. "not so easily as you think. it has been
smouldering like that ever since it was lighted."

"why, what's the matter with you, tony?" inquires mr. guppy, looking
at him, snuffers in hand, as he sits down with his elbow on the
table.

"william guppy," replies the other, "i am in the downs. it's this
unbearably dull, suicidal room--and old boguey downstairs, i
suppose." mr. weevle moodily pushes the snuffers-tray from him with
his elbow, leans his head on his hand, puts his feet on the fender,
and looks at the fire. mr. guppy, observing him, slightly tosses his
head and sits down on the other side of the table in an easy
attitude.

"wasn't that snagsby talking to you, tony?"

"yes, and he--yes, it was snagsby," said mr. weevle, altering the
construction of his sentence.

"on business?"

"no. no business. he was only sauntering by and stopped to prose."

"i thought it was
 
 ___________________________
 
he, "i can make allowances for lowness of spirits, for
no man knows what it is when it does come upon a man better than i
do, and no man perhaps has a better right to know it than a man who
has an unrequited image imprinted on his 'eart. but there are bounds
to these things when an unoffending party is in question, and i will
acknowledge to you, tony, that i don't think your manner on the
present occasion is hospitable or quite gentlemanly."

"this is strong language, william guppy," returns mr. weevle.

"sir, it may be," retorts mr. william guppy, "but i feel strongly
when i use it."

mr. weevle admits that he has been wrong and begs mr. william guppy
to think no more about it. mr. william guppy, however, having got the
advantage, cannot quite release it without a little more injured
remonstrance.

"no! dash it, tony," says that gentleman, "you really ought to be
careful how you wound the feelings of a man who has an unrequited
image imprinted on his 'eart and who is not altogether happy in 
 
 ___________________________
 
leaning on opposite sides of the table, with their heads
very near together, "that he told you of his having taken the bundle
of letters from his lodger's portmanteau?"

"that was the time, sir," answers tony, faintly adjusting his
whiskers. "whereupon i wrote a line to my dear boy, the honourable
william guppy, informing him of the appointment for to-night and
advising him not to call before, boguey being a slyboots."

the light vivacious tone of fashionable life which is usually assumed
by mr. weevle sits so ill upon him to-night that he abandons that and
his whiskers together, and after looking over his shoulder, appears
to yield himself up a prey to the horrors again.

"you are to bring the letters to your room to read and compare, and
to get yourself into a position to tell him all about them. that's
the arrangement, isn't it, tony?" asks mr. guppy, anxiously biting
his thumb-nail.

"you can't speak too low. yes. that's what he and i agreed."

"i tell you what, tony--"

"you can't speak 
 
 ___________________________
 
so that if he should ask to see the real one
while it's in my possession, you can show him the dummy."

"and suppose he detects the dummy as soon as he sees it, which with
his biting screw of an eye is about five hundred times more likely
than not," suggests tony.

"then we'll face it out. they don't belong to him, and they never
did. you found that, and you placed them in my hands--a legal friend
of yours--for security. if he forces us to it, they'll be producible,
won't they?"

"ye-es," is mr. weevle's reluctant admission.

"why, tony," remonstrates his friend, "how you look! you don't doubt
william guppy? you don't suspect any harm?"

"i don't suspect anything more than i know, william," returns the
other gravely.

"and what do you know?" urges mr. guppy, raising his voice a little;
but on his friend's once more warning him, "i tell you, you can't
speak too low," he repeats his question without any sound at all,
forming with his lips only the words, "what do you know?"

"i know three thing
 
 ___________________________
 
inst him, tony."

"may be not, still i don't like it. live here by yourself and see how
you like it."

"as to dead men, tony," proceeds mr. guppy, evading this proposal,
"there have been dead men in most rooms."

"i know there have, but in most rooms you let them alone, and--and
they let you alone," tony answers.

the two look at each other again. mr. guppy makes a hurried remark to
the effect that they may be doing the deceased a service, that he
hopes so. there is an oppressive blank until mr. weevle, by stirring
the fire suddenly, makes mr. guppy start as if his heart had been
stirred instead.

"fah! here's more of this hateful soot hanging about," says he. "let
us open the window a bit and get a mouthful of air. it's too close."

he raises the sash, and they both rest on the window-sill, half in
and half out of the room. the neighbouring houses are too near to
admit of their seeing any sky without craning their necks and looking
up, but lights in frowsy windows here and there, and the rol
 
 ___________________________
 
e shut, after a little forensic
meditation. "he may have found papers in something he bought, where
papers were not supposed to be, and may have got it into his shrewd
head from the manner and place of their concealment that they are
worth something."

"or he may have been taken in, in some pretended bargain. or he may
have been muddled altogether by long staring at whatever he has got,
and by drink, and by hanging about the lord chancellor's court and
hearing of documents for ever," returns mr. weevle.

mr. guppy sitting on the window-sill, nodding his head and balancing
all these possibilities in his mind, continues thoughtfully to tap
it, and clasp it, and measure it with his hand, until he hastily
draws his hand away.

"what, in the devil's name," he says, "is this! look at my fingers!"

a thick, yellow liquor defiles them, which is offensive to the touch
and sight and more offensive to the smell. a stagnant, sickening oil
with some natural repulsion in it that makes them both shudder.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
 triumph
at a jolting gallop perched up aloft on the phoenix and holding on to
that fabulous creature with all his might in the midst of helmets and
torches. one helmet remains behind after careful investigation of all
chinks and crannies and slowly paces up and down before the house in
company with one of the two policemen who have likewise been left in
charge thereof. to this trio everybody in the court possessed of
sixpence has an insatiate desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid
form.

mr. weevle and his friend mr. guppy are within the bar at the sol and
are worth anything to the sol that the bar contains if they will only
stay there. "this is not a time," says mr. bogsby, "to haggle about
money," though he looks something sharply after it, over the counter;
"give your orders, you two gentlemen, and you're welcome to whatever
you put a name to."

thus entreated, the two gentlemen (mr. weevle especially) put names
to so many things that in course of time they find it difficult to
put a n
 
 ___________________________
 
"why, good gracious, gentlemen," says mr. snagsby, somewhat promptly
backed away, "i was at this door last night betwixt ten and eleven
o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodges here."

"indeed?" returns the policeman. "you will find the young man next
door then. now move on here, some of you."

"not hurt, i hope?" says mr. snagsby.

"hurt? no. what's to hurt him!"

mr. snagsby, wholly unable to answer this or any question in his
troubled mind, repairs to the sol's arms and finds mr. weevle
languishing over tea and toast with a considerable expression on him
of exhausted excitement and exhausted tobacco-smoke.

"and mr. guppy likewise!" quoth mr. snagsby. "dear, dear, dear! what
a fate there seems in all this! and my lit--"

mr. snagsby's power of speech deserts him in the formation of the
words "my little woman." for to see that injured female walk into the
sol's arms at that hour of the morning and stand before the
beer-engine, with her eyes fixed upon him like an accusing spiri
 
 ___________________________
 
injured, and accompanies mrs. snagsby from the
sol's arms. before night his doubt whether he may not be responsible
for some inconceivable part in the catastrophe which is the talk of
the whole neighbourhood is almost resolved into certainty by mrs.
snagsby's pertinacity in that fixed gaze. his mental sufferings are
so great that he entertains wandering ideas of delivering himself up
to justice and requiring to be cleared if innocent and punished with
the utmost rigour of the law if guilty.

mr. weevle and mr. guppy, having taken their breakfast, step into
lincoln's inn to take a little walk about the square and clear as
many of the dark cobwebs out of their brains as a little walk may.

"there can be no more favourable time than the present, tony," says
mr. guppy after they have broodingly made out the four sides of the
square, "for a word or two between us upon a point on which we must,
with very little delay, come to an understanding."

"now, i tell you what, william g.!" returns the other
 
 ___________________________
 
a bloodshot eye. "if it's a point of conspiracy, you
needn't take the trouble to mention it. i have had enough of that,
and i ain't going to have any more. we shall have you taking fire
next or blowing up with a bang."

this supposititious phenomenon is so very disagreeable to mr. guppy
that his voice quakes as he says in a moral way, "tony, i should have
thought that what we went through last night would have been a lesson
to you never to be personal any more as long as you lived." to which
mr. weevle returns, "william, i should have thought it would have
been a lesson to you never to conspire any more as long as you
lived." to which mr. guppy says, "who's conspiring?" to which mr.
jobling replies, "why, you are!" to which mr. guppy retorts, "no, i
am not." to which mr. jobling retorts again, "yes, you are!" to which
mr. guppy retorts, "who says so?" to which mr. jobling retorts, "i
say so!" to which mr. guppy retorts, "oh, indeed?" to which mr.
jobling retorts, "yes, indeed!" and both being
 
 ___________________________
 
 now in a heated state,
they walk on silently for a while to cool down again.

"tony," says mr. guppy then, "if you heard your friend out instead of
flying at him, you wouldn't fall into mistakes. but your temper is
hasty and you are not considerate. possessing in yourself, tony, all
that is calculated to charm the eye--"

"oh! blow the eye!" cries mr. weevle, cutting him short. "say what
you have got to say!"

finding his friend in this morose and material condition, mr. guppy
only expresses the finer feelings of his soul through the tone of
injury in which he recommences, "tony, when i say there is a point on
which we must come to an understanding pretty soon, i say so quite
apart from any kind of conspiring, however innocent. you know it is
professionally arranged beforehand in all cases that are tried what
facts the witnesses are to prove. is it
 
 ___________________________
 
 or is it not desirable that
we should know what facts we are to prove on the inquiry into the
death of this unfortunate old mo--gentleman?" (mr. guppy was going to
say "mogul," but thinks "gentleman" better suited to the
circumstances.)

"what facts? the facts."

"the facts bearing on that inquiry. those are"--mr. guppy tells them
off on his fingers--"what we knew of his habits, when you saw him
last, what his condition was then, the discovery that we made, and
how we made it."

"yes," says mr. weevle. "those are about the facts."

"we made the discovery in consequence of his having, in his eccentric
way, an appointment with you at twelve o'clock at night, when you
were to explain some writing to him as you had often done before on
account of his not being able to read. i, spending the evening with
you, was called down--and so forth. the inquiry being only into the
circumstances touching the death of the deceased, it's not necessary
to go beyond these facts, i suppose you'll agree?"

"no!" r
 
 ___________________________
 
eturns mr. weevle. "i suppose not."

"and this is not a conspiracy, perhaps?" says the injured guppy.

"no," returns his friend; "if it's nothing worse than this, i
withdraw the observation."

"now, tony," says mr. guppy, taking his arm again and walking him
slowly on, "i should like to know, in a friendly way, whether you
have yet thought over the many advantages of your continuing to live
at that place?"

"what do you mean?" says tony, stopping.

"whether you have yet thought over the many advantages of your
c
 
 ___________________________
 
ontinuing to live at that place?" repeats mr. guppy, walking him on
again.

"at what place? that place?" pointing in the direction of the rag and
bottle shop.

mr. guppy nods.

"why, i wouldn't pass another night there for any consideration that
you could offer me," says mr. weevle, haggardly staring.

"do you mean it though, tony?"

"mean it! do i look as if i mean it? i feel as if i do; i know that,"
says mr. weevle with a very genuine shudder.

"then the possibility or probability--for such it must be
considered--of your never being disturbed in possession of those
effects lately belonging to a lone old man who seemed to have no
relation in the world, and the certainty of your being able to find
out what he really had got stored up there, don't weigh with you at
all against last night, tony, if i understand you?" says mr. guppy,
biting his thumb with the appetite of vexation.

"certainly not. talk in that
 
 ___________________________
 
 cool way of a fellow's living there?"
cries mr. weevle indignantly. "go and live there yourself."

"oh! i, tony!" says mr. guppy, soothing him. "i have never lived
there and couldn't get a lodging there now, whereas you have got
one."

"you are welcome to it," rejoins his friend, "and--ugh!--you may make
yourself at home in it."

"then you really and truly at this point," says mr. guppy, "give up
the whole thing, if i understand you, tony?"

"you never," returns tony with a most convincing steadfastness, "said
a truer word in all your life. i do!"

 
 ___________________________
 
the
public-house in the court?" and they prepare to bear the venerable
burden to the sol's arms.

"there's your fare!" says the patriarch to the coachman with a fierce
grin and shaking his incapable fist at him. "ask me for a penny more,
and i'll have my lawful revenge upon you. my dear young men, be easy
with me, if you please. allow me to catch you round the neck. i won't
squeeze you tighter than i can help. oh, lord! oh, dear me! oh, my
bones!"

it is well that the sol is not far off, for mr. weevle presents an
apoplectic appearance before half the distance is accomplished. with
no worse aggravation of his symptoms, however, than the utterance of
divers croaking sounds expressive of obstructed respiration, he
fulfils his share of the porterage and the benevolent old gentleman
is deposited by his own desire in the parlour of the sol's arms.

"oh, lord!" gasps mr. smallweed, looking about him, breathless, from
an arm-chair. "oh, dear me! oh, my bones and back! oh, my aches and
pains! sit dow
 
 ___________________________
 
has collapsed. "i
have come to look after the property. shake me up, and call in the
police on duty at the next house to be explained to about the
property. my solicitor will be here presently to protect the
property. transportation or the gallows for anybody who shall touch
the property!" as his dutiful grandchildren set him up, panting, and
putting him through the usual restorative process of shaking and
punching, he still repeats like an echo, "the--the property! the
property! property!"

mr. weevle and mr. guppy look at each other, the former as having
relinquished the whole affair, the latter with a discomfited
countenance as having entertained some lingering expectations yet.
but there is nothing to be done in opposition to the smallweed
interest. mr. tulkinghorn's clerk comes down from his official pew in
the chambers to mention to the police that mr. tulkinghorn is
answerable for its being all correct about the next of kin and that
the papers and effects will be formally taken possess
 
 ___________________________
 
ne subject that is
resolving his existence into itself; besides, it is a justification
to him in his own eyes to have an embodied antagonist and oppressor.

is richard a monster in all this, or would chancery be found rich in
such precedents too if they could be got for citation from the
recording angel?

two pairs of eyes not unused to such people look after him, as,
biting his nails and brooding, he crosses the square and is swallowed
up by the shadow of the southern gateway. mr. guppy and mr. weevle
are the possessors of those eyes, and they have been leaning in
conversation against the low stone parapet under the trees. he passes
close by them, seeing nothing but the ground.

"william," says mr. weevle, adjusting his whiskers, "there's
combustion going on there! it's not a case of spontaneous, but it's
smouldering combustion it is."

"ah!" says mr. guppy. "he wouldn't keep out of jarndyce, and i
suppose he's over head and ears in debt. i never knew much of him. he
was as high as the monum
 
 ___________________________
 
jects which i had an idea of carrying out in the
court with your aid as a friend is to let 'em alone and bury 'em in
oblivion. do you think it possible, do you think it at all likely (i
put it to you, tony, as a friend), from your knowledge of that
capricious and deep old character who fell a prey to the--spontaneous
element, do you, tony, think it at all likely that on second thoughts
he put those letters away anywhere, after you saw him alive, and that
they were not destroyed that night?"

mr. weevle reflects for some time. shakes his head. decidedly thinks
not.

"tony," says mr. guppy as they walk towards the court, "once again
understand me, as a friend. without entering into further
explanations, i may repeat that the idol is down. i have no purpose
to serve now but burial in oblivion. to that i have pledged myself. i
owe it to myself, and i owe it to the shattered image, as also to the
circumstances over which i have no control. if you was to express to
me by a gesture, by a wink, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
you saw lying anywhere in your late
lodgings any papers that so much as looked like the papers in
question, i would pitch them into the fire, sir, on my own
responsibility."

mr. weevle nods. mr. guppy, much elevated in his own opinion by
having delivered these observations, with an air in part forensic and
in part romantic--this gentleman having a passion for conducting
anything in the form of an examination, or delivering anything in the
form of a summing up or a speech--accompanies his friend with dignity
to the court.

never since it has been a court has it had such a fortunatus' purse
of gossip as in the proceedings at the rag and bottle shop.
regularly, every morning at 
 
 ___________________________
 
t that "the dogs love broo" (whatever the nature of that
refreshment may be) with such archness and such a turn of the head
towards next door that she is immediately understood to mean mr.
smallweed loves to find money, and is nightly honoured with a double
encore. for all this, the court discovers nothing; and as mrs. piper
and mrs. perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose appearance
is the signal for a general rally, it is in one continual ferment to
discover everything, and more.

mr. weevle and mr. guppy, with every eye in the court's head upon
them, knock at the closed door of the late lamented's house, in a
high state of popularity. but being contrary to the court's
expectation admitted, they immediately become unpopular and are
considered to mean no good.

the shutters are more or less closed all over the house, and the
ground-floor is sufficiently dark to require candles. introduced into
the back shop by mr. smallweed the younger, they, fresh from the
sunlight, can at first se
 
 ___________________________
 
h dust and dirt and present a
fiendish appearance not relieved by the general aspect of the room.
there is more litter and lumber in it than of old, and it is dirtier
if possible; likewise, it is ghostly with traces of its dead
inhabitant and even with his chalked writing on the wall.

on the entrance of visitors, mr. smallweed and judy simultaneously
fold their arms and stop in their researches.

"aha!" croaks the old gentleman. "how de do, gentlemen, how de do!
come to fetch your property, mr. weevle? that's well, that's well.
ha! ha! we should have been forced to sell you up, sir, to pay your
warehouse room if you had left it here much longer. you feel quite at
home here again, i dare say? glad to see you, glad to see you!"

mr. weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about. mr. guppy's eye follows
mr. weevle's eye. mr. weevle's eye comes back without any new
intelligence in it. mr. guppy's eye comes back and meets mr.
smallweed's eye. that engaging old gentleman is still murmuring, like
some w
 
 ___________________________
 
it with an easy nod.
mr. tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do and
were rather amused by the novelty.

"a good deal of property here, sir, i should say," mr. guppy observes
to mr. smallweed.

"principally rags and rubbish, my dear friend! rags and rubbish! me
and bart and my granddaughter judy are endeavouring to make out an
inventory of what's worth anything to sell. but we haven't come to
much as yet; we--haven't--come--to--hah!"

mr. smallweed has run down again, while mr. weevle's eye, attended by
mr. guppy's eye, has again gone round the room and come back.

"well, sir," says mr. weevle. "we won't intrude any longer if you'll
allow us to go upstairs."

"anywhere, my dear sir, anywhere! you're at home. make yourself so,
pray!"

as they go upstairs, mr. guppy lifts his eyebrows inquiringly and
looks at tony. tony shakes his head. they find the old room very dull
and dismal, with the ashes of the fire that was burning on that
memorable night yet in the discoloured grate.
 
 ___________________________
 
owed so much
commiseration for her on one occasion of his calling in cook's court
in the absence of her perjured husband that she has of late
habitually carried to him all her woes. everybody it appears, the
present company excepted, has plotted against mrs. snagsby's peace.
there is mr. guppy, clerk to kenge and carboy, who was at first as
open as the sun at noon, but who suddenly shut up as close as
midnight, under the influence--no doubt--of mr. snagsby's suborning
and tampering. there is mr. weevle, friend of mr. guppy, who lived
mysteriously up a court, owing to the like coherent causes. there was
krook, deceased; there was nimrod, deceased; and there was jo,
deceased; and they were "all in it." in what, mrs. snagsby does not
with particularity express, but she knows that jo was mr. snagsby's
son, "as well as if a trumpet had spoken it," and she followed mr.
snagsby when he went on his last visit to the boy, and if he was not
his son why did he go? the one occupation of her life has been
 
 ___________________________
 
which we all deplore i was gravelled--an expression which your
ladyship, moving in the higher circles, will be so good as to
consider tantamount to knocked over. small likewise--a name by which
i refer to another party, a friend of mine that your ladyship is not
acquainted with--got to be so close and double-faced that at times it
wasn't easy to keep one's hands off his 'ead. however, what with the
exertion of my humble abilities, and what with the help of a mutual
friend by the name of mr. tony weevle (who is of a high aristocratic
turn and has your ladyship's portrait always hanging up in his room),
i have now reasons for an apprehension as to which i come to put your
ladyship upon your guard. first, will your ladyship allow me to ask
you whether you have had any strange visitors this morning? i don't
mean fashionable visitors, but such visitors, for instance, as miss
barbary's old servant, or as a person without the use of his lower
extremities, carried upstairs similarly to a guy?"

"no!"
 
 ___________________________
 
d my
guardian, "we will certainly receive this hero." so instructions were
given that mr. guppy should be shown in when he came again, and they
were scarcely given when he did come again.

he was embarrassed when he found my guardian with me, but recovered
himself and said, "how de do, sir?"

"how do you do, sir?" returned my guardian.

"thank you, sir, i am tolerable," returned mr. guppy. "will you allow
me to introduce my mother, mrs. guppy of the old street road, and my
particular friend, mr. weevle. that is to say, my friend has gone by
the name of weevle, but his name is really and truly jobling."

my guardian begged them to be seated, and they all sat down.

"tony," said mr. guppy to his friend after an awkward silence. "will
you open the case?"

"do it yourself," returned the friend rather tartly.

"well, mr. jarndyce, sir," mr. guppy, after a moment's consideration,
began, to the great diversion of his mother, which she displayed by
nudging mr. jobling with her elbow and winking at me