ng us all the time, with much smiling
condescension, that she lived close by.

it was quite true, as it soon appeared. she lived so close by that we
had not time to have done humouring her for a few moments before she
was at home. slipping us out at a little side gate, the old lady
stopped most unexpectedly in a narrow back street, part of some
courts and lanes immediately outside the wall of the inn, and said,
"this is my lodging. pray walk up!"

she had stopped at a shop over which was written krook, rag and
bottle warehouse. also, in long thin letters, krook, dealer in marine
stores. in one part of the window was a picture of a red paper mill
at which a cart was unloading a quantity of sacks of old rags. in
another was the inscription bones bought. in another, kitchen-stuff
bought. in another, old iron bought. in another, waste-paper bought.
in another, ladies' and gentlemen's wardrobes bought. everything
seemed to be bought and nothing to be sold there. in all parts of the
window were qu
 
 ___________________________
 
bent, in her
harmless way, on leading me in, as part of the good omen she desired,
that i (whatever the others might do) saw nothing for it but to
comply. i suppose we were all more or less curious; at any rate, when
the old man added his persuasions to hers and said, "aye, aye! please
her! it won't take a minute! come in, come in! come in through the
shop if t'other door's out of order!" we all went in, stimulated by
richard's laughing encouragement and relying on his protection.

"my landlord, krook," said the little old lady, condescending to him
from her lofty station as she presented him to us. "he is called
among the neighbours the lord chancellor. his shop is called the
court of chancery. he is a very eccentric person. he is very odd. oh,
i assure you he is very odd!"

she shook her head a great many times and tapped her forehead with
her finger to express to us that we must have the goodness to excuse
him, "for he is a little--you know--m!" said the old lady with great
stateliness. t
 
 ___________________________
 
 good friend!" said richard, strongly disapproving of
his having drawn one of ada's tresses through his yellow hand. "you
can admire as the rest of us do without taking that liberty."

the old man darted at him a sudden look which even called my
attention from ada, who, startled and blushing, was so remarkably
beautiful that she seemed to fix the wandering attention of the
little old lady herself. but as ada interposed and laughingly said
she could only feel proud of such genuine admiration, mr. krook
shrunk into his former self as suddenly as he had leaped out of it.

"you see, i have so many things here," he resumed, holding up the
lantern, "of so many kinds, and all as the neighbours think (but they
know nothing), wasting away and going to rack and ruin, that that's
why they have given me and my place a christening. and i have so many
old parchmentses and papers in my stock. and i have a liking for rust
and must and cobwebs. and all's fish that comes to my net. and i
can't abear to part w
 
 ___________________________
 
 for any one i was to set her on," said the old man.
"i deal in cat-skins among other general matters, and hers was
offered to me. it's a very fine skin, as you may see, but i didn't
have it stripped off! that warn't like chancery practice though, says
you!"

he had by this time led us across the shop, and now opened a door in
the back part of it, leading to the house-entry. as he stood with his
hand upon the lock, the little old lady graciously observed to him
before passing out, "that will do, krook. you mean well, but are
tiresome. my young friends are pressed for time. i have none to spare
myself, having to attend court very soon. my young friends are the
wards in jarndyce."

"jarndyce!" said the old man with a start.

"jarndyce and jarndyce. the great suit, krook," returned his lodger.

"hi!" exclaimed the old man in a tone of thoughtful amazement and
with a wider stare than before. "think of it!"

he seemed so rapt all in a moment and looked so curiously at us that
richard said, "why, 
 
 ___________________________
 
also
read; and he laughed again.

"hi!" said the old man, laying aside the chalk. "i have a turn for
copying from memory, you see, miss, though i can neither read nor
write."

he looked so disagreeable and his cat looked so wickedly at me, as if
i were a blood-relation of the birds upstairs, that i was quite
relieved by richard's appearing at the door and saying, "miss
summerson, i hope you are not bargaining for the sale of your hair.
don't be tempted. three sacks below are quite enough for mr. krook!"

i lost no time in wishing mr. krook good morning and joining my
friends outside, where we parted with the little old lady, who gave
us her blessing with great ceremony and renewed her assurance of
yesterday in reference to her intention of settling estates on ada
and me. before we finally turned out of those lanes, we looked back
and saw mr. krook standing at his shop-door, in his spectacles,
looking after us, with his cat upon his shoulder, and her tail
sticking up on one side of his hairy 
 
 ___________________________
 
 law and equity, and through that
kindred mystery, the street mud, which is made of nobody knows what
and collects about us nobody knows whence or how--we only knowing in
general that when there is too much of it we find it necessary to
shovel it away--the lawyer and the law-stationer come to a rag and
bottle shop and general emporium of much disregarded merchandise,
lying and being in the shadow of the wall of lincoln's inn, and kept,
as is announced in paint, to all whom it may concern, by one krook.

"this is where he lives, sir," says the law-stationer.

"this is where he lives, is it?" says the lawyer unconcernedly.
"thank you."

"are you not going in, sir?"

"no, thank you, no; i am going on to the fields at present. good
evening. thank you!" mr. snagsby lifts his hat and returns to his
little woman and his tea.

but mr. tulkinghorn does not go on to the fields at present. he goes
a short way, turns back, comes again to the shop of mr. krook, and
enters it straight. it is dim enough, w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith a blot-headed candle or so
in the windows, and an old man and a cat sitting in the back part by
a fire. the old man rises and comes forward, with another blot-headed
candle in his hand.

"pray is your lodger within?"

"male or female, sir?" says mr. krook.

"male. the person who does copying."

mr. krook has eyed his man narrowly. knows him by sight. has an
indistinct impression of his aristocratic repute.

"did you wish to see him, sir?"

"yes."

"it's what i seldom do myself," says mr. krook with a grin. "shall i
call him down? but it's a weak chance if he'd come, sir!"

"i'll go up to him, then," says mr. tulkinghorn.

"second floor, sir. take the candle. up there!" mr. krook, with his
cat beside him, stands at the bottom of the staircase, looking after
mr. tulkinghorn. "hi-hi!" he says when mr. tulkinghorn has nearly
disappeared. the lawyer looks down over the hand-rail. the cat
expands her wicked mouth and snarls at him.

"order, lady jane! behave yourself to visitors, my lady! 
 
 ___________________________
 
you know
what they say of my lodger?" whispers krook, going up a step or two.

"what do they say of him?"

"they say he has sold himself to the enemy, but you and i know
better--he don't buy. i'll tell you what, though; my lodger is so
black-humoured and gloomy that i believe he'd as soon make that
bargain as any other. don't put him out, sir. that's my advice!"

mr. tulkinghorn with a nod goes on his way. he comes to the dark door
on the second floor. he knocks, receives no answer, opens it, and
accidentally extinguishes his candle in doing so.

 
 ___________________________
 
dle?"

"it's gone out. here it is."

krook takes it, goes to the fire, stoops over the red embers, and
tries to get a light. the dying ashes have no light to spare, and his
endeavours are vain. muttering, after an ineffectual call to his
lodger, that he will go downstairs and bring a lighted candle from
the shop, the old man departs. mr. tulkinghorn, for some new reason
that he has, does not await his return in the room, but on the stairs
outside.

the welcome light soon shines upon the wall, as krook comes slowly up
with his green-eyed cat following at his heels. "does the man
generally sleep like this?" inquired the lawyer in a low voice. "hi!
i don't know," says krook, shaking his head and lifting his eyebrows.
"i know next to nothing of his habits except that he keeps himself
very close."

thus whispering, they both go in together. as the light goes in, the
great eyes in the shutters, darkening, seem to close. not so the eyes
upon the bed.

"god save us!" exclaims mr. tulkinghorn. "he is
 
 ___________________________
 
 dead!" krook drops
the heavy hand he has taken up so suddenly that the arm swings over
the bedside.

they look at one another for a moment.

"send for some doctor! call for miss flite up the stairs, sir. here's
poison by the bed! call out for flite, will you?" says krook, with
his lean hands spread out above the body like a vampire's wings.

mr. tulkinghorn hurries to the landing and calls, "miss flite! flite!
make haste, here, whoever you are! flite!" krook follows him with his
eyes, and while he is calling, finds opportunity to steal to the old
portmanteau and steal back again.

"run, flite, run! the nearest doctor! run!" so mr. krook addresses a
crazy little woman who is his female lodger, who appears and vanishes
in a breath, who soon returns accompanied by a testy medical man
brought from his dinner, with a broad, snuffy upper lip and a broad
scotch tongue.

"ey! bless the hearts o' ye," says the medical man, looking up at
them after a moment'
 
 ___________________________
 
re!" with which remark he finishes his brief attendance and
returns to finish his dinner.

the dark young surgeon passes the candle across and across the face
and carefully examines the law-writer, who has established his
pretensions to his name by becoming indeed no one.

"i knew this person by sight very well," says he. "he has purchased
opium of me for the last year and a half. was anybody present related
to him?" glancing round upon the three bystanders.

"i was his landlord," grimly answers krook, taking the candle from
the surgeon's outstretched hand. "he told me once i was the nearest
relation he had."

"he has died," says the surgeon, "of an over-dose of opium, there is
no doubt. the room is strongly flavoured with it. there is enough
here now," taking an old tea-pot from mr. krook, "to kill a dozen
people."

"do you think he did it on purpose?" asks krook.

"took the over-dose?"

"yes!" krook almost smacks his lips with the unction of a horrible
interest.

"i can't say. i should thi
 
 ___________________________
 
nk it unlikely, as he has been in the habit
of taking so much. but nobody can tell. he was very poor, i suppose?"

"i suppose he was. his room--don't look rich," says krook, who might
have changed eyes with his cat, as he casts his sharp glance around.
"but i have never been in it since he had it, and he was too close to
name his circumstances to me."

"did he owe you any rent?"

"six weeks."

"he will never pay it!" says the young man, resuming his examination.
"it is beyond a doubt that he is indeed as dead as pharaoh; and to
judge from his appearance and condition, i should think it a happy
release. yet he must have been a good figure when a youth, and i dare
s
 
 ___________________________
 
, some
employment at his trade of copying. i had heard of him from my
stationer--snagsby of cook's court. since no one here knows anything
about him, it might be as well to send for snagsby. ah!" to the
little crazy woman, who has often seen him in court, and whom he has
often seen, and who proposes, in frightened dumb-show, to go for the
law-stationer. "suppose you do!"

while she is gone, the surgeon abandons his hopeless investigation
and covers its subject with the patchwork counterpane. mr. krook and
he interchange a word or two. mr. tulkinghorn says nothing, but
stands, ever, near the old portmanteau.

mr. snagsby arrives hastily in his grey coat and his black sleeves.
"dear me, dear me," he says; "and it has come to this, has it! bless
my soul!"

"can you give the person of the house any information about this
unfortunate creature, snagsby?" inquires mr. tulkinghorn. "he was in
arrears with his rent, it seems. and he must be buried, you know."

"well, sir," says mr. snagsby, coughing 
 
 ___________________________
 
"i could
advise--"

"no one better, sir, i am sure," says mr. snagsby, with his
deferential cough.

"i speak of affording some clue to his connexions, or to where he
came from, or to anything concerning him."

"i assure you, sir," says mr. snagsby after prefacing his reply with
his cough of general propitiation, "that i no more know where he came
from than i know--"

"where he has gone to, perhaps," suggests the surgeon to help him
out.

a pause. mr. tulkinghorn looking at the law-stationer. mr. krook,
with his mouth open, looking for somebody to speak next.

"as to his connexions, sir," says mr. snagsby, "if a person was to
say to me, 'snagsby, here's twenty thousand pound down, ready for you
in the bank of england if you'll only name one of 'em,' i couldn't do
it, sir! about a year and a half ago--to the best of my belief, at
the time when he first came to lodge at the present rag and bottle
shop--"

"that was the time!" says krook with a nod.

"about a year and a half ago," says mr. snags
 
 ___________________________
 
t our
place; and that is the most i know of him except that he was a quick
hand, and a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him
out, say, five and forty folio on the wednesday night, you would have
it brought in on the thursday morning. all of which--" mr. snagsby
concludes by politely motioning with his hat towards the bed, as much
as to add, "i have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm if he
were in a condition to do it."

"hadn't you better see," says mr. tulkinghorn to krook, "whether he
had any papers that may enlighten you? there will be an inquest, and
you will be asked the question. you can read?"

"no, i can't," returns the old man with a sudden grin.

"snagsby," says mr. tulkinghorn, "look over the room for him. he will
get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise. being here, i'll wait
if you make haste, and then i can testify on his behalf, if it should
ever be necessary, that all was fair and right. if you will hold the
candle for mr. snagsby, my friend, 
 
 ___________________________
 
lse. they search the cupboard
and the drawer of the ink-splashed table. there is not a morsel of an
old letter or of any other writing in either. the young surgeon
examines the dress on the law-writer. a knife and some odd halfpence
are all he finds. mr. snagsby's suggestion is the practical
suggestion after all, and the beadle must be called in.

so the little crazy lodger goes for the beadle, and the rest come out
of the room. "don't leave the cat there!" says the surgeon; "that
won't do!" mr. krook therefore drives her out before him, and she
goes furtively downstairs, winding her lithe tail and licking her
lips.

"good night!" says mr. tulkinghorn, and goes home to allegory and
meditation.

by this time the news has got into the court. groups of its
inhabitants assemble to discuss the thing, and the outposts of the
army of observation (principally boys) are pushed forward to mr.
krook's window, which they closely invest. a policeman has already
walked up to the room, and walked down agai
 
 ___________________________
 
ead, beating the palms of his white
gloves one against the other and stopping now and then at a
street-corner to look casually about for anything between a lost
child and a murder.

under cover of the night, the feeble-minded beadle comes flitting
about chancery lane with his summonses, in which every juror's name
is wrongly spelt, and nothing rightly spelt but the beadle's own
name, which nobody can read or wants to know. the summonses served
and his witnesses forewarned, the beadle goes to mr. krook's to keep
a small appointment he has made with certain paupers, who, presently
arriving, are conducted upstairs, where they leave the great eyes in
the shutter something new to stare at, in that last shape which
earthly lodgings take for no one--and for every one.

and all that night the coffin stands ready by the old portmanteau;
and the lonely figure on the bed, whose path in life has lain through
five and forty years, lies there with no more track behind him that
any one can trace than a des
 
 ___________________________
 
n of professional
celebrity, faced by little swills, the comic vocalist, who hopes
(according to the bill in the window) that his friends will rally
round him and support first-rate talent. the sol's arms does a brisk
stroke of business all the morning. even children so require
sustaining under the general excitement that a pieman who has
established himself for the occasion at the corner of the court says
his brandy-balls go off like smoke. what time the beadle, hovering
between the door of mr. krook's establishment and the door of the
sol's arms, shows the curiosity in his keeping to a few discreet
spirits and accepts the compliment of a glass of ale or so in return.

at the appointed hour arrives the coroner, for whom the jurymen are
waiting and who is received with a salute of skittles from the good
dry skittle-ground attached to the sol's arms. the coroner frequents
more public-houses than any man alive. the smell of sawdust, beer,
tobacco-smoke, and spirits is inseparable in his vocati
 
 ___________________________
 
 are impanelled here to
inquire into the death of a certain man. evidence will be given
before you as to the circumstances attending that death, and you will
give your verdict according to the--skittles; they must be stopped,
you know, beadle!--evidence, and not according to anything else. the
first thing to be done is to view the body."

"make way there!" cries the beadle.

so they go out in a loose procession, something after the manner of a
straggling funeral, and make their inspection in mr. krook's back
second floor, from which a few of the jurymen retire pale and
precipitately. the beadle is very careful that two gentlemen not very
neat about the cuffs and buttons (for whose accommodation he has
provided a special little table near the coroner in the harmonic
meeting room) should see all that is to be seen. for they are the
public chroniclers of such inquiries by the line; and he is not
superior to the universal human infirmity, but hopes to read in print
what "mooney, the active and i
 
 ___________________________
 
reath, though the most
patient of men, "i thought you was dead, i am sure!"

what question this enthusiastic fowl supposes he settles when he
strains himself to such an extent, or why he should thus crow (so men
crow on various triumphant public occasions, however) about what
cannot be of any moment to him, is his affair. it is enough that
daylight comes, morning comes, noon comes.

then the active and intelligent, who has got into the morning papers
as such, comes with his pauper company to mr. krook's and bears off
the body of our dear brother here departed to a hemmed-in churchyard,
pestiferous and obscene, whence malignant diseases are communicated
to the bodies of our dear brothers and sisters who have not departed,
while our dear brothers and sisters who hang about official
back-stairs--would to heaven they had departed!--are very complacent
and agreeable. into a beastly scrap of ground which a turk would
reject as a savage abomination and a caffre would shudder at, they
bring our dear
 
 ___________________________
 
 become friends."

"oh, do you?" cried caddy. "how happy that would make me!"

"my dear caddy," said i, "let us be friends from this time, and let
us often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right
way through them." caddy was overjoyed. i said everything i could in
my old-fashioned way to comfort and encourage her, and i would not
have objected to old mr. turveydrop that day for any smaller
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

by this time we were come to mr. krook's, whose private door stood
open. there was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room to
let on the second floor. it reminded caddy to tell me as we proceeded
upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an inquest and
that our little friend had been ill of the fright. the door and
window of the vacant room being open, we looked in. it was the room
with the dark door to which miss flite had secretly directed my
attention when i was last in the house. a sad and desolate place i
 
 ___________________________
 
urce from which it came or wonder
whose humanity was so considerate. my guardian stood before me,
contemplating the birds, and i had no need to look beyond him.

"and what do you call these little fellows, ma'am?" said he in his
pleasant voice. "have they any names?"

"i can answer for miss flite that they have," said i, "for she
promised to tell us what they were. ada remembers?"

ada remembered very well.

"did i?" said miss flite. "who's that at my door? what are you
listening at my door for, krook?"

the old man of the house, pushing it open before him, appeared there
with his fur cap in his hand and his cat at his heels.

"i warn't listening, miss flite," he said, "i was going to give a rap
with my knuckles, only you're so quick!"

"make your cat go down. drive her away!" the old lady angrily
exclaimed.

"bah, bah! there ain't no danger, gentlefolks," said mr. krook,
looking slowly and sharply from one to another until he had looked at
all of us; "she'd never offer at the birds when i w
 
 ___________________________
 
as here unless i
told her to it."

"you will excuse my landlord," said the old lady with a dignified
air. "m, quite m! what do you want, krook, when i have company?"

"hi!" said the old man. "you know i am the chancellor."

"well?" returned miss flite. "what of that?"

"for the chancellor," said the old man with a chuckle, "not to be
acquainted with a jarndyce is queer, ain't it, miss flite? mightn't i
take the liberty? your servant, sir. i know jarndyce and jarndyce
a'most as well as you do, sir. i knowed old squire tom, sir. i never
to my knowledge see you afore though, not even in court. yet, i go
there a mortal sight of times in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he course of the year, taking one
day with another."

"i never go there," said mr. jarndyce (which he never did on any
consideration). "i would sooner go--somewhere else."

"would you though?" returned krook, grinning. "you're bearing hard
upon my noble and learned brother in your meaning, sir, though
perhaps it is but nat'ral in a jarndyce. the burnt child, sir! what,
you're looking at my lodger's birds, mr. jarndyce?" the old man had
come by little and little into the room until he now touched my
guardian with his elbow and looked close up into his face with his
spectacled eyes. "it's one of her strange ways that she'll never tell
the names of these birds if she can help it, though she named 'em

 
 ___________________________
 
 up at the cages after another look at us, went
through the list.

"hope, joy, youth, peace, rest, life, dust, ashes, waste, want, ruin,
despair, madness, death, cunning, folly, words, wigs, rags,
sheepskin, plunder, precedent, jargon, gammon, and spinach. that's
the whole collection," said the old man, "all cooped up together, by
my noble and learned brother."

"this is a bitter wind!" muttered my guardian.

"when my noble and learned brother gives his judgment, they're to be
let go free," said krook, winking at us again. "and then," he added,
whispering and grinning, "if that ever was to happen--which it
won't--the birds that have never been caged would kill 'em."

"if ever the wind was in the east," said my guardian, pretending to
look out of the window for a weathercock, "i think it's there
to-day!"

we found it very difficult to get away from the house. it was not
miss flite who detained us; she was as reasonable a little creature
in consulting the convenience of others as there possibl
 
 ___________________________
 
y could be.
it was mr. krook. he seemed unable to detach himself from mr.
jarndyce. if he had been linked to him, he could hardly have attended
him more closely. he proposed to show us his court of chancery and
all the strange medley it contained; during the whole of our
inspection (prolonged by himself) he kept close to mr. jarndyce and
sometimes detained him under one pretence or other until we had
passed on, as if he were tormented by an inclination to enter upon
some secret subject which he could not make up his mind t
 
 ___________________________
 
o approach.
i cannot imagine a countenance and manner more singularly expressive
of caution and indecision, and a perpetual impulse to do something he
could not resolve to venture on, than mr. krook's was that day. his
watchfulness of my guardian was incessant. he rarely removed his eyes
from his face. if he went on beside him, he observed him with the
slyness of an old white fox. if he went before, he looked back. when
we stood still, he got opposite to him, and drawing his hand across
and across his open mouth with a curious expression of a sense of
power, and turning up his eyes, and lowering his grey eyebrows until
they appeared to be shut, seemed to scan every lineament of his face.


 
 ___________________________
 
at last, having been (always attended by the cat) all over the house
and having seen the whole stock of miscellaneous lumber, which was
certainly curious, we came into the back part of the shop. here on
the head of an empty barrel stood on end were an ink-bottle, some old
stumps of pens, and some dirty playbills; and against the wall were
pasted several large printed alphabets in several plain hands.

"what are you doing here?" asked my guardian.

"trying to learn myself to read and write," said krook.

"and how do you get on?"

"slow. bad," returned the old man impatiently. "it's hard at my time
of life."

"it would be easier to be taught by some one," said my guardian.

"aye, but they might teach me wrong!" returned the old man with a
wonderfully suspicious flash of his eye. "i don't know what i may
have lost by not being learned afore. i wouldn't like to lose
anything by being learned wrong now."

"wrong?" said my guardian with his good-humoured smile. "who do you
suppose would teach you 
 
 ___________________________
 
wrong?"

"i don't know, mr. jarndyce of bleak house!" replied the old man,
turning up his spectacles on his forehead and rubbing his hands. "i
don't suppose as anybody would, but i'd rather trust my own self than
another!"

these answers and his manner were strange enough to cause my guardian
to inquire of mr. woodcourt, as we all walked across lincoln's inn
together, whether mr. krook were really, as his lodger represented
him, deranged. the young surgeon replied, no, he had seen no reason
to think so. he was exceedingly distrustful, as ignorance usually
was, and he was always more or less under the influence of raw gin,
of which he drank great quantities and of which he and his back-shop,
as we might have observed, smelt strongly; but he did not think him
mad as yet.

on our way home, i so conciliated peepy's affections by buying him a
windmill and two flour-sacks that he w
 
 ___________________________
 
em over buckets. a shop with a
sun-blind, and a watered pavement, and a bowl of gold and silver fish
in the window, is a sanctuary. temple bar gets so hot that it is, to
the adjacent strand and fleet street, what a heater is in an urn, and
keeps them simmering all night.

there are offices about the inns of court in which a man might be
cool, if any coolness were worth purchasing at such a price in
dullness; but the little thoroughfares immediately outside those
retirements seem to blaze. in mr. krook's court, it is so hot that
the people turn their houses inside out and sit in chairs upon the
pavement--mr. krook included, who there pursues his studies, with his
cat (who never is too hot) by his side. the sol's arms has
discontinued the harmonic meetings for the season, and little swills
is engaged at the pastoral gardens down the river, where he comes out
in quite an innocent manner and sings comic ditties of a juvenile
complexion calculated (as the bill says) not to wound the feelings of
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 say this is a poor prospect of a living. granted.
but it's better than nothing, and better than enlistment. you want
time. there must be time for these late affairs to blow over. you
might live through it on much worse terms than by writing for
snagsby."

mr. jobling is about to interrupt when the sagacious smallweed checks
him with a dry cough and the words, "hem! shakspeare!"

"there are two branches to this subject, jobling," says mr. guppy.
"that is the first. i come to the second. you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane. come, jobling," says mr. guppy in his
encouraging cross-examination-tone, "i think you know krook, the
chancellor, across the lane?"

"i know him by sight," says mr. jobling.

"you know him by sight. very well. and you know little flite?"

"everybody knows her," says mr. jobling.

"everybody knows her. very well. now it has been one of my duties of
late to pay flite a certain weekly allowance, deducting from it the
amount of her weekly rent, which i have paid (
 
 ___________________________
 
in consequence of
instructions i have received) to krook himself, regularly in her
presence. this has brought me into communication with krook and into
a knowledge of his house and his habits. i know he has a room to let.
you may live there at a very low charge under any name you like, as
quietly as if you were a hundred miles off. he'll ask no questions
and would accept you as a tenant at a word from me--before the clock
strikes, if you chose. and i tell you another thing, jobling," says
mr. guppy, who has suddenly lowered his voice and become familiar
again, "he's an extraordinary old chap--always rummaging among a
litter of papers 
 
 ___________________________
 
 death. you don't mind that?"

"no," says mr. jobling, "i don't mind it; but he might as well have
died somewhere else. it's devilish odd that he need go and die at my
place!" mr. jobling quite resents this liberty, several times
returning to it with such remarks as, "there are places enough to die
in, i should think!" or, "he wouldn't have liked my dying at his
place, i dare say!"

however, the compact being virtually made, mr. guppy proposes to
dispatch the trusty smallweed to ascertain if mr. krook is at home,
as in that case they may complete the negotiation without delay. mr.
jobling approving, smallweed puts himself under the tall hat and
conveys it out of the dining-rooms in the guppy manner. he soon
returns with the intelligence that mr. krook is at home and that he
has seen him through the shop-door, sitting in the back premises,
sleeping "like one o'clock."

"then i'll pay," says mr. guppy, "and we'll go and see him. small,
what will it be?"

mr. smallweed, compelling the attendanc
 
 ___________________________
 
ited by these stupendous calculations, smallweed
dismisses his friends with a cool nod and remains behind to take a
little admiring notice of polly, as opportunity may serve, and to
read the daily papers, which are so very large in proportion to
himself, shorn of his hat, that when he holds up the times to run his
eye over the columns, he seems to have retired for the night and to
have disappeared under the bedclothes.

mr. guppy and mr. jobling repair to the rag and bottle shop, where
they find krook still sleeping like one o'clock, that is to say,
breathing stertorously with his chin upon his breast and quite
insensible to any external sounds or even to gentle shaking. on the
table beside him, among the usual lumber, stand an empty gin-bottle
and a glass. the unwholesome air is so stained with this liquor that
even the green eyes of the cat upon her shelf, as they open and shut
and glimmer on the visitors, look drunk.

"hold up here!" says mr. guppy, giving the relaxed figure of the old
ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n another shake. "mr. krook! halloa, sir!"

but it would seem as easy to wake a bundle of old clothes with a
spirituous heat smouldering in it. "did you ever see such a stupor as
he falls into, between drink and sleep?" says mr. guppy.

"if this is his regular sleep," returns jobling, rather alarmed,
"it'll last a long time one of these days, i am thinking."

"it's always more like a fit than a nap," says mr. guppy, shaking him
again. "halloa, your lordship! why, he might be robbed fifty times
over! open your eyes!"

afte
 
 ___________________________
 
is hands, and several times closes and opens his parched
lips, he seems to all intents and purposes as insensible as before.

"he is alive, at any rate," says mr. guppy. "how are you, my lord
chancellor. i have brought a friend of mine, sir, on a little matter
of business."

the old man still sits, often smacking his dry lips without the least
consciousness. after some minutes he makes an attempt to rise. they
help him up, and he staggers against the wall and stares at them.

"how do you do, mr. krook?" says mr. guppy in some discomfiture. "how
do you do, sir? you are looking charming, mr. krook. i hope you are
pretty well?"

the old man, in aiming a purposeless blow at mr. guppy, or at
nothing, feebly swings himself round and comes with his face against
the wall. so he remains for a minute or two, heaped up against it,
and then staggers down the shop to the front door. the air, the
movement in the court, the lapse of time, or the combination of these
things recovers him. he comes back prett
 
 ___________________________
 

odd times."

"rather so, indeed, sir," responds mr. guppy.

"what? you've been a-trying to do it, have you?" says the suspicious
krook.

"only a little," mr. guppy explains.

the old man's eye resting on the empty bottle, he takes it up,
examines it, and slowly tilts it upside down.

"i say!" he cries like the hobgoblin in the story. "somebody's been
making free here!"

"i assure you we found it so," says mr. guppy. "would you allow me to
get it filled for you?"

"yes, certainly i would!" cries krook in high glee. "certainly i
would! don't mention it! get it filled next door--sol's arms--the
lord chancellor's fourteenpenny. bless you, they know me!"

he so presses the empty bottle upon mr. guppy that that gentleman,
with a nod to his friend, accepts the trust and hurries out and
hurries in again with the bottle filled. the old man receives it in
his arms like a beloved grandchild and pats it tenderly.

"but, i say," he whispers, with his eyes screwed up, after tasting
it, "this ain't the lo
 
 ___________________________
 
rd chancellor's fourteenpenny. this is
eighteenpenny!"

"i thought you might like that better," says mr. guppy.

"you're a nobleman, sir," returns krook with another taste, and his
hot breath seems to come towards them like a flame. "you're a baron
of the land."

taking advantage of this auspicious moment, mr. guppy presents his
friend under the impromptu name of mr. weevle and states the object
of their visit. krook, with his bottle under his arm (he never gets
beyond a certain point of either drunkenness or sobriety), takes time
to survey his proposed lodger and seems to approve of him. "you'd
like to see the room, young man?" he says. "ah! it's a good room!
been whitewashed. been cleaned down with soft soap and soda. hi! it's
worth twice the rent, letting alone my company when you want it and
such a cat to keep the mice away."

commending the room after this manner, the old man takes them
upstairs, where
 
 ___________________________
 
desk bespattered with a rain of ink--and talks to
krook or is "very free," as they call it in the court, commendingly,
with any one disposed for conversation. wherefore, mrs. piper, who
leads the court, is impelled to offer two remarks to mrs. perkins:
firstly, that if her johnny was to have whiskers, she could wish 'em
to be identically like that young man's; and secondly, "mark my
words, mrs. perkins, ma'am, and don't you be surprised, lord bless
you, if that young man comes in at last for old krook's money!"




chapter xxi

the smallweed family


in a rather ill-favoured and ill-savoured neighbourhood, though one
of its rising grounds bears the name of mount pleasant, the elfin
smallweed, christened bartholomew and known on the domestic hearth as
bart, passes that limited portion of his time on which the office and
its contingencies have no claim. he dwells in a little narrow street,
always solitary, shady, and sad, closely bricked in on all sides like
a tomb, but where there yet lingers
 
 ___________________________
 
p dwells, there is a general tendency towards beer and
supper. mrs. piper and mrs. perkins, whose respective sons, engaged
with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek, have been
lying in ambush about the by-ways of chancery lane for some hours and
scouring the plain of the same thoroughfare to the confusion of
passengers--mrs. piper and mrs. perkins have but now exchanged
congratulations on the children being abed, and they still linger on
a door-step over a few parting words. mr. krook and his lodger, and
the fact of mr. krook's being "continually in liquor," and the
testamentary prospects of the young man are, as usual, the staple of
their conversation. but they have something to say, likewise, of the
harmonic meeting at the sol's arms, where the sound of the piano
through the partly opened windows jingles out into the court, and
where little swills, after keeping the lovers of harmony in a roar
like a very yorick, may now be heard taking the gruff line in a
concerted piece 
 
 ___________________________
 
lling
back a step to look up at the house. "i couldn't live in that room
alone, as you do, sir. i should get so fidgety and worried of an
evening, sometimes, that i should be driven to come to the door and
stand here sooner than sit there. but then it's very true that you
didn't see, in your room, what i saw there. that makes a difference."

"i know quite enough about it," returns tony.

"it's not agreeable, is it?" pursues mr. snagsby, coughing his cough
of mild persuasion behind his hand. "mr. krook ought to consider it
in the rent. i hope he does, i am sure."

"i hope he does," says tony. "but i doubt it."

"you find the rent too high, do you, sir?" returns the stationer.
"rents are high about here. i don't know how it is exactly, but the
law seems to put things up in price. not," adds mr. snagsby with his
apologetic cough, "that i mean to say a word against the profession i
get my living by."

mr. weevle again glances up and down the court and then looks at the
stationer. mr. snagsby, bl
 
 ___________________________
 
 one
flower. the ole garden is open to you, and your airy pinions carry
you through it. still, tony, far be it from me, i am sure, to wound
even your feelings without a cause!"

tony again entreats that the subject may be no longer pursued, saying
emphatically, "william guppy, drop it!" mr. guppy acquiesces, with
the reply, "i never should have taken it up, tony, of my own accord."

"and now," says tony, stirring the fire, "touching this same bundle
of letters. isn't it an extraordinary thing of krook to have
appointed twelve o'clock to-night to hand 'em over to me?"

"very. what did he do it for?"

"what does he do anything for? he don't know. said to-day was his
birthday and he'd hand 'em over to-night at twelve o'clock. he'll
have drunk himself blind by that time. he has been at it all day."

"he hasn't forgotten the appointment, i hope?"

"forgotten? trust him for that. he never forgets anything. i saw him
to-night, about eight--helped him to shut up his shop--and he had got
the letters 
 
 ___________________________
 
ows here and there, and the rolling of
distant carriages, and the new expression that there is of the stir
of men, they find to be comfortable. mr. guppy, noiselessly tapping
on the window-sill, resumes his whispering in quite a light-comedy
tone.

"by the by, tony, don't forget old smallweed," meaning the younger of
that name. "i have not let him into this, you know. that grandfather
of his is too keen by half. it runs in the family."

"i remember," says tony. "i am up to all that."

"and as to krook," resumes mr. guppy. "now, do you suppose he really
has got hold of any other papers of importance, as he has boasted to
you, since you have been such allies?"

tony shakes his head. "i don't know. can't imagine. if we get through
this business without rousing his suspicions, i shall be better
informed, no doubt. how can i know without seeing them, when he don't
know himself? he is always spelling out words from them, and chalking
them over the table and the shop-wall, and asking what this is a
 
 ___________________________
 
ane was yesterday, at about midnight, thrown into a state of the
most intense agitation and excitement by the following alarming and
horrible discovery. now do they set forth how it will doubtless be
remembered that some time back a painful sensation was created in the
public mind by a case of mysterious death from opium occurring in the
first floor of the house occupied as a rag, bottle, and general
marine store shop, by an eccentric individual of intemperate habits,
far advanced in life, named krook; and how, by a remarkable
coincidence, krook was examined at the inquest, which it may be
recollected was held on that occasion at the sol's arms, a
well-conducted tavern immediately adjoining the premises in question
on the west side and licensed to a highly respectable landlord, mr.
james george bogsby. now do they show (in as many words as possible)
how during some hours of yesterday evening a very peculiar smell was
observed by the inhabitants of the court, in which the tragical
occurrence 
 
 ___________________________
 
. swills) found his voice seriously
affected by the impure state of the atmosphere, his jocose expression
at the time being that he was like an empty post-office, for he
hadn't a single note in him. how this account of mr. swills is
entirely corroborated by two intelligent married females residing in
the same court and known respectively by the names of mrs. piper and
mrs. perkins, both of whom observed the foetid effluvia and regarded
them as being emitted from the premises in the occupation of krook,
the unfortunate deceased. all this and a great deal more the two
gentlemen who have formed an amicable partnership in the melancholy
catastrophe write down on the spot; and the boy population of the
court (out of bed in a moment) swarm up the shutters of the sol's
arms parlour, to behold the tops of their heads while they are about
it.

the whole court, adult as well as boy, is sleepless for that night,
and can do nothing but wrap up its many heads, and talk of the
ill-fated house, and look at
 
 ___________________________
 
i am sure!"

"no, he never communicated with us, which is to be deplored," the old
gentleman strikes in, "but i have come to look after the property--to
look over the papers, and to look after the property. we shall make
good our title. it is in the hands of my solicitor. mr. tulkinghorn,
of lincoln's inn fields, over the way there, is so good as to act as
my solicitor; and grass don't grow under his feet, i can tell ye.
krook was mrs. smallweed's only brother; she had no relation but
krook, and krook had no relation but mrs. smallweed. i am speaking of
your brother, you brimstone black-beetle, that was seventy-six years
of age."

mrs. smallweed instantly begins to shake her head and pipe up,
"seventy-six pound seven and sevenpence! seventy-six thousand bags of
money! seventy-six hundred thousand million of parcels of
bank-notes!"

"will somebody give me a quart pot?" exclaims her exasperated
husband, looking helplessly about him and finding no missile within
his reach. "will somebody obleeg
 
 ___________________________
 
 prebendary of
verona, who wrote a scholarly work or so and was occasionally heard
of in his time as having gleams of reason in him; and also of the
testimony of messrs. fodere and mere, two pestilent frenchmen who
would investigate the subject; and further, of the corroborative
testimony of monsieur le cat, a rather celebrated french surgeon once
upon a time, who had the unpoliteness to live in a house where such a
case occurred and even to write an account of it--still they regard
the late mr. krook's obstinacy in going out of the world by any such
by-way as wholly unjustifiable and personally offensive. the less the
court understands of all this, the more the court likes it, and the
greater enjoyment it has in the stock in trade of the sol's arms.
then there comes the artist of a picture newspaper, with a foreground
and figures ready drawn for anything from a wreck on the cornish
coast to a review in hyde park or a meeting in manchester, and in
mrs. perkins' own room, memorable evermore, 
 
 ___________________________
 
he then and there throws
in upon the block mr. krook's house, as large as life; in fact,
considerably larger, making a very temple of it. similarly, being
permitted to look in at the door of the fatal chamber, he depicts
that apartment as three-quarters of a mile long by fifty yards high,
at which the court is particularly charmed. all this time the two
gentlemen before mentioned pop in and out of every house and assist
at the philosophical disputations--go everywhere and listen to
everybody--and yet are always diving into the sol's parlour and
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ong the treasures of the late lamented. what
those treasures are they keep so secret that the court is maddened.
in its delirium it imagines guineas pouring out of tea-pots,
crown-pieces overflowing punch-bowls, old chairs and mattresses
stuffed with bank of england notes. it possesses itself of the
sixpenny history (with highly coloured folding frontispiece) of mr.
daniel dancer and his sister, and also of mr. elwes, of suffolk, and
transfers all the facts from those authentic narratives to mr. krook.
twice when the dustman is called in to carry off a cartload of old
paper, ashes, and broken bottles, the whole court assembles and pries
into the baskets as they come forth. many times the two gentlemen who
write with the ravenous little pens on the tissue-paper are seen
prowling in the neighbourhood--shy of each other, their late
partnership being dissolved. the sol skilfully carries a vein of the
prevailing interest through the harmonic nights. little swills, in
what are professionally known
 
 ___________________________
 
ables with all possible speed and never speaking above a
whisper.

"look here," says tony, recoiling. "here's that horrible cat coming
in!"

mr. guppy retreats behind a chair. "small told me of her. she went
leaping and bounding and tearing about that night like a dragon, and
got out on the house-top, and roamed about up there for a fortnight,
and then came tumbling down the chimney very thin. did you ever see
such a brute? looks as if she knew all about it, don't she? almost
looks as if she was krook. shoohoo! get out, you goblin!"

lady jane, in the doorway, with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and
her club of a tail, shows no intention of obeying; but mr.
tulkinghorn stumbling over her, she spits at his rusty legs, and
swearing wrathfully, takes her arched back upstairs. possibly to roam
the house-tops again and return by the chimney.

"mr. guppy," says mr. tulkinghorn, "could i have a word with you?"

mr. guppy is engaged in collecting the galaxy gallery of british
beauty from the wall a
 
 ___________________________
 
 hear what it's all about in
presence of sir leicester dedlock, baronet. come."

mr. smallweed, beckoning mr. chadband, takes a moment's counsel with
him in a whisper. mr. chadband, expressing a considerable amount of
oil from the pores of his forehead and the palms of his hands, says
aloud, "yes. you first!" and retires to his former place.

"i was the client and friend of mr. tulkinghorn," pipes grandfather
smallweed then; "i did business with him. i was useful to him, and he
was useful to me. krook, dead and gone, was my brother-in-law. he was
own brother to a brimstone magpie--leastways mrs. smallweed. i come
into krook's property. i examined all his papers and all his effects.
they was all dug out under my eyes. there was a bundle of letters
belonging to a dead and gone lodger as was hid away at the back of a
shelf in the side of lady jane's bed--his cat's bed. he hid all
manner of things away, everywheres. mr. tulkinghorn wanted 'em and
got 'em, but i looked 'em over first. i'm a man o
 
 ___________________________
 
to dispute this designation of himself when he was
seized with a violent fit of coughing.

"now, moral, you know!" said mr. bucket, improving the accident.
"don't you contradict when there ain't no occasion, and you won't be
took in that way. now, mr. jarndyce, i address myself to you. i've
been negotiating with this gentleman on behalf of sir leicester
dedlock, baronet, and one way and another i've been in and out and
about his premises a deal. his premises are the premises formerly
occupied by krook, marine store dealer--a relation of this
gentleman's that you saw in his lifetime if i don't mistake?"

my guardian replied, "yes."

"well! you are to understand," said mr. bucket, "that this gentleman
he come into krook's property, and a good deal of magpie property
there was. vast lots of waste-paper among the rest. lord bless you,
of no use to nobody!"

the cunning of mr. bucket's eye and the masterly manner in which he
contrived, without a look or a word against which his watchful
auditor c