putting a number of papers
towards us, "to look over some remarks on that head, and on the
general subject, which have been extensively circulated, while i
finish a letter i am now dictating to my eldest daughter, who is my
amanuensis--"

the girl at the table left off biting her pen and made a return to
our recognition, which was half bashful and half sulky.

"--i shall then have finished for the present," proceeded mrs.
jellyby with a sweet smile, "though my work is never done. where are
you, caddy?"

"'presents her compliments to mr. swallow, and begs--'" said caddy.

"'and begs,'" said mrs. jellyby, dictating, "'to inform him, in
reference to his letter of inquiry on the african project--' no,
peepy! not on my account!"

peepy (so self-named) was the unfortunate child who had fallen
downstairs, who now interrupted the correspondence by presenting
himself, with a strip of plaster on his forehead, to exhibit his
wounded knees, in which ada and i did not know which to pity
most--the bruise
 
 ___________________________
 
d at ada's kissing him, but soon fell fast
asleep in my arms, sobbing at longer and longer intervals, until he
was quiet. i was so occupied with peepy that i lost the letter in
detail, though i derived such a general impression from it of the
momentous importance of africa, and the utter insignificance of all
other places and things, that i felt quite ashamed to have thought so
little about it.

"six o'clock!" said mrs. jellyby. "and our dinner hour is nominally
(for we dine at all hours) five! caddy, show miss clare and miss
summerson their rooms. you will like to make some change, perhaps?
you will excuse me, i know, being so much occupied. oh, that very bad
child! pray put him down, miss summerson!"

i begged permission to retain him, truly saying that he was not at
all troublesome, and carried him upstairs and laid him on my bed. ada
and i had two upper rooms with a door of communication between. they
were excessively bare and disorderly, and the curtain to my window
was fastened up wit
 
 ___________________________
 
spondence relative to borrioboola-gha, which would occasion her
(she said) to pass a busy day. the children tumbled about, and
notched memoranda of their accidents in their legs, which were
perfect little calendars of distress; and peepy was lost for an hour
and a half, and brought home from newgate market by a policeman. the
equable manner in which mrs. jellyby sustained both his absence and
his restoration to the family circle surprised us all.

she was by that time perseveringly dictating to caddy, and caddy was
fast relapsing into the inky condition in which we had found her. at
one o'clock an open carriage arrived for us, and a cart for our
luggage. mrs. jellyby charged us with many remembrances to her good
friend mr. jarndyce; caddy left her desk to see us depart, kissed me
in the passage, and stood biting her pen and sobbing on the steps;
peepy, i am happy to say, was asleep and spared the pain of
separation (i was not without misgivings that he had gone to newgate
market in search o
 
 ___________________________
 
ried to say something soothing.

"oh, it's of no use, miss summerson," exclaimed miss jellyby, "though
i thank you for the kind intention all the same. i know how i am
used, and i am not to be talked over. you wouldn't be talked over if
you were used so. peepy, go and play at wild beasts under the piano!"

"i shan't!" said peepy.

"very well, you ungrateful, naughty, hard-hearted boy!" returned miss
jellyby with tears in her eyes. "i'll never take pains to dress you
any more."

"yes, i will go, caddy!" cried peepy, who was really a good child and
who was so moved by his sister's vexation that he went at once.

"it seems a little thing to cry about," said poor miss jellyby
apologetically, "but i am quite worn out. i was directing the new
circulars till two this morning. i detest the whole thing so that
that alone makes my head ache till i can't see out of my eyes. and
look at that poor unfortunate child! was there ever such a fright as
he is!"

peepy, happily unconscious of the defects in hi
 
 ___________________________
 
n it be otherwise?
you know what ma is--and i needn't make poor pa more miserable by
telling him."

"but would it not be adding to his unhappiness to marry without his
knowledge or consent, my dear?" said i.

"no," said miss jellyby, softening. "i hope not. i should try to make
him happy and comfortable when he came to see me, and peepy and the
others should take it in turns to come and stay with me, and they
should have some care taken of them then."

there was a good deal of affection in poor caddy. she softened more
and more while saying this and cried so much over the unwonted little
home-picture she had raised in her mind that peepy, in his cave under
the piano, was touched, and turned himself over on his back with loud
lamentations. it was not until i had brought him to kiss his sister,
and had restored him to his place on my lap, and had shown him that
caddy was laughing (she laughed expressly for the purpose), that we
could recall his peace of mind; even then it was for some time
co
 
 ___________________________
 
g to our house," she said.

we naturally asked how.

"i felt i was so awkward," she replied, "that i made up my mind to be
improved in that respect at all events and to learn to dance. i told
ma i was ashamed of myself, and i must be taught to dance. ma looked
at me in that provoking way of hers as if i wasn't in sight, but i
was quite determined to be taught to dance, and so i went to mr.
turveydrop's academy in newman street."

"and was it there, my dear--" i began.

"yes, it was there," said caddy, "and i am engaged to mr. turveydrop.
there are two mr. turveydrops, father and son. my mr. turveydrop is
the son, of course. i only wish i had been better brought up and was
likely to make him a better wife, for i am very fond of him."

"i am sorry to hear this," said i, "i must confess."

"i don't know why you should be sorry," she retorted a little
anxiously, "but i am engaged to mr. turveydrop, whether or no, and he
is very fond of me. it's a secret as yet, even on his side, because
old mr.
 
 ___________________________
 
dower."

we were here interrupted by peepy, whose leg had undergone so much on
account of his sister's unconsciously jerking it like a bell-rope
whenever she was emphatic that the afflicted child now bemoaned his
sufferings with a very low-spirited noise. as he appealed to me for
compassion, and as i was only a listener, i undertook to hold him.
miss jellyby proceeded, after begging peepy's pardon with a kiss and
assuring him that she hadn't meant to do it.

"that's the state of the case," said caddy. "if i ever blame myself,
i still think it's ma's fault. we are to be married whenever we can,
and then i shall go to pa at the office and write to ma. it won't
much agitate ma; i am only pen and ink to her. one great comfort is,"
said caddy with a sob, "that i shall never hear of africa after i am
married. young mr. turveydrop hates it for my sake, and if old mr.
turveydrop knows there is such a place, it's as much as he does."

"it was he who was very gentlemanly, i think!" said i.

"very gen
 
 ___________________________
 
tlemanly indeed," said caddy. "he is celebrated almost
everywhere for his deportment."

"does he teach?" asked ada.

"no, he don't teach anything in particular," replied caddy. "but his
deportment is beautiful."

caddy went on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance that
there was one thing more she wished us to know, and felt we ought to
know, and which she hoped would not offend us. it was that she had
improved her acquaintance with miss flite, the little crazy old lady,
and that she frequently went there early in the morning and met her
lover for a few minutes before breakfast--only for a few minutes. "i
go there at other times," said caddy, "but prince does not come then.
young mr. turveydrop's
 
 ___________________________
 
e prince regent on account of his
deportment. i hope you won't think the worse of me for having made
these little appointments at miss flite's, where i first went with
you, because i like the poor thing for her own sake and i believe she
likes me. if you could see young mr. turveydrop, i am sure you would
think well of him--at least, i am sure you couldn't possibly think
any ill of him. i am going there now for my lesson. i couldn't ask
you to go with me, miss summerson; but if you would," said caddy, who
had said all this earnestly and tremblingly, "i should be very
glad--very glad."

it happened that we had arranged with my guardian to go to miss
flite's that day. we had told him of our former visit, and our
account had interested him; but something had always happened to
prevent our going there again. as i trusted that i might have
sufficient influence with miss jellyby to prevent her taking any very
rash step if i fully accepted the confidence she was so willing to
place in me, poor gir
 
 ___________________________
 
back and was lighted by a skylight.
it was a bare, resounding room smelling of stables, with cane forms
along the walls, and the walls ornamented at regular intervals with
painted lyres and little cut-glass branches for candles, which seemed
to be shedding their old-fashioned drops as other branches might shed
autumn leaves. several young lady pupils, ranging from thirteen or
fourteen years of age to two or three and twenty, were assembled; and
i was looking among them for their instructor when caddy, pinching my
arm, repeated the ceremony of introduction. "miss summerson, mr.
prince turveydrop!"

i curtsied to a little blue-eyed fair man of youthful appearance with
flaxen hair parted in the middle and curling at the ends all round
his head. he had a little fiddle, which we used to call at school a
kit, under his left arm, and its little bow in the same hand. his
little dancing-shoes were particularly diminutive, and he had a
little innocent, feminine manner which not only appealed to me in
 
 ___________________________
 
him, so
dutiful to him, and so proud of him that i almost felt as if it were
an unkindness to the younger man not to be able to believe implicitly
in the elder. the few moments that were occupied by prince in taking
leave of us (and particularly of one of us, as i saw, being in the
secret), enhanced my favourable impression of his almost childish
character. i felt a liking for him and a compassion for him as he put
his little kit in his pocket--and with it his desire to stay a little
while with caddy--and went away good-humouredly to his cold mutton
and his school at kensington, that made me scarcely less irate with
his father than the censorious old lady.

the father opened the room door for us and bowed us out in a manner,
i must acknowledge, worthy of his shining original. in the same style
he presently passed us on the other side of the street, on his way to
the aristocratic part of the town, where he was going to show himself
among the few other gentlemen left. for some moments, i was 
 
 ___________________________
 
so lost
in reconsidering what i had heard and seen in newman street that i
was quite unable to talk to caddy or even to fix my attention on what
she said to me, especially when i began to inquire in my mind whether
there were, or ever had been, any other gentlemen, not in the dancing
profession, who lived and founded a reputation entirely on their
deportment. this became so bewildering and suggested the possibility
of so many mr. turveydrops that i said, "esther, you must make up
your mind to abandon this subject altogether and attend to caddy." i
accordingly did so, and we chatted all the rest of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 way to
lincoln's inn.

caddy told me that her lover's education had been so neglected that
it was not always easy to read his notes. she said if he were not so
anxious about his spelling and took less pains to make it clear, he
would do better; but he put so many unnecessary letters into short
words that they sometimes quite lost their english appearance. "he
does it with the best intention," observed caddy, "but it hasn't the
effect he means, poor fellow!" caddy then went on to reason, how
could he be expected to be a scholar when he had passed his whole
life in the dancing-school and had done nothing but teach and fag,
fag and teach, morning, noon, and night! and what did it matter? she
could write letters enough for both, as she knew to her cost, and it
was far better for him to be amiable than learned. "besides, it's not
as if i was an accomplished girl who had any right to give herself
airs," said caddy. "i know little enough, i am sure, thanks to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ma!

"there's another thing i want to tell you, now we are alone,"
continued caddy, "which i should not have liked to mention unless you
had seen prince, miss summerson. you know what a house ours is. it's
of no use my trying to learn anything that it would be useful for
prince's wife to know in our house. we live in such a state of muddle
that it's impossible, and i have only been more disheartened whenever
i have tried. so i get a little practice with--who do you think? poor
miss flite! early in the morning i help her to tidy her room and
clean her birds, and i make her cup
 
 ___________________________
 
 of coffee for her (of course she
taught me), and i have learnt to make it so well that prince says
it's the very best coffee he ever tasted, and would quite delight old
mr. turveydrop, who is very particular indeed about his coffee. i can
make little puddings too; and i know how to buy neck of mutton, and
tea, and sugar, and butter, and a good many housekeeping things. i am
not clever at my needle, yet," said caddy, glancing at the repairs on
peepy's frock, "but perhaps i shall improve, and since i have been
engaged to prince and have been doing all this, i have felt
better-tempered, i hope, and more forgiving to ma. it rather put me
out at first this morning to see you and miss clare looking so neat
and pretty and to feel ashamed of peepy and myself too, but on the
whole i hope i am better-tempered than i was and more forgiving to
ma."

the poor girl, trying so hard, said it from her heart, and touched
m
 
 ___________________________
 
ine. "caddy, my love," i replied, "i begin to have a great affection
for you, and i hope we shall become friends."

"oh, do you?" cried caddy. "how happy that would make me!"

"my dear caddy," said i, "let us be friends from this time, and let
us often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right
way through them." caddy was overjoyed. i said everything i could in
my old-fashioned way to comfort and encourage her, and i would not
have objected to old mr. turveydrop that day for any smaller
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

by this time we were come to mr. krook's, whose private door stood
open. there was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room to
let on the second floor. it reminded caddy to tell me as we proceeded
upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an inques
 
 ___________________________
 
t and
that our little friend had been ill of the fright. the door and
window of the vacant room being open, we looked in. it was the room
with the dark door to which miss flite had secretly directed my
attention when i was last in the house. a sad and desolate place it
was, a gloomy, sorrowful place that gave me a strange sensation of
mournfulness and even dread. "you look pale," said caddy when we came
out, "and cold!" i felt as if the room had chilled me.

we had walked slowly while we were talking, and my guardian and ada
were here before us. we found them in miss flite's garret. they were
looking at the birds, while a medical gentleman who was so good as to
attend miss flite with much solicitude and compassion spoke with her
cheerfully by the fire.

"i have finished my professional visit," he said, coming forward.
"miss flite is much better and may appear in court (as her mind
 
 ___________________________
 
 is
set upon it) to-morrow. she has been greatly missed there, i
understand."

miss flite received the compliment with complacency and dropped a
general curtsy to us.

"honoured, indeed," said she, "by another visit from the wards in
jarndyce! ve-ry happy to receive jarndyce of bleak house beneath my
humble roof!" with a special curtsy. "fitz-jarndyce, my dear"--she
had bestowed that name on caddy, it appeared, and always called her
by it--"a double welcome!"

"has she been very ill?" asked mr. jarndyce of the gentleman whom we
had found in attendance on her. she answered for herself directly,
though he had put the question in a whisper.

"oh, decidedly unwell! oh, very unwell indeed," she said
confidentially. "not pain, you know--trouble. not bodily so much as
nervous, nervous! the truth is," in a subdued voice and trembling,
"we have had death here. there was poison in the house. i am 
 
 ___________________________
 
ason
to think so. he was exceedingly distrustful, as ignorance usually
was, and he was always more or less under the influence of raw gin,
of which he drank great quantities and of which he and his back-shop,
as we might have observed, smelt strongly; but he did not think him
mad as yet.

on our way home, i so conciliated peepy's affections by buying him a
windmill and two flour-sacks that he would suffer nobody else to take
off his hat and gloves and would sit nowhere at dinner but at my
side. caddy sat upon the other side of me, next to ada, to whom we
imparted the whole history of the engagement as soon as we got back.
we made much of caddy, and peepy too; and caddy brightened
exceedingly; and my guardian was as merry as we were; and we were all
very happy indeed until caddy went home at night in a hackney-coach,
with peepy fast asleep, but holding tight to the windmill.

i have forgotten to mention--at least i have not mentioned--that mr.
woodcourt was the same dark young surgeon whom w
 
 ___________________________
 
s
treasured. and so we gave him our hands, one after another--at least,
they did--and i did; and so he put his lips to ada's hand--and to
mine; and so he went away upon his long, long voyage!

i was very busy indeed all day and wrote directions home to the
servants, and wrote notes for my guardian, and dusted his books and
papers, and jingled my housekeeping keys a good deal, one way and
another. i was still busy between the lights, singing and working by
the window, when who should come in but caddy, whom i had no
expectation of seeing!

"why, caddy, my dear," said i, "what beautiful flowers!"

she had such an exquisite little nosegay in her hand.

"indeed, i think so, esther," replied caddy. "they are the loveliest
i ever saw."

"prince, my dear?" said i in a whisper.

"no," answered caddy, shaking her head and holding them to me to
smell. "not prince."

"well, to be sure, caddy!" said i. "you must have two lovers!"

"what? do they look like that sort of thing?" said caddy.

"do they look
 
 ___________________________
 
 like that sort of thing?" i repeated, pinching her
cheek.

caddy only laughed in return, and telling me that she had come for
half an hour, at the expiration of which time prince would be waiting
for her at the corner, sat chatting with me and ada in the window,
every now and then handing me the flowers again or trying how they
looked against my hair. at last, when she was going, she took me into
my room and put them in my dress.

"for me?" said i, surprised.

"for you," said caddy with a kiss. "they were left behind by
somebody."

"left behind?"

"at poor miss flite's," said caddy. "somebody who has been very good
to her was hurrying away an hour ago to join a ship and left these
flowers behind. no, no! don't take them out. let the pretty little
things lie here," said caddy, adjusting them with a careful hand,
"because i was present myself, and i shouldn't wonder if somebody
left them on purpose!"

"do they look like that sort of thing?" said ada, coming laughingly
behin
 
 ___________________________
 
uch happiness then, and with such
better things before him--what a fatal link was riveting between his
fresh youth and her faded age, between his free hopes and her caged
birds, and her hungry garret, and her wandering mind.

ada loved him too well to mistrust him much in anything he said or
did, and my guardian, though he frequently complained of the east
wind and read more than usual in the growlery, preserved a strict
silence on the subject. so i thought one day when i went to london to
meet caddy jellyby, at her solicitation, i would ask richard to be in
waiting for me at the coach-office, that we might have a little talk
together. i found him there when i arrived, and we walked away arm in
arm.

"well, richard," said i as soon as i could begin to be grave with
him, "are you beginning to feel more settled now?"

"oh, yes, my dear!" returned richard. "i'm all right enough."

"but settled?" said i.

"how do you mean, settled?" returned richard with his gay laugh.

"settled in the law," sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ke to richard with all the earnestness i felt, and all the hope
i could not quite feel then, and implored him for ada's sake not to
put any trust in chancery. to all i said, richard readily assented,
riding over the court and everything else in his easy way and drawing
the brightest pictures of the character he was to settle into--alas,
when the grievous suit should loose its hold upon him! we had a long
talk, but it always came back to that, in substance.

at last we came to soho square, where caddy jellyby had appointed to
wait for me, as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of newman street.
caddy was in the garden in the centre and hurried out as soon as i
appeared. after a few cheerful words, richard left us together.

"prince has a pupil over the way, esther," said caddy, "and got the
key for us. so if you will walk round and round here with me, we can
lock ourselves in and i can tell you comfortably what i wanted to see
your dear good face about."

"very well, my dear," said i. "nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
g could be better." so caddy,
after affectionately squeezing the dear good face as she called it,
locked the gate, and took my arm, and we began to walk round the
garden very cosily.

"you see, esther," said caddy, who thoroughly enjoyed a little
confidence, "after you spoke to me about its being wrong to marry
without ma's knowledge, or even to keep ma long in the dark
respecting our engagement--though i don't believe ma cares much for
me, i must say--i thought it right to mention your opinions to
prince. in the first place because i want to profit by everything you
tell me, and in the second place because i have no secrets from
prince."

"i hope he approved, caddy?"

"oh, my dear! i assure you he would
 
 ___________________________
 
 approve of anything you could
say. you have no idea what an opinion he has of you!"

"indeed!"

"esther, it's enough to make anybody but me jealous," said caddy,
laughing and shaking her head; "but it only makes me joyful, for you
are the first friend i ever had, and the best friend i ever can have,
and nobody can respect and love you too much to please me."

"upon my word, caddy," said i, "you are in the general conspiracy to
keep me in a good humour. well, my dear?"

"well! i am going to tell you," replied caddy, crossing her hands
confidentially upon my arm. "so we talked a good deal about it, and
so i said to prince, 'prince, as miss summerson--'"

"i hope you didn't say 'miss summerson'?"

"no. i didn't!" cried caddy, greatly pleased and with the brightest
of faces. "i said, 'esther.' i said to prince, 'as esther is
decidedly of that opinion, prince, and has expres
 
 ___________________________
 
sed it to me, and
always hints it when she writes those kind notes, which you are so
fond of hearing me read to you, i am prepared to disclose the truth
to ma whenever you think proper. and i think, prince,' said i, 'that
esther thinks that i should be in a better, and truer, and more
honourable position altogether if you did the same to your papa.'"

"yes, my dear," said i. "esther certainly does think so."

"so i was right, you see!" exclaimed caddy. "well! this troubled
prince a good deal, not because he had the least doubt about it, but
because he is so considerate of the feelings of old mr. turveydrop;
and he had his apprehensions that old mr. turveydrop might break his
heart, or faint away, or be very much overcome in some affecting
manner or other if he made such an announcement. he feared old mr.
turveydrop might consider it undutiful and might receive too great a
shock. for old mr. turveydrop's deportment is very beautiful, you
know
 
 ___________________________
 
, esther," said caddy, "and his feelings are extremely
sensitive."

"are they, my dear?"

"oh, extremely sensitive. prince says so. now, this has caused my
darling child--i didn't mean to use the expression to you, esther,"
caddy apologized, her face suffused with blushes, "but i generally
call prince my darling child."

i laughed; and caddy laughed and blushed, and went on.

"this has caused him, esther--"

"caused whom, my dear?"

"oh, you tiresome thing!" said caddy, laughing, with her pretty face
on fire. "my darling child, if you insist upon it! this has caused
him weeks of uneasiness and has made him delay, from day to day, in a
very anxious manner. at last he said to me, 'caddy, if miss
summerson, who is a great favourite with my father, could be
prevailed upon to be present when i broke the subject, i think i
could do it.' so i promised i would ask you. and i made up my mind,
besides," said caddy, looking at me hopefully but timidly, "that if
you cons
 
 ___________________________
 
ented, i would ask you afterwards to come with me to ma. this
is what i meant when i said in my note that i had a great favour and
a great assistance to beg of you. and if you thought you could grant
it, esther, we should both be very grateful."

"let me see, caddy," said i, pretending to consider. "really, i think
i could do a greater thing than that if the need were pressing. i am
at your service and the darling child's, my dear, whenever you like."

caddy was quite transported by this reply of mine, being, i believe,
as susceptible to the least kindness or encouragement as any tender
heart that ever beat in this world; and after another turn or two
round the garden, during which she put on an entirely new pair of
gloves and made herself as resplendent as possible that she might do
no avoidable discredit to the master of deportment, we went to newman
street direct.

prince was teaching, of course. we found him engaged with a not very
hopeful pupi
 
 ___________________________
 
n under
foot by mechanics. that it can yet bask in the smile of beauty, my
dear madam."

i said nothing, which i thought a suitable reply; and he took a pinch
of snuff.

"my dear son," said mr. turveydrop, "you have four schools this
afternoon. i would recommend a hasty sandwich."

"thank you, father," returned prince, "i will be sure to be punctual.
my dear father, may i beg you to prepare your mind for what i am
going to say?"

"good heaven!" exclaimed the model, pale and aghast as prince and
caddy, hand in hand, bent down before him. "what is this? is this
lunacy! or what is this?"

"father," returned prince with great submission, "i love this young
lady, and we are engaged."

"engaged!" cried mr. turveydrop, reclining on the sofa and shutting
out the sight with his hand. "an arrow launched at my brain by my own
child!"

"we have been engaged for some time, father," faltered prince, "and
miss summerson, hearing of it, advised that we should declare the
fact to you and was so very kind as
 
 ___________________________
 
ydrop underwent a severe internal struggle and came upright
on the sofa again with his cheeks puffing over his stiff cravat, a
perfect model of parental deportment.

"my son!" said mr. turveydrop. "my children! i cannot resist your
prayer. be happy!"

his benignity as he raised his future daughter-in-law and stretched
out his hand to his son (who kissed it with affectionate respect and
gratitude) was the most confusing sight i ever saw.

"my children," said mr. turveydrop, paternally encircling caddy with
his left arm as she sat beside him, and putting his right hand
gracefully on his hip. "my son and daughter, your happiness shall be
my care. i will watch over you. you shall always live with
me"--meaning, of course, i will always live with you--"this house is
henceforth as much yours as mine; consider it your home. may you long
live to share it with me!"

the power of his deportment was such that they really were as much
overcome with thankfulness as if, instead of quartering himself upon

 
 ___________________________
 
ith all my heart,"
replied prince.

"i have no doubt of it," said mr. turveydrop. "your qualities are not
shining, my dear child, but they are steady and useful. and to both
of you, my children, i would merely observe, in the spirit of a
sainted wooman on whose path i had the happiness of casting, i
believe, some ray of light, take care of the establishment, take care
of my simple wants, and bless you both!"

old mr. turveydrop then became so very gallant, in honour of the
occasion, that i told caddy we must really go to thavies inn at once
if we were to go at all that day. so we took our departure after a
very loving farewell between caddy and her betrothed, and during our
walk she was so happy and so full of old mr. turveydrop's praises
that i would not have said a word in his disparagement for any
consideration.

the house in thavies inn had bills in the windows announcing that it
was to let, and it looked dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than
ever. the name of poor mr. jellyby had app
 
 ___________________________
 
eared in the list of
bankrupts but a day or two before, and he was shut up in the
dining-room with two gentlemen and a heap of blue bags,
account-books, and papers, making the most desperate endeavours to
understand his affairs. they appeared to me to be quite beyond his
comprehension, for when caddy took me into the dining-room by mistake
and we came upon mr. jellyby in his spectacles, forlornly fenced into
a corner by the great dining-table and the two gentlemen, he seemed
to have given up the whole thing and to be speechless and insensible.

going upstairs to mrs. jellyby's room (the children were all
screaming in the kitchen, and there was no servant to be seen), we
found that lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence, opening,
reading, and sorting letters, with a great accumulat
 
 ___________________________
 
n the calmest manner.
"he has been unfortunate in his affairs and is a little out of
spirits. happily for me, i am so much engaged that i have no time to
think about it. we have, at the present moment, one hundred and
seventy families, miss summerson, averaging five persons in each,
either gone or going to the left bank of the niger."

i thought of the one family so near us who were neither gone nor
going to the left bank of the niger, and wondered how she could be so
placid.

"you have brought caddy back, i see," observed mrs. jellyby with a
glance at her daughter. "it has become quite a novelty to see her
here. she has almost deserted her old employment and in fact obliges
me to employ a boy."

"i am sure, ma--" began caddy.

"now you know, caddy," her mother mildly interposed, "that i do
employ a boy, who is now at his dinner. what is the use of your
contradicting?"

"i was not going to contradict, ma," returned caddy. "i was only
going to say that surely you wouldn't have me be a mere d
 
 ___________________________
 
rudge all my
life."

"i believe, my dear," said mrs. jellyby, still opening her letters,
casting her bright eyes smilingly over them, and sorting them as she
spoke, "that you have a business example before you in your mother.
besides. a mere drudge? if you had any sympathy with the destinies of
the human race, it would raise you high above any such idea. but you
have none. i have often told you, caddy, you have no such sympathy."

"not if it's africa, ma, i have not."

"of course you have not. now, if i were not happily so much engaged,
miss summerson," said mrs. jellyby, sweetly casting her eyes for a
moment on me and considering where to put the particular letter she
had just opened, "this would distress and disappoint me. but i have
so much to think of, in connexion with borrioboola-gha and it is so
necessary i should concentrate myself that there is my remedy, you
see."

as caddy gave me
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. jellyby was
looking far away into africa straight through my bonnet and head, i
thought it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit and
to attract mrs. jellyby's attention.

"perhaps," i began, "you will wonder what has brought me here to
interrupt you."

"i am always delighted to see miss summerson," said mrs. jellyby,
pursuing her employment with a placid smile. "though i wish," and she
shook her head, "she was more interested in the borrioboolan
project."

"i have come with caddy," said i, "because caddy justly thinks she
ought not to have a secret from her mother and fancies i shall
encourage and aid her (though i am sure i don't know how) in
imparting one."

"caddy," said mrs. jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation
and then serenely pursuing it after shaking her head, "you are going
to tell me some nonsense."

caddy untied the strings of her bonnet, took her bonnet off, and
letting it dangle on the floor by the strings, and crying heartily,
said, "ma, i am en
 
 ___________________________
 
gaged."

"oh, you ridiculous child!" observed mrs. jellyby with an abstracted
air as she looked over the dispatch last opened; "what a goose you
are!"

"i am engaged, ma," sobbed caddy, "to young mr. turveydrop, at the
academy; and old mr. turveydrop (who is a very gentlemanly man
indeed) has given his consent, and i beg and pray you'll give us
yours, ma, because i never could be happy without it. i never, never
could!" sobbed caddy, quite forgetful of her general complainings and
of everything but her natural affection.

"you see again, miss summerson," observed mrs. jellyby serenely,
"what a happiness it is to be so much occupied as i am and to have
this necessity for self-concentration that i have. here is caddy
engaged to a dancing-master's son--mixed up with people who have no
more sympathy with the destinies of the human race than she has
herself! this, too, when mr. quale, one of the first philanthropists
of our tim
 
 ___________________________
 
e, has mentioned to me that he was really disposed to be
interested in her!"

"ma, i always hated and detested mr. quale!" sobbed caddy.

"caddy, caddy!" returned mrs. jellyby, opening another letter with
the greatest complacency. "i have no doubt you did. how could you do
otherwise, being totally destitute of the sympathies with which he
overflows! now, if my public duties were not a favourite child to me,
if i were not occupied with large measures on a vast scale, these
petty details might grieve me very much, miss summerson. but can i
permit the film of a silly proceeding on the part of caddy (from whom
i expect nothing else) to interpose b
 
 ___________________________
 
etween me and the great african
continent? no. no," repeated mrs. jellyby in a calm clear voice, and
with an agreeable smile, as she opened more letters and sorted them.
"no, indeed."

i was so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception,
though i might have expected it, that i did not know what to say.
caddy seemed equally at a loss. mrs. jellyby continued to open and
sort letters and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of
voice and with a smile of perfect composure, "no, indeed."

"i hope, ma," sobbed poor caddy at last, "you are not angry?"

"oh, caddy, you really are an absurd girl," returned mrs. jellyby,
"to ask such questions after what i have said of the preoccupation of
my mind."

"and i hope, ma, you give us your consent and wish us well?" said
caddy.

"you are a nonsensical ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ild to have done anything of this kind,"
said mrs. jellyby; "and a degenerate child, when you might have
devoted yourself to the great public measure. but the step is taken,
and i have engaged a boy, and there is no more to be said. now, pray,
caddy," said mrs. jellyby, for caddy was kissing her, "don't delay me
in my work, but let me clear off this heavy batch of papers before
the afternoon post comes in!"

i thought i could not do better than take my leave; i was detained
for a moment by caddy's saying, "you won't object to my bringing him
to see you, ma?"

"oh, dear me, caddy," cried mrs. jellyby, who had relapsed into that
distant contemplation, "have you begun again? bring whom?"

"him, ma."

"caddy, caddy!" said mrs. jellyby, quite weary of such little
matters. "then you must bring him some evening which is not a parent
society night, or a branch night, or a ramification night. you must
accommodate the visit to the demands upon my time. my dear miss
summerson, it was very kind of
 
 ___________________________
 
 you to come here to help out this
silly chit. good-bye! when i tell you that i have fifty-eight new
letters from manufacturing families anxious to understand the details
of the native and coffee-cultivation question this morning, i need
not apologize for having very little leisure."

i was not surprised by caddy's being in low spirits when we went
downstairs, or by her sobbing afresh on my neck, or by her saying she
would far rather have been scolded than treated with such
indifference, or by her confiding to me that she was so poor in
clothes that how she was ever to be married creditably she didn't
know. i gradually cheered her up by dwelling on the many things she
would do for her unfortunate father and for peepy when she had a home
of her own; and finally we went downstairs into the damp dark
kitch
 
 ___________________________
 
pieces i
was obliged to fall back on my fairy-tales. from time to time i heard
loud voices in the parlour overhead, and occasionally a violent
tumbling about of the furniture. the last effect i am afraid was
caused by poor mr. jellyby's breaking away from the dining-table and
making rushes at the window with the intention of throwing himself
into the area whenever he made any new attempt to understand his
affairs.

as i rode quietly home at night after the day's bustle, i thought a
good deal of caddy's engagement and felt confirmed in my hopes (in
spite of the elder mr. turveydrop) that she would be the happier and
better for it. and if there seemed to be but a slender chance of her
and her husband ever finding out what the model of deportment really
was, why that was all for the best too, and who would wish them to be
wiser? i did not wish them to be any wiser and indeed was half
ashamed of not entirely believing in him myself. and i looked up at
the stars, and thought about travellers in 
 
 ___________________________
 
see me when i got home, as they always were,
that i could have sat down and cried for joy if that had not been a
method of making myself disagreeable. everybody in the house, from
the lowest to the highest, showed me such a bright face of welcome,
and spoke so cheerily, and was so happy to do anything for me, that i
suppose there never was such a fortunate little creature in the
world.

we got into such a chatty state that night, through ada and my
guardian drawing me out to tell them all about caddy, that i went on
prose, prose, prosing for a length of time. at last i got up to my
own room, quite red to think how i had been holding forth, and then i
heard a soft tap at my door. so i said, "come in!" and there came in
a pretty little girl, neatly dressed in mourning, who dropped a
curtsy.

"if you please, miss," said the little girl in a soft voice, "i am
charley."

"why, so you are," said i, stooping down in astonishment and giving
her a kiss. "how glad am i to see you, charley!"

"if you 
 
 ___________________________
 
 over and over again in
twenty scales? why was it so worrying to me to have her in our house,
and confidential to me every night, when i yet felt that it was
better and safer somehow that she should be there than anywhere else?
these were perplexities and contradictions that i could not account
for. at least, if i could--but i shall come to all that by and by,
and it is mere idleness to go on about it now.

so when mrs. woodcourt went away, i was sorry to lose her but was
relieved too. and then caddy jellyby came down, and caddy brought
such a packet of domestic news that it gave us abundant occupation.

first caddy declared (and would at first declare nothing else) that i
was the best adviser that ever was known. this, my pet said, was no
news at all; and this, i said, of course, was nonsense. then caddy
told us that she was going to be married in a month and that if ada
and i would be her bridesmaids, she was the happiest girl in the
world. to be sure, this was news indeed; and i thought 
 
 ___________________________
 
we never
should have done talking about it, we had so much to say to caddy,
and caddy had so much to say to us.

it seemed that caddy's unfortunate papa had got over his
bankruptcy--"gone through the gazette," was the expression caddy
used, as if it were a tunnel--with the general clemency and
commiseration of his creditors, and had got rid of his affairs in
some blessed manner without succeeding in understanding them, and had
given up everything he possessed (which was not worth much, i should
think, to judge from the state of the furniture), and had satisfied
every one concerned that he could do no more, poor man. so, he had
been honourably dismissed to "the office" to begin the world again.
what he did at the office, i ne
 
 ___________________________
 
ver knew; caddy said he was a
"custom-house and general agent," and the only thing i ever
understood about that business was that when he wanted money more
than usual he went to the docks to look for it, and hardly ever found
it.

as soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this shorn
lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in hatton garden
(where i found the children, when i afterwards went there, cutting
the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking themselves
with it), c
 
 ___________________________
 
d mr.
turveydrop; and poor mr. jellyby, being very humble and meek, had
deferred to mr. turveydrop's deportment so submissively that they had
become excellent friends. by degrees, old mr. turveydrop, thus
familiarized with the idea of his son's marriage, had worked up his
parental feelings to the height of contemplating that event as being
near at hand and had given his gracious consent to the young couple
commencing housekeeping at the academy in newman street when they
would.

"and your papa, caddy. what did he say?"

"oh! poor pa," said caddy, "only cried and said he hoped we might get
on better than he and ma had got on. he didn't say so before prince,
he only said so to me. and he said, 'my poor girl, you have not been
very well taught how to make a home for your husband, but unless you
mean with all your heart to strive to do it, you had better murder
him than marry him--if you really love him.'"

"and how did you reassure him, caddy?"

"why, it was very distressing, you know, to see 
 
 ___________________________
 
poor pa so low and
hear him say such terrible things, and i couldn't help crying myself.
but i told him that i did mean it with all my heart and that i hoped
our house would be a place for him to come and find some comfort in
of an evening and that i hoped and thought i could be a better
daughter to him there than at home. then i mentioned peepy's coming
to stay with me, and then pa began to cry again and said the children
were indians."

"indians, caddy?"

"yes," said caddy, "wild indians. and pa said"--here she began to
sob, poor girl, not at all like the happiest girl in the world--"that
he was sensible the best thing that could happen to them was their
being all tomahawked together."

ada suggested that it was comfortable to know that mr. jellyby did
not mean these destructive sentiments.

"no, of course i know pa wouldn't like his family to be weltering in
their blood," said caddy, "but he means that they are very
unfortunate in being ma's children and that he
 
 ___________________________
 
 is very unfortunate in
being ma's husband; and i am sure that's true, though it seems
unnatural to say so."

i asked caddy if mrs. jellyby knew that her wedding-day was fixed.

"oh! you know what ma is, esther," she returned. "it's impossible to
say whether she knows it or not. she has been told it often enough;
and when she is told it, she only gives me a placid look, as if i was
i don't know what--a steeple in the distance," said caddy with a
sudden idea; "and then she shakes her head and says 'oh, caddy,
caddy, what a tease you are!' and goes on with the borrioboola
letters."

"and about your wardrobe, caddy?" said i. for she was under no
restraint with us.

"well, my dear esther," she returned, drying her eyes, "i must do the
best i can and trust to my dear prince never to have an unkind
remembrance of my coming so shabbily to him. if the question
concerned an outfit for borrioboola, ma would know all about it and
would be 
 
 ___________________________
 
quite excited. being what it is, she neither knows nor
cares."

caddy was not at all deficient in natural affection for her mother,
but mentioned this with tears as an undeniable fact, which i am
afraid it was. we were sorry for the poor dear girl and found so much
to admire in the good disposition which had survived under such
discouragement that we both at once (i mean ada and i) proposed a
little scheme that made her perfectly joyful. this was her staying
with us for three weeks, my staying with her for one, and our all
three contriving and cutting out, and re
 
 ___________________________
 
pairing, and sewing, and
saving, and doing the very best we could think of to make the most of
her stock. my guardian being as pleased with the idea as caddy was,
we took her home next day to arrange the matter and brought her out
again in triumph with her boxes and all the purchases that could be
squeezed out of a ten-pound note, which mr. jellyby had found in the
docks i suppose, but which he at all events gave her. what my
guardian would not have given her if we had encouraged him, it would
be difficult to say, but we thought it right to compound for no more
than her wedding-dress and bonnet. he agreed to this compromise, and
if caddy had ever be
 
 ___________________________
 
en we sat
down to work.

she was clumsy enough with her needle, poor girl, and pricked her
fingers as much as she had been used to ink them. she could not help
reddening a little now and then, partly with the smart and partly
with vexation at being able to do no better, but she soon got over
that and began to improve rapidly. so day after day she, and my
darling, and my little maid charley, and a milliner out of the town,
and i, sat hard at work, as pleasantly as possible.

over and above this, caddy was very anxious "to learn housekeeping,"
as she said. now, mercy upon us! the idea of her learning
housekeeping of a person of my vast experience was such a joke that i
laughed, and coloured up, and fell into a comical confusion when she
proposed it. however, i said, "caddy, i am sure you are very welcome
to learn anything that you can learn of me, my dear," and i showed
her all my books and methods and all my fidgety ways. you would have
supposed that i was showing her some wonderful inventio
 
 ___________________________
 
ns, by her
study of them; and if you had seen her, whenever i jingled my
housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, certainly you might have
thought that there never was a greater imposter than i with a blinder
follower than caddy jellyby.

so what with working and housekeeping, and lessons to charley, and
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with ada, the
three weeks slipped fast away. then i went home with caddy to see
what could be done there, and ada and charley remained behind to take
care of my guardian.

when i say i went home with caddy, i mean to the furnished lodging in
hatton garden. we went to newman street two or three times, where
preparations were in progress too--a good many, i observed, for
enhancing the comforts of old mr. turveydrop, and a few for putting
the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the house--but
our great point was to make the furnished lodging decent for the

 
 ___________________________
 
the house. when mr. jellyby came home,
he usually groaned and went down into the kitchen. there he got
something to eat if the servant would give him anything, and then,
feeling that he was in the way, went out and walked about hatton
garden in the wet. the poor children scrambled up and tumbled down
the house as they had always been accustomed to do.

the production of these devoted little sacrifices in any presentable
condition being quite out of the question at a week's notice, i
proposed to caddy that we should make them as happy as we could on
her marriage morning in the attic where they all slept, and should
confine our greatest efforts to her mama and her mama's room, and a
clean breakfast. in truth mrs. jellyby required a good deal of
attention, the lattice-work up her back having widened considerably
since i first knew her and her hair looking like the mane of a
dustman's horse.

thinking that the display of caddy's wardrobe would be the best means
of approaching the subject, i inv
 
 ___________________________
 
ited mrs. jellyby to come and look
at it spread out on caddy's bed in the evening after the unwholesome
boy was gone.

"my dear miss summerson," said she, rising from her desk with her
usual sweetness of temper, "these are really ridiculous preparations,
though your assisting them is a proof of your kindness. there is
something so inexpressibly absurd to me in the idea of caddy being
married! oh, caddy, you silly, silly, silly puss!"

she came upstairs with us notwithstanding and looked at the clothes
in her customary far-off manner. they suggested one distinct idea to
her, for she said with her placid smile, and shaking her head, "my
good miss summerson, at half the cost, this weak child might have
been equipped for africa!"

on our going downstairs again, mrs. jellyby asked me whether this
troublesome business was really to take place next wednesday. and on
my replying yes, she said, "will 
 
 ___________________________
 
my room be required, my dear miss
summerson? for it's quite impossible that i can put my papers away."

i took the liberty of saying that the room would certainly be wanted
and that i thought we must put the papers away somewhere. "well, my
dear miss summerson," said mrs. jellyby, "you know best, i dare say.
but by obliging me to employ a boy, caddy has embarrassed me to that
extent, overwhelmed as i am with public business, that i don't know
which way to turn. we have a ramification meeting, too, on wednesday
afternoon, and the inconvenience is very serious."

"it is not likely to occur again," said i, smiling. "caddy will be
married but once, probably."

"that's true," mrs. jellyby replied; "that's true, my dear. i suppose
we must make the best of it!"

the next question was how mrs. jellyby should be dressed on the
occasion. i thought i
 
 ___________________________
 
t very curious to see her looking on serenely
from her writing-table while caddy and i discussed it, occasionally
shaking her head at us with a half-reproachful smile like a superior
spirit who could just bear with our trifling.

the state in which her dresses were, and the extraordinary confusion
in which she kept them, added not a little to our difficulty; but at
length we devised something not very unlike what a common-place
mother might wear on such an occasion. the abstracted manner in which
mrs. jellyby would deliver herself up to having this attire tried on
by the dr
 
 ___________________________
 
urned my thoughts to
africa, were consistent with the rest of her behaviour.

the lodging was rather confined as to space, but i fancied that if
mrs. jellyby's household had been the only lodgers in saint paul's or
saint peter's, the sole advantage they would have found in the size
of the building would have been its affording a great deal of room to
be dirty in. i believe that nothing belonging to the family which it
had been possible to break was unbroken at the time of those
preparations for caddy's marriage, that nothing which it had been
possible to spoil in any way was unspoilt, and that no domestic
object which was capable of collecting dirt, from a dear child's knee
to the door-plate, was without as much dirt as could well accumulate
upon it.

poor mr. jellyby, who very seldom spoke and almost always sat when he
was at home with his head against the wall, became interested when he
saw that caddy and i were attempting to establish some order among
all this waste and ruin and took off
 
 ___________________________
 
f paper bags,
footstools, blacklead brushes, bread, mrs. jellyby's bonnets, books
with butter sticking to the binding, guttered candle ends put out
by being turned upside down in broken candlesticks, nutshells,
heads and tails of shrimps, dinner-mats, gloves, coffee-grounds,
umbrellas--that he looked frightened, and left off again. but he came
regularly every evening and sat without his coat, with his head
against the wall, as though he would have helped us if he had known
how.

"poor pa!" said caddy to me on the night before the great day, when
we really had got things a little to rights. "it seems unkind to
leave him, esther. but what could i do if i stayed! since i first
knew you, i have tidied and tidied over and over again, but it's
useless. ma and africa, together, upset the whole house directly. we
never have a servant who don't drink. ma's ruinous to everything."

mr. jellyby could not hear what she said, but he seemed very low
indeed and shed tears, i thought.

"my heart aches for 
 
 ___________________________
 
him; that it does!" sobbed caddy. "i can't help
thinking to-night, esther, how dearly i hope to be happy with prince,
and how dearly pa hoped, i dare say, to be happy with ma. what a
disappointed life!"

"my dear caddy!" said mr. jellyby, looking slowly round from the
wail. it was the first time, i think, i ever heard him say three
words together.

"yes, pa!" cried caddy, going to him and embracing him
affectionately.

"my dear caddy," said mr. jellyby. "never have--"

"not prince, pa?" faltered caddy. "not have prince?"

"yes, my dear," said mr. jellyby. "have him, certainly. but, never
have--"

i mentioned in my account of our first visit in thavies inn that
richard described mr. jellyby as frequently opening his mouth after
dinner without saying anything. it was a habit of his. he opened his
mouth now a great many times and shook his head in a melancholy
manner.

"what do you wish me not to have? don't have what, dear pa
 
 ___________________________
 
?" asked
caddy, coaxing him, with her arms round his neck.

"never have a mission, my dear child."

mr. jellyby groaned and laid his head against the wall again, and
this was the only time i ever heard him make any approach to
expressing his sentiments on the borrioboolan question. i suppose he
had been more talkative and lively once, but he seemed to have been
completely exhausted long before i knew him.

i thought mrs. jellyby never would have left off serenely looking
over her papers and drinking coffee th
 
 ___________________________
 
at night. it was twelve o'clock
before we could obtain possession of the room, and the clearance it
required then was so discouraging that caddy, who was almost tired
out, sat down in the middle of the dust and cried. but she soon
cheered up, and we did wonders with it before we went to bed.

in the morning it looked, by the aid of a few flowers and a quantity
of soap and water and a little arrangement, quite gay. the plain
breakfast made a cheerful show, and caddy was perfectly charming. but
when my darling came, i thought--and i think now--that i never had
seen such a dear face as my beautiful pet's.

we made a little feast for the children upstairs, and we put peepy at
the head of the table, and we showed them caddy in her bridal dress,
and they clapped their hands and hurrahed, and caddy cried to think
that she was going away from them and hugged them over and over again
until we brought prince up to fetch her away--when, i am sorry to
say, peepy bit 
 
 ___________________________
 
him. then there was old mr. turveydrop downstairs, in
a state of deportment not to be expressed, benignly blessing caddy
and giving my guardian to understand that his son's happiness was his
own parental work and that he sacrificed personal considerations to
ensure it. "my dear sir," said mr. turveydrop, "these young people
will live with me; my house is large enough for their accommodation,
and they shall not want the shelter of my roof. i could have
wished--you will understand the allusion, mr. jarndyce, for you
remember my illustrious patron the prince regent--i could have
wished that my son had married into a
 
 ___________________________
 
uardian said, was to show
the world that woman's mission was man's mission and that the only
genuine mission of both man and woman was to be always moving
declaratory resolutions about things in general at public meetings.
the guests were few, but were, as one might expect at mrs. jellyby's,
all devoted to public objects only. besides those i have mentioned,
there was an extremely dirty lady with her bonnet all awry and the
ticketed price of her dress still sticking on it, whose neglected
home, caddy told me, was like a filthy wilderness, but whose church
was like a fancy fair. a very contentious gentleman, who said it was
his mission to be everybody's brother but who appeared to be on terms
of coolness with the whole of his large family, completed the party.

a party, having less in common with such an occasion, could hardly
have been got together by any ingenuity. such a mean mission as the
domestic mission was the very last thing to be endured among them;
indeed, miss wisk informed us, w
 
 ___________________________
 
 pardiggle being as clear that the only
one infallible course was her course of pouncing upon the poor and
applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; as miss wisk
was that the only practical thing for the world was the emancipation
of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. mrs. jellyby, all the
while, sat smiling at the limited vision that could see anything but
borrioboola-gha.

but i am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the ride
home instead of first marrying caddy. we all went to church, and mr.
jellyby gave her away. of the air with which old mr. turveydrop, with
his hat under his left arm (the inside presented at the clergyman
like a cannon) and his eyes creasing themselves up into his wig,
stood stiff and high-shouldered behind us bridesmaids during the
ceremony, and afterwards saluted us, i could never say enough to do
it justice. miss wisk, whom i cannot report as prepossessing in
appearance, and whose manner was grim, listened to the proceedings,
a
 
 ___________________________
 
s part of woman's wrongs, with a disdainful face. mrs. jellyby, with
her calm smile and her bright eyes, looked the least concerned of all
the company.

we duly came back to breakfast, and mrs. jellyby sat at the head of
the table and mr. jellyby at the foot. caddy had previously stolen
upstairs to hug the children again and tell them that her name was
turveydrop. but this piece of information, instead of being an
agreeable surprise to peepy, threw him on his back in such transports
of kicking grief that i could do nothing on being sent for but accede
to the proposal that he should be admitted to the breakfast table. so
he came down and sat in my lap; and mrs. jellyby, after saying, in
reference to the state of his pinafore, "oh, you naughty peepy, what
a
 
 ___________________________
 
m before we went to church) and would dip him head first
into the wine-glasses and then put him in his mouth.

my guardian, with his sweet temper and his quick perception and his
amiable face, made something agreeable even out of the ungenial
company. none of them seemed able to talk about anything but his, or
her, own one subject, and none of them seemed able to talk about even
that as part of a world in which there was anything else; but my
guardian turned it all to the merry encouragement of caddy and the
honour of the occasion, and brought us through the breakfast nobly.
what we should have done without him, i am afraid to think, for all
the company despising the bride and bridegroom and old mr.
turveydrop--and old mr. thurveydrop, in virtue of his deportment,
considering himself vastly superior to all the company--it was a very
unpromising case.

at last the time came when poor caddy was to go and when all her
property was packed on the hired coach and pair that was to take her
and her
 
 ___________________________
 
 husband to gravesend. it affected us to see caddy clinging,
then, to her deplorable home and hanging on her mother's neck with
the greatest tenderness.

"i am very sorry i couldn't go on writing from dictation, ma," sobbed
caddy. "i hope you forgive me now."

"oh, caddy, caddy!" said mrs. jellyby. "i have told you over and over
again that i have engaged a boy, and there's an end of it."

"you are sure you are not the least angry with me, ma? say you are
sure before i go away, ma?"

"you foolish caddy," returned mrs. jellyby, "do i look angry, or have
i inclination to be angry, or time to be angry? how can you?"

"take a little care of pa while i am gone, mama!"

mrs. jellyby positively laughed at the fancy. "you romantic child,"
said she, lightly patting caddy's back
 
 ___________________________
 
. "go along. i am excellent
friends with you. now, good-bye, caddy, and be very happy!"

then caddy hung upon her father and nursed his cheek against hers as
if he were some poor dull child in pain. all this took place in the
hall. her father released her, took out his pocket handkerchief, and
sat down on the stairs with his head against the wall. i hope he
found some consolation in walls. i almost think he did.

and then prince took her arm in his and turned with great emotion and
respect to his father, whose deportment at that moment was
overwhelming.

"thank you over and over again, father
 
 ___________________________
 
!" said prince, kissing his
hand. "i am very grateful for all your kindness and consideration
regarding our marriage, and so, i can assure you, is caddy."

"very," sobbed caddy. "ve-ry!"

"my dear son," said mr. turveydrop, "and dear daughter, i have done
my duty. if the spirit of a sainted wooman hovers above us and looks
down on the occasion, that, and your constant affection, will be my
recompense. you will not fail in your duty, my son and daughter, i
believe?"

"dear father, never!" cried prince.

"never, never, dear mr. turveydrop!" said caddy.

"this," returned mr. turveydrop, "is as it should be. my children, my
home is yours, my heart is yours, my all is your
 
 ___________________________
 
orting me with his arm. for a
little while he sat with his hand over his face, but when he removed
it, fell into his usual manner. there never can have been, there
never can be, a pleasanter manner.

"my little woman," said he, "what a sad time this has been. such an
inflexible little woman, too, through all!"

"only for the best, guardian," said i.

"for the best?" he repeated tenderly. "of course, for the best. but
here have ada and i been perfectly forlorn and miserable; here has
your friend caddy been coming and going late and early; here has
every one about the house been utterly lost and dejected; here has
even poor rick been writing--to me too--in his anxiety for you!"

i had read of caddy in ada's letters, but not of richard. i told him
so.

"why, no, my dear," he replied. "i have thought it better not to
mention it to her."

"and you speak of his writing to you," said i, repeating his
emphasis. "as if it were not natural for him to do so, guardian; as
if he could write to a better 
 
 ___________________________
 
er at all, if you please,
miss!"

"why, who can she be?" said i.

"my love," miss flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with
her most mysterious look, "in my opinion--don't mention this to our
diminutive friend--she's the lord chancellor's wife. he's married,
you know. and i understand she leads him a terrible life. throws his
lordship's papers into the fire, my dear, if he won't pay the
jeweller!"

i did not think very much about this lady then, for i had an
impression that it might be caddy. besides, my attention was diverted
by my visitor, who was cold after her ride and looked hungry and who,
our dinner being brought in, required some little assistance in
arraying herself with great satisfaction in a pitiable old scarf and
a much-worn and often-mended pair of gloves, which she had brought
down in a paper parcel. i had to preside, too, over the
entertainment, consisting of a dish of fish, a roast fowl, a
sweetbread, vegetables, pudding, and madeira; and it was so pleasant
to see 
 
 ___________________________
 
and business,
devoted to such settlements of accounts, such repeated journeys to
and fro between the growlery and all other parts of the house, so
many rearrangements of drawers and presses, and such a general new
beginning altogether, that i had not a moment's leisure. but when
these arrangements were completed and everything was in order, i paid
a visit of a few hours to london, which something in the letter i had
destroyed at chesney wold had induced me to decide upon in my own
mind.

i made caddy jellyby--her maiden name was so natural to me that i
always called her by it--the pretext for this visit and wrote her a
note previously asking the favour of her company on a little business
expedition. leaving home very early in the morning, i got to london
by stage-coach in such good time that i got to newman street with the
day before me.

caddy, who had not seen me since her wedding-day, was so glad and so
affectionate that i was half inclined to fear i should make her
husband jealous. but 
 
 ___________________________
 
he was, in his way, just as bad--i mean as good;
and in short it was the old story, and nobody would leave me any
possibility of doing anything meritorious.

the elder mr. turveydrop was in bed, i found, and caddy was
milling his chocolate, which a melancholy little boy who was an
apprentice--it seemed such a curious thing to be apprenticed to the
trade of dancing--was waiting to carry upstairs. her father-in-law
was extremely kind and considerate, caddy told me, and they lived
most happily together. (when she spoke of their living together, she
meant that the old gentleman had all the good things and all the good
lodging, while she and her husband had what they could get, and were
poked into two corner rooms over the mews.)

"and how is your mama, caddy?" said i.

"why, i hear of her, esther," replied caddy, "through pa, but i see
very little of her. we are good friends, i am glad to say, but ma
thinks there is something absurd in my having ma
 
 ___________________________
 
rried a
dancing-master, and she is rather afraid of its extending to her."

it struck me that if mrs. jellyby had discharged her own natural
duties and obligations before she swept the horizon with a telescope
in search of others, she would have taken the best precautions
against becoming absurd, but i need scarcely observe that i kept this
to myself.

"and your papa, caddy?"

"he comes here every evening," returned caddy, "and is so fond of
sitting in the corner there that it's a treat to see him."

looking at the corner, i plainly perceived the mark of mr. jellyby's
head against the wall. it was consolatory to know that he had found
such a resting-place for it.

"and you, caddy," said i, "you are always busy, i'll be bound?"

"well, my dear," returned caddy, "i am indeed, for to tell you a
grand secret, i am qualifying myself to give lessons. prince's health
is not strong, and i want to be able to assist him. 
 
 ___________________________
 
what with
schools, and classes here, and private pupils, and the apprentices,
he really has too much to do, poor fellow!"

the notion of the apprentices was still so odd to me that i asked
caddy if there were many of them.

"four," said caddy. "one in-door, and three out. they are
very good children; only when they get together they will
play--children-like--instead of attending to their work. so the
little boy you saw just now waltzes by himself in the empty kitchen,
and we distribute the others over the house as well as we can."

"that is only for their steps, of course?" said i.

"only for their steps," said caddy. "in that way they practise, so
many hours at a time, whatever steps they happen to be upon. they
dance in the academ
 
 ___________________________
 
y, and at this time of year we do figures at five
every morning."

"why, what a laborious life!" i exclaimed.

"i assure you, my dear," returned caddy, smiling, "when the out-door
apprentices ring us up in the morning (the bell rings into our room,
not to disturb old mr. turveydrop), and when i put up the window and
see them standing on the door-step with their little pumps under
their arms, i am actually reminded of the sweeps."

all this presented the art to me in a singular light, to be sure.
caddy enjoyed the effect of her communication and cheerfully
recounted the particulars of her own studies.

"you see, my dear, to save expense i ough
 
 ___________________________
 
 kit too, and consequently
i have to practise those two instruments as well as the details of
our profession. if ma had been like anybody else, i might have had
some little musical knowledge to begin upon. however, i hadn't any;
and that part of the work is, at first, a little discouraging, i must
allow. but i have a very good ear, and i am used to drudgery--i have
to thank ma for that, at all events--and where there's a will there's
a way, you know, esther, the world over." saying these words, caddy
laughingly sat down at a little jingling square piano and really
rattled off a quadrille with great spirit. then she good-humouredly
and blushingly got up again, and while she still laughed herself,
said, "don't laugh at me, please; that's a dear girl!"

i would sooner have cried, but i did neither. i encouraged her and
praised her with all my heart. for i conscientiously believed,
dancing-master's wife though she was, and dancing-mistress though in
her limited ambition she aspired to be, she h
 
 ___________________________
 
ad struck out a natural,
wholesome, loving course of industry and perseverance that was quite
as good as a mission.

"my dear," said caddy, delighted, "you can't think how you cheer me.
i shall owe you, you don't know how much. what changes, esther, even
in my small world! you recollect that first night, when i was so
unpolite and inky? who would have thought, then, of my ever teaching
people to dance, of all other possibilities and impossibilities!"

her husband, who had left us while we had this chat, now coming back,
preparatory to exercising the apprentices in the ball-room, caddy
informed me she was quite at my disposal. but 
 
 ___________________________
 
oly boy, who, i hoped, had not been made so by waltzing alone
in the empty kitchen, there were two other boys and one dirty little
limp girl in a gauzy dress. such a precocious little girl, with such
a dowdy bonnet on (that, too, of a gauzy texture), who brought her
sandalled shoes in an old threadbare velvet reticule. such mean
little boys, when they were not dancing, with string, and marbles,
and cramp-bones in their pockets, and the most untidy legs and
feet--and heels particularly.

i asked caddy what had made their parents choose this profession for
them. caddy said she didn't know; perhaps they were designed for
teachers, perhaps for the stage. they were all people in humble
circumstances, and the melancholy boy's mother kept a ginger-beer
shop.

we danced for an hour with great gravity, the melancholy child doing
wonders with his lower extremities, in which there appeared to be
some sense of enjoyment though it never rose above his waist. caddy,
while she was observant of her husband
 
 ___________________________
 
y founded upon
him, had acquired a grace and self-possession of her own, which,
united to her pretty face and figure, was uncommonly agreeable. she
already relieved him of much of the instruction of these young
people, and he seldom interfered except to walk his part in the
figure if he had anything to do in it. he always played the tune. the
affectation of the gauzy child, and her condescension to the boys,
was a sight. and thus we danced an hour by the clock.

when the practice was concluded, caddy's husband made himself ready
to go out of town to a school, and caddy ran away to get ready to go
out with me. i sat in the ball-room in the interval, contemplating
the apprentices. the two out-door boys went upon the staircase to put
on their half-boots and pull the in-door boy's hair, as i judged from
the nature of his objections. returning with their jackets buttoned
and their pumps stuck in them, they then produced packets of cold
bread and meat and bivouacked under a painted lyre on the wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ll. the
little gauzy child, having whisked her sandals into the reticule and
put on a trodden-down pair of shoes, shook her head into the dowdy
bonnet at one shake, and answering my inquiry whether she liked
dancing by replying, "not with boys," tied it across her chin, and
went home contemptuous.

"old mr. turveydrop is so sorry," said caddy, "that he has not
finished dressing yet and cannot have the pleasure of seeing you
before you go. you are such a favourite of his, esther."

i expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it
necessary to add that i readily dispensed with this attention.

"it takes him a long time to dress," said caddy, "because he is very
much looked up to in such things, you know, and has a reputation to
support. you can't think how kind he is to pa. he talks to pa of an
evening about the prince reg
 
 ___________________________
 
ent, and i never saw pa so interested."

there was something in the picture of mr. turveydrop bestowing his
deportment on mr. jellyby that quite took my fancy. i asked caddy if
he brought her papa out much.

"no," said caddy, "i don't know that he does that, but he talks to
pa, and pa greatly admires him, and listens, and likes it. of course
i am aware that pa has hardly any claims to deportment, but they get
on together delightfully. you can't think what good companions they
make. i never saw pa take snuff before in my life, but he takes one
pinch out of mr. turveydrop's box regularly and keeps putting it to
his nose and taking it away again all the evening."

that old mr. turveydrop should ever, in the chances an
 
 ___________________________
 
d changes of
life, have come to the rescue of mr. jellyby from borrioboola-gha
appeared to me to be one of the pleasantest of oddities.

"as to peepy," said caddy with a little hesitation, "whom i was most
afraid of--next to having any family of my own, esther--as an
inconvenience to mr. turveydrop, the kindness of the old gentleman to
that child is beyond everything. he asks to see him, my dear! he lets
him take the newspaper up to him in bed; he gives him the crusts of
his toast to eat; he sends him on little errands about the house; he
tells him to come to me for sixpences. in short," said caddy
cheerily, "and not to prose, i am a very fortunate girl 
 
 ___________________________
 
and ought to
be very grateful. where are we going, esther?"

"to the old street road," said i, "where i have a few words to say to
the solicitor's clerk who was sent to meet me at the coach-office on
the very day when i came to london and first saw you, my dear. now i
think of it, the gentleman who brought us to your house."

"then, indeed, i seem to be naturally the person to go with you,"
returned caddy.

to the old street road we went and there inquired at mrs. guppy's
residence for mrs. guppy. mrs. guppy, occupying the parlours and
having indeed been visibly in danger of cracking herself like a nut
in the front-parlour door by peeping out before she was asked for,
immediately presented herself and requested us to walk in. she was an
old lady in a large cap, with rather a red nose and rather an
unsteady eye, but smiling all over. her close little sitting-room was
prepared for a visit, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
 in a great many colours and was discovered at a table
reading law-papers with his forefinger to his forehead.

"miss summerson," said mr. guppy, rising, "this is indeed an oasis.
mother, will you be so good as to put a chair for the other lady and
get out of the gangway."

mrs. guppy, whose incessant smiling gave her quite a waggish
appearance, did as her son requested and then sat down in a corner,
holding her pocket handkerchief to her chest, like a fomentation,
with both hands.

i presented caddy, and mr. guppy said that any friend of mine was
more than welcome. i then proceeded to the object of my visit.

"i took the liberty of sending you a note, sir," said i.

mr. guppy acknowledged the receipt by taking it out of his
breast-pocket, putting it to his lips, and returning it to his pocket
with a bow. mr. guppy's mother was so diverted that she rolled her
head as she smiled and made a silent appeal to caddy with her elbow.

"could i speak to you alone for a moment?" said i.

anything li
 
 ___________________________
 
ke the jocoseness of mr. guppy's mother just now, i think
i never saw. she made no sound of laughter, but she rolled her head,
and shook it, and put her handkerchief to her mouth, and appealed to
caddy with her elbow, and her hand, and her shoulder, and was so
unspeakably entertained altogether that it was with some difficulty
she could marshal caddy through the little folding-door into her
bedroom adjoining.

"miss summerson," said mr. guppy, "you will excuse the waywardness of
a parent ever mindful of a son's appiness. my mother, though highly
exasperating to the feelings, is actuated by maternal dictates."

i could hardly have believed that anybody could in a moment have
turned so red or changed so much as mr. guppy did when i now put up
my veil.

"i asked the favour of seeing you for a few moments here," said i,
"in preference to callin
 
 ___________________________
 
y soul, miss summerson, as i am a living
man, i'll act according to your wish! i'll never go another step in
opposition to it. i'll take my oath to it if it will be any
satisfaction to you. in what i promise at this present time touching
the matters now in question," continued mr. guppy rapidly, as if he
were repeating a familiar form of words, "i speak the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so--"

"i am quite satisfied," said i, rising at this point, "and i thank
you very much. caddy, my dear, i am ready!"

mr. guppy's mother returned with caddy (now making me the recipient
of her silent laughter and her nudges), and we took our leave. mr.
guppy saw us to the door with the air of one who was either
imperfectly awake or walking in his sleep; and we left him there,
staring.

but in a minute he came after us down the street without any hat, and
with his long hair all blown about, and stopped us, saying fervently,
"miss summerson, upon my honour and soul, you may depend upon me
 
 ___________________________
 
!"

"i do," said i, "quite confidently."

"i beg your pardon, miss," said mr. guppy, going with one leg and
staying with the other, "but this lady being present--your own
witness--it might be a satisfaction to your mind (which i should wish
to set at rest) if you was to repeat those admissions."

"well, caddy," said i, turning to her, "perhaps you will not be
surprised when i tell you, my dear, that there never has been any
engagement--"

"no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," suggested mr. guppy.

"no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," said i, "between
this gentleman--"

"william guppy, of penton place, pentonville, in the county of
middlesex," he murmured.

"between this gentleman, mr. william guppy, of penton place,
pentonville, in the county of middlesex, and myself."

"thank
 
 ___________________________
 
 can't look chance men in the face with these things on," mr.
george hurriedly replies. "do, for god's sake, pull my hat forward."

so strongly entreated, mr. bucket complies, puts his own hat on, and
conducts his prize into the streets, the trooper marching on as
steadily as usual, though with his head less erect, and mr. bucket
steering him with his elbow over the crossings and up the turnings.




chapter l

esther's narrative


it happened that when i came home from deal i found a note from caddy
jellyby (as we always continued to call her), informing me that her
health, which had been for some time very delicate, was worse and
that she would be more glad than she could tell me if i would go to
see her. it was a note of a few lines, written from the couch on
which she lay and enclosed to me in another from her husband, in
which he seconded her entreaty with much solicitude. caddy was now
the mother, and i the godmother, of such a poor little baby--such a
tiny old-faced mite, with a coun
 
 ___________________________
 
but cap-border, and a little lean, long-fingered hand,
always clenched under its chin. it would lie in this attitude all
day, with its bright specks of eyes open, wondering (as i used to
imagine) how it came to be so small and weak. whenever it was moved
it cried, but at all other times it was so patient that the sole
desire of its life appeared to be to lie quiet and think. it had
curious little dark veins in its face and curious little dark marks
under its eyes like faint remembrances of poor caddy's inky days, and
altogether, to those who were not used to it, it was quite a piteous
little sight.

but it was enough for caddy that she was used to it. the projects
with which she beguiled her illness, for little esther's education,
and little esther's marriage, and even for her own old age as the
grandmother of little esther's little esthers, was so prettily
expressive of devotion to this pride of her life that i should be
tempted to recall some of them but for the timely remembrance that i

 
 ___________________________
 
am getting on irregularly as it is.

to return to the letter. caddy had a superstition about me which had
been strengthening in her mind ever since that night long ago when
she had lain asleep with her head in my lap. she almost--i think i
must say quite--believed that i did her good whenever i was near her.
now although this was such a fancy of the affectionate girl's that i
am almost ashamed to mention it, still it might have all the force of
a fact when she was really ill. therefore i set off to caddy, with my
guardian's consent, post-haste; and she and prin
 
 ___________________________
 
or for ada, or for both of us.
it is somebody's birthday to-morrow, i think."

"truly i think it is," said i, kissing my darling, who would be
twenty-one to-morrow.

"well," observed my guardian, half pleasantly, half seriously,
"that's a great occasion and will give my fair cousin some necessary
business to transact in assertion of her independence, and will make
london a more convenient place for all of us. so to london we will
go. that being settled, there is another thing--how have you left
caddy?"

"very unwell, guardian. i fear it will be some time before she
regains her health and strength."

"what do you call some time, now?" asked my guardian thoughtfully.

"some weeks, i am afraid."

"ah!" he began to walk about the room with his hands in his pockets,
showing that he had been thinking as much. "now, what do you say
about her doctor? is he a good doctor, my love?"

i felt obliged to confess that i knew nothing to the contrary but
that prince and i had agreed only that evening that 
 
 ___________________________
 
d to have a
great reliance on him and to like him very much. i said that he was
no stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in his kind
attendance on miss flite.

"very good," said my guardian. "he has been here to-day, my dear, and
i will see him about it to-morrow."

i felt in this short conversation--though i did not know how, for she
was quiet, and we interchanged no look--that my dear girl well
remembered how merrily she had clasped me round the waist when no
other hands than caddy's had brought me the little parting token.
this caused me to feel that i ought to tell her, and caddy too, that
i was going to be the mistress of bleak house and that if i avoided
that disclosure any longer i might become less worthy in my own eyes
of its master's love. therefore, when we went upstairs and had waited
listening until the clock struck twelve in order that only i might be
the first to wish my darling all good wishes on her birthday and to
take her to my heart, i set before her, ju
 
 ___________________________
 
w hours ago, but now that
it was gone i felt as if i understood its nature better.

next day we went to london. we found our old lodging vacant, and in
half an hour were quietly established there, as if we had never gone
away. mr. woodcourt dined with us to celebrate my darling's birthday,
and we were as pleasant as we could be with the great blank among us
that richard's absence naturally made on such an occasion. after that
day i was for some weeks--eight or nine as i remember--very much with
caddy, and thus it fell out that i saw less of ada at this time than
any other since we had first come together, except the time of my own
illness. she often came to caddy's, but our function there was to
amuse and cheer her, and we did not talk in our usual confidential
manner. whenever i went home at night we were together, but caddy's
rest was broken by pain, and i often remained to nurse her.

with her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and their
home to strive for, what a good cr
 
 ___________________________
 
eature caddy was! so self-denying,
so uncomplaining, so anxious to get well on their account, so afraid
of giving trouble, and so thoughtful of the unassisted labours of her
husband and the comforts of old mr. turveydrop; i had never known the
best of her until now. and it seemed so curious that her pale face
and helpless figure should be lying there day after day where dancing
was the business of life, where the kit and the apprentices began
early every morning in the ball-room, and where the untidy little
 
 ___________________________
 
 boy
waltzed by himself in the kitchen all the afternoon.

at caddy's request i took the supreme direction of her apartment,
trimmed it up, and pushed her, couch and all, into a lighter and more
airy and more cheerful corner than she had yet occupied; then, every
day, when we were in our neatest array, i used to lay my small small
namesake in her arms and sit down to chat or work or read to her. it
was at one of the first of these quiet times that i told caddy about
bleak house.

we had other visitors besides ada. first of all we had prince, who in
his hurried intervals of teaching used to come softly in and sit
softly down, with a face of loving anxiety for caddy and the very
little child. whatever caddy's condition really was, she never failed
to declare to prince that she was all but well--which i, heaven
forgive me, never failed to confirm. this would put prince in such
good spirits that he would sometimes take the kit from his pocket and
play a 
 
 ___________________________
 
chord or two to astonish the baby, which i never knew it to do
in the least degree, for my tiny namesake never noticed it at all.

then there was mrs. jellyby. she would come occasionally, with her
usual distraught manner, and sit calmly looking miles beyond her
grandchild as if her attention were absorbed by a young borrioboolan
on its native shores. as bright-eyed as ever, as serene, and as
untidy, she would say, "well, caddy, child, and how do you do
to-day?" and then would sit amiably smiling and taking no notice of
the reply or would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number
of letters she had lately received and answered or of the
coffee-bearing power of borrioboola-gha. this she would always do
with a serene contempt for our limited sphere of action, not to be
disguised.

then there was old mr. turveydrop, who was from morning to night and
from night to morning the subject of innumerable precautions. i
 
 ___________________________
 
f the
baby cried, it was nearly stifled lest the noise should make him
uncomfortable. if the fire wanted stirring in the night, it was
surreptitiously done lest his rest should be broken. if caddy
required any little comfort that the house contained, she first
carefully discussed whether he was likely to require it too. in
return for this consideration he would come into the room once a day,
all but blessing it--showing a condescension, and a patronage, and a
grace of manner in dispensing the light of his high-shouldered
presence from which i might have supposed him (if i had not known
better) to have been the benefactor of caddy's life.

"my caroline," he would say, making the nearest a
 
 ___________________________
 
pproach that he
could to bending over her. "tell me that you are better to-day."

"oh, much better, thank you, mr. turveydrop," caddy would reply.

"delighted! enchanted! and our dear miss summerson. she is not quite
prostrated by fatigue?" here he would crease up his eyelids and kiss
his fingers to me, though i am happy to say he had ceased to be
particular in his attentions since i had been so altered.

"not at all," i would assure him.

"charming! we must take care of our dear caroline, miss summerson. we
must spare nothing that will restore her. we must nourish her. my
dear caroline"--he would turn to his daughter-in-law 
 
 ___________________________
 
, my love. frame a wish
and gratify it, my daughter. everything this house contains,
everything my room contains, is at your service, my dear. do not," he
would sometimes add in a burst of deportment, "even allow my simple
requirements to be considered if they should at any time interfere
with your own, my caroline. your necessities are greater than mine."

he had established such a long prescriptive right to this deportment
(his son's inheritance from his mother) that i several times knew
both caddy and her husband to be melted to tears by these
affectionate self-sacrifices.

"nay, my dears," he would remonstrate; and when i saw caddy's thin
arm about his fat neck as he said it, i would be melted too, though
not by the same process. "nay, nay! i have promised never to leave
ye. be dutiful and affectionate towards me, and i ask no other
return. now, bless ye! i am going to the park."

he would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his
hotel dinner. i hope i do old mr. turveyd
 
 ___________________________
 
an these i faithfully record, except
that he certainly conceived a liking for peepy and would take the
child out walking with great pomp, always on those occasions sending
him home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally with a
halfpenny in his pocket. but even this disinterestedness was attended
with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for before peepy was
sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with the professor of
deportment, he had to be newly dressed, at the expense of caddy and
her husband, from top to toe.

last of our visitors, there was mr. jellyby. really when he used to
come in of an evening, and ask caddy in his meek voice how she was,
and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no attempt
to say anything more, i liked him very much. if he found me bustling
about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took his coat off, as
if with an intention of helping by a great exertion; but he never got
any further. his sole occupation was to sit with 
 
 ___________________________
 
his head against the
wall, looking hard at the thoughtful baby; and i could not quite
divest my mind of a fancy that they understood one another.

i have not counted mr. woodcourt among our visitors because he was
now caddy's regular attendant. she soon began to improve under his
care, but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains he
took that it is not to be wondered at, i am sure. i saw a good deal
of mr. woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might be
supposed, for knowing caddy to be safe in his hands, i often slipped
home at about the hours when he was expected. we frequently met,
notwithstanding. i was quite reconciled to myself now, but i still
felt glad to think that he was sorry 
 
 ___________________________
 
for me, and he still was sorry
for me i believed. he helped mr. badger in his professional
engagements, which were numerous, and had as yet no settled projects
for the future.

it was when caddy began to recover that i began to notice a change in
my dear girl. i cannot say how it first presented itself to me,
because i observed it in many slight particulars which were nothing
in themselves and only became something when they were pieced
together. but i made it out, by putting them together, that ada was
not so frankly cheerful with me as she used to be. her tenderness for
me was as loving and true as ever; i did not for a moment doubt that;
but there was a quiet sorrow about her which 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat there was any selfish reference in my doing so. i was not
grieved for myself: i was quite contented and quite happy. still,
that ada might be thinking--for me, though i had abandoned all such
thoughts--of what once was, but was now all changed, seemed so easy
to believe that i believed it.

what could i do to reassure my darling (i considered then) and show
her that i had no such feelings? well! i could only be as brisk and
busy as possible, and that i had tried to be all along. however, as
caddy's illness had certainly interfered, more or less, with my home
duties--though i had always been there in the morning to make my
guardian's breakfast, and he had a hundred times laughed and said
there must be two little women, for his little woman was never
missing--i resolved to be doubly diligent and gay. so i went about
the house humming all the tunes i knew, and i sat working and working
in a desperate manner, and i talked and talked, morning, noon, and
night.

and still there was the same s
 
 ___________________________
 
hade between me and my darling.

"so, dame trot," observed my guardian, shutting up his book one night
when we were all three together, "so woodcourt has restored caddy
jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?"

"yes," i said; "and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be
made rich, guardian."

"i wish it was," he returned, "with all my heart."

so did i too, for that matter. i said so.

"aye! we would make him as rich as a jew if we knew how. would we
not, little woman?"

i laughed as i worked and replied that i was not sure about that, for
it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be
many who could ill spare him. as miss f
 
 ___________________________
 
lite, and caddy herself, and
many others.

"true," said my guardian. "i had forgotten that. but we would agree
to make him rich enough to live, i suppose? rich enough to work with
tolerable peace of mind? rich enough to have his own happy home and
his own household gods--and household goddess, too, perhaps?"

that was quite another thing, i said. we must all agree in that.

"to be sure," said my guardian. "all of us. i have a great regard for
woodcourt, a high esteem for him; and i have been sounding him
delic
 
 ___________________________
 
r for a little while.

she was asleep, and i thought as i looked at her that she was a
little changed. i had thought so more than once lately. i could not
decide, even looking at her while she was unconscious, how she was
changed, but something in the familiar beauty of her face looked
different to me. my guardian's old hopes of her and richard arose
sorrowfully in my mind, and i said to myself, "she has been anxious
about him," and i wondered how that love would end.

when i had come home from caddy's while she was ill, i had often
found ada at work, and she had always put her work away, and i had
never known what it was. some of it now lay in a drawer near her,
which was not quite closed. i did not open the drawer, but i still
rather wondered what the work could be, for it was evidently nothing
for herself.

and i noticed as i kissed my dear that she lay with one hand under
her pillow so that it was hidden.

how much less amiable i must have been than they thought me, how much
less amiabl
 
 ___________________________
 
s myself. do, i beseech you, think of that!"

afterwards, when mr. woodcourt came to reflect on what had passed, he
was so very much impressed by the strength of richard's anxiety on
this point that in telling me generally of his first visit to
symond's inn he particularly dwelt upon it. it revived a fear i had
had before that my dear girl's little property would be absorbed by
mr. vholes and that richard's justification to himself would be
sincerely this. it was just as i began to take care of caddy that the
interview took place, and i now return to the time when caddy had
recovered and the shade was still between me and my darling.

i proposed to ada that morning that we should go and see richard. it
a little surprised me to find that she hesitated and was not so
radiantly willing as i had expected.

"my dear," said i, "you have not had any difference with richard
since i have been so much away?"

"no, esther."

"not heard of him, perhaps?" said i.

"yes, i have heard of him," said ada.


 
 ___________________________
 
estminster that the cause was to come on. it had come on
there, i dare say, a hundred times before, but i could not divest
myself of an idea that it might lead to some result now. we left home
directly after breakfast to be at westminster hall in good time and
walked down there through the lively streets--so happily and
strangely it seemed!--together.

as we were going along, planning what we should do for richard and
ada, i heard somebody calling "esther! my dear esther! esther!" and
there was caddy jellyby, with her head out of the window of a little
carriage which she hired now to go about in to her pupils (she had so
many), as if she wanted to embrace me at a hundred yards' distance. i
had written her a note to tell her of all that my guardian had done,
but had not had a moment to go and see her. of course we turned back,
and the affectionate girl was in that state of rapture, and was so
overjoyed to talk about the night when she brought me the flowers,
and was so determined to squeeze 
 
 ___________________________
 
my face (bonnet and all) between her
hands, and go on in a wild manner altogether, calling me all kinds of
precious names, and telling allan i had done i don't know what for
her, that i was just obliged to get into the little carriage and calm
her down by letting her say and do exactly what she liked. allan,
standing at the window, was as pleased as caddy; and i was as pleased
as either of them; and i wonder that i got away as i did, rather than
that i came off laughing, and red, and anything but tidy, and looking
after caddy, who looked after us out of the coach-window as long as
she could see us.

this made us some quarter of an hour late, and when we came to
westminster hall we found that the day's business was begun. worse
than that, we found such an unusual crowd in the court of chancery
that it was full to the door, and we could neither se
 
 ___________________________
 
o
do and was in great request. so far as my small maid is concerned, i
might suppose time to have stood for seven years as still as the mill
did half an hour ago, since little emma, charley's sister, is exactly
what charley used to be. as to tom, charley's brother, i am really
afraid to say what he did at school in ciphering, but i think it was
decimals. he is apprenticed to the miller, whatever it was, and is a
good bashful fellow, always falling in love with somebody and being
ashamed of it.

caddy jellyby passed her very last holidays with us and was a dearer
creature than ever, perpetually dancing in and out of the house with
the children as if she had never given a dancing-lesson in her life.
caddy keeps her own little carriage now instead of hiring one, and
lives full two miles further westward than newman street. she works
very hard, her husband (an excellent one) being lame and able to do
very little. still, she is more than contented and does all she has
to do with all her heart. m
 
 ___________________________
 
enings at her new
house with his head against the wall as he used to do in her old one.
i have heard that mrs. jellyby was understood to suffer great
mortification from her daughter's ignoble marriage and pursuits, but
i hope she got over it in time. she has been disappointed in
borrioboola-gha, which turned out a failure in consequence of the
king of borrioboola wanting to sell everybody--who survived the
climate--for rum, but she has taken up with the rights of women to
sit in parliament, and caddy tells me it is a mission involving more
correspondence than the old one. i had almost forgotten caddy's poor
little girl. she is not such a mite now, but she is deaf and dumb. i
believe there never was a better mother than caddy, who learns, in
her scanty intervals of leisure, innumerable deaf and dumb arts to
soften the affliction of her child.

as if i were never to have done with caddy, i am reminded here of
peepy and old mr. turveydrop. peepy is in the custom house, and doing
extremely well