
females of america, the ladies of a hundred denominations. they
appeared to be always excited about canvassing and electing. they
seemed to our poor wits, and according to their own accounts, to be
constantly polling people by tens of thousands, yet never bringing
their candidates in for anything. it made our heads ache to think, on
the whole, what feverish lives they must lead.

among the ladies who were most distinguished for this rapacious
benevolence (if i may use the expression) was a mrs. pardiggle, who
seemed, as i judged from the number of her letters to mr. jarndyce,
to be almost as powerful a correspondent as mrs. jellyby herself. we
observed that the wind always changed when mrs. pardiggle became the
subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupted mr.
jarndyce and prevented his going any farther, when he had remarked
that there were two classes of charitable people; one, the people who
did a little and made a great deal of noise; the other, the people
who did a great deal 
 
 ___________________________
 
and made no noise at all. we were therefore
curious to see mrs. pardiggle, suspecting her to be a type of the
former class, and were glad when she called one day with her five
young sons.

she was a formidable style of lady with spectacles, a prominent nose,
and a loud voice, who had the effect of wanting a great deal of room.
and she really did, for she knocked down little chairs with her
skirts that were quite a great way off. as only ada and i were at
home, we received her timidly, for she seemed to come in like cold
weather and to make the little pardiggles blue 
 
 ___________________________
 
as they followed.

"these, young ladies," said mrs. pardiggle with great volubility
after the first salutations, "are my five boys. you may have seen
their names in a printed subscription list (perhaps more than one) in
the possession of our esteemed friend mr. jarndyce. egbert, my eldest
(twelve), is the boy who sent out his pocket-money, to the amount of
five and threepence, to the tockahoopo indians. oswald, my second
(ten and a half), is the child who contributed two and nine-pence to
the great national smithers testimonial. francis, my third (nine),

 
 ___________________________
 
 ferocious with discontent. at the
mention of the tockahoopo indians, i could really have supposed
egbert to be one of the most baleful members of that tribe, he gave
me such a savage frown. the face of each child, as the amount of his
contribution was mentioned, darkened in a peculiarly vindictive
manner, but his was by far the worst. i must except, however, the
little recruit into the infant bonds of joy, who was stolidly and
evenly miserable.

"you have been visiting, i understand," said mrs. pardiggle, "at mrs.
jellyby's?"

we said yes, we had passed one night there.

"mrs. jellyby," pursued the lady, always speaking in the same
demonstrative, loud, hard tone, so that her voice impressed my fancy
as if it had a sort of spectacles on too--and i may take the
opportunity of remarking that her spectacles were made the less
engaging by her eyes being what ada called "choking eyes," meaning
very prominent--"mrs. jellyby is a benefactor to society and deserves
a helping hand. my boys have contribut
 
 ___________________________
 
e objects to
which she is devoted. she may be right, she may be wrong; but, right
or wrong, this is not my course with my young family. i take them
everywhere."

i was afterwards convinced (and so was ada) that from the
ill-conditioned eldest child, these words extorted a sharp yell. he
turned it off into a yawn, but it began as a yell.

"they attend matins with me (very prettily done) at half-past six
o'clock in the morning all the year round, including of course the
depth of winter," said mrs. pardiggle rapidly, "and they are with me
during the revolving duties of the day. i am a school lady, i am a
visiting lady, i am a reading lady, i am a distributing lady; i am on
the local linen box committee and many general committees; and my
canvassing alone is very extensive--perhaps no one's more so. but
they are my companions everywhere; and by these means they acquire
that knowledge of the poor, and that capacity of doing charitable
business in general--in short, that taste for the sort of
thing--w
 
 ___________________________
 
eetings and listened to as many lectures, orations, and
discussions as generally fall to the lot of few grown people. alfred
(five), who, as i mentioned, has of his own election joined the
infant bonds of joy, was one of the very few children who manifested
consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of two hours
from the chairman of the evening."

alfred glowered at us as if he never could, or would, forgive the
injury of that night.

"you may have observed, miss summerson," said mrs. pardiggle, "in
some of the lists to which i have referred, in the possession of our
esteemed friend mr. jarndyce, that the names of my young family are
concluded with the name of o. a. pardiggle, f.r.s., one pound. that
is their father. we usually observe the same routine. i put down my
mite first; then my young family enrol their contributions, according
to their ages and their little means; and then mr. pardiggle brings
up the rear. mr. pardiggle is happy to throw in his limited donation,
under my dire
 
 ___________________________
 
ction; and thus things are made not only pleasant to
ourselves, but, we trust, improving to others."

suppose mr. pardiggle were to dine with mr. jellyby, and suppose mr.
jellyby were to relieve his mind after dinner to mr. pardiggle, would
mr. pardiggle, in return, make any confidential communication to mr.
jellyby? i was quite confused to find myself thinking this, but it
came into my head.

"you are very pleasantly situated here!" said mrs. pardiggle.

we were glad to change the subject, and going to the window, pointed
out the beauties of the prospect, on which the spectacles appeared to
me to rest with curious indifference.

"you know mr. gusher?" said our visitor.

we were obliged to say that we had not the pleasure of mr. gusher's
acquaintance.

"the loss is yours, i assure you," said mrs. pardiggle with her
commanding deportment. "he is a very fervid, impassioned
speaker--full of fire! stationed in a waggon on this lawn, now,
which, fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om the shape of the land, is naturally adapted to a public
meeting, he would improve almost any occasion you could mention for
hours and hours! by this time, young ladies," said mrs. pardiggle,
moving back to her chair and overturning, as if by invisible agency,
a little round table at a considerable distance with my work-basket
on it, "by this time you have found me out, i dare say?"

this was really such a confusing question that ada looked at me in
perfect dismay. as to the guilty nature of my own consciousness after
what i had been thinking, it must have been expressed in the colour
of my cheeks.

"found out, i mean," said mrs. pardiggle, "the prominent point in my
character. i a
 
 ___________________________
 
y. i lay myself open to detection, i know. well! i freely
admit, i am a woman of business. i love hard work; i enjoy hard work.
the excitement does me good. i am so accustomed and inured to hard
work that i don't know what fatigue is."

we murmured that it was very astonishing and very gratifying, or
something to that effect. i don't think we knew what it was either,
but this is what our politeness expressed.

"i do not understand what it is to be tired; you cannot tire me if
you try!" said mrs. pardiggle. "the quantity of exertion (which is no
exertion to me), the amount of business (which i regard as nothing),
that i go through sometimes astonishes myself. i have seen my young
family, and mr. pardiggle, quite worn out with witnessing it, when i
may truly say i have been as fresh as a lark!"

if that dark-visaged eldest boy could look more malicious than he had
already looked, this was the time when he did it. i observed that he
doubled his right fist and delivered a secret blow into the crown 
 
 ___________________________
 
of
his cap, which was under his left arm.

"this gives me a great advantage when i am making my rounds," said
mrs. pardiggle. "if i find a person unwilling to hear what i have to
say, i tell that person directly, 'i am incapable of fatigue, my good
friend, i am never tired, and i mean to go on until i have done.' it
answers admirably! miss summerson, i hope i shall have your
assistance in my visiting rounds immediately, and miss clare's very
soon."

at first i tried to excuse myself for the present on the general
ground of having occupations to attend to which i must not neglect.
but as this was an ineffectual protes
 
 ___________________________
 
points of
view. that i had not that delicate knowledge of the heart which must
be essential to such a work. that i had much to learn, myself, before
i could teach others, and that i could not confide in my good
intentions alone. for these reasons i thought it best to be as useful
as i could, and to render what kind services i could to those
immediately about me, and to try to let that circle of duty gradually
and naturally expand itself. all this i said with anything but
confidence, because mrs. pardiggle was much older than i, and had
great experience, and was so very military in her manners.

"you are wrong, miss summerson," said she, "but perhaps you are not
equal to hard work or the excitement of it, and that makes a vast
difference. if you would like to see how i go through my work, i am
now about--with my young family--to visit a brickmaker in the
neighbourhood (a very bad character) and shall be glad to take you
with me. miss clare also, if she will do me the favour."

ada and i interchan
 
 ___________________________
 
ged looks, and as we were going out in any case,
accepted the offer. when we hastily returned from putting on our
bonnets, we found the young family languishing in a corner and mrs.
pardiggle sweeping about the room, knocking down nearly all the light
objects it contained. mrs. pardiggle took possession of ada, and i
followed with the family.

ada told me afterwards that mrs. pardiggle talked in the same loud
tone (that, indeed, i overheard) all the way to the brickmaker's
about an exciting contest which she had for two or three years waged
against another lady relative to the bringing in of their rival
candidates for a pension somewhere. there had been a quantity of
printing, and promising, and proxying, and polling, and it appeared
to have imparted great liveliness to all concerned, except the
pensioners--who were not elected yet.

i am very fond of being confided in by chi
 
 ___________________________
 
ing nothing but stagnant pools. here and there an old tub was put
to catch the droppings of rain-water from a roof, or they were banked
up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt-pie. at the doors
and windows some men and women lounged or prowled about, and took
little notice of us except to laugh to one another or to say
something as we passed about gentlefolks minding their own business
and not troubling their heads and muddying their shoes with coming to
look after other people's.

mrs. pardiggle, leading the way with a great show of moral
determination and talking with much volubility about the untidy
habits of the people (though i doubted if the best of us could have
been tidy in such a place), conducted us into a cottage at the
farthest corner, the ground-floor room of which we nearly filled.
besides ourselves, there were in this damp, offensive room a woman
with a black eye, nursing a poor little gasping baby by the fire; a
man, all stained with clay and mud and looking very dissipa
 
 ___________________________
 
ted, lying
at full length on the ground, smoking a pipe; a powerful young man
fastening a collar on a dog; and a bold girl doing some kind of
washing in very dirty water. they all looked up at us as we came in,
and the woman seemed to turn her face towards the fire as if to hide
her bruised eye; nobody gave us any welcome.

"well, my friends," said mrs. pardiggle, but her voice had not a
friendly sound, i thought; it was much too business-like and
systematic. "how do you do, all of you? i am here again. i told you,
you couldn't tire me, you know. i am fond of hard work, and am true
to my word."

"there an't," growled the man on the floor, whose head rested on his
hand as he stared at us, "any more on you to come in, is there?"

"no, my friend," said mrs. pardiggle, seating herself on one stool
and knocking down another. "we are all here."

"because i th
 
 ___________________________
 
ought there warn't enough of you, perhaps?" said the
man, with his pipe between his lips as he looked round upon us.

the young man and the girl both laughed. two friends of the young
man, whom we had attracted to the doorway and who stood there with
their hands in their pockets, echoed the laugh noisily.

"you can't tire me, good people," said mrs. pardiggle to these
latter. "i enjoy hard work, and the harder you make mine, the better
i like it."

"then make it easy for her!" growled the man upon the floor. "i wants
it done, and over. i wants a end of these liberties took with my
place. i wants an end of being drawed like a badger. now you're
a-going to poll-pry and question according to custom--i know what
you're a-going to be up to. well! you haven't got no occasion to be
up to it. i'll save you the trouble. is my daughter a-washin? yes,
she is a
 
 ___________________________
 
 have i been conducting of
myself? why, i've been drunk for three days; and i'da been drunk four
if i'da had the money. don't i never mean for to go to church? no, i
don't never mean for to go to church. i shouldn't be expected there,
if i did; the beadle's too gen-teel for me. and how did my wife get
that black eye? why, i give it her; and if she says i didn't, she's a
lie!"

he had pulled his pipe out of his mouth to say all this, and he now
turned over on his other side and smoked again. mrs. pardiggle, who
had been regarding him through her spectacles with a forcible
composure, calculated, i could not help thinking, to increase his
antagonism, pulled out a good book as if it were a constable's staff
and took the whole family into custody. i mean into religious
custody, of course; but she really did it as if she were an
inexorable moral policeman carrying them all off to a station-house.

ada and i were very uncomfortable. we both felt intrusive and out of
place, and we both thought that mrs.
 
 ___________________________
 
 pardiggle would have got on
infinitely better if she had not had such a mechanical way of taking
possession of people. the children sulked and stared; the family took
no notice of us whatever, except when the young man made the dog
bark, which he usually did when mrs. pardiggle was most emphatic. we
both felt painfully sensible that between us and these people there
was an iron barrier which could not be removed by our new friend. by
whom or how it could be removed, we did not know, but we knew that.
even what she read and said seemed to us to be ill-chosen for such
auditors, if it had been imparted ever so modestly and with ever so
much tact. as to the little book to which the man on the floor had
referred, we acquired a knowledge of it afterwards, and mr. jarndyce
s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid he doubted if robinson crusoe could have read it, though he had
had no other on his desolate island.

we were much relieved, under these circumstances, when mrs. pardiggle
left off.

the man on the floor, then turning his head round again, said
morosely, "well! you've done, have you?"

"for to-day, i have, my friend. but i am never fatigued. i shall come
to you again in your regular order," returned mrs. pardiggle with
demonstrative cheerfulness.

"so long as you goes now," said he, folding his arms and shutting his
eyes with an oath, "you may do wot you like!"

mrs. pardiggle accordingly rose and made a little vortex in the
confined room from which the pipe itself very narrowly escaped.
taking one of her young family in each hand, and telling the others
to follow closely, and expressing her hope that the brickmaker and
all his house would be improved when she saw them next, she then
proceeded to another
 
 ___________________________
 
or
anything in the way of a testimonial to any one. his great power
seemed to be his power of indiscriminate admiration. he would sit for
any length of time, with the utmost enjoyment, bathing his temples in
the light of any order of luminary. having first seen him perfectly
swallowed up in admiration of mrs. jellyby, i had supposed her to be
the absorbing object of his devotion. i soon discovered my mistake
and found him to be train-bearer and organ-blower to a whole
procession of people.

mrs. pardiggle came one day for a subscription to something, and with
her, mr. quale. whatever mrs. pardiggle said, mr. quale repeated to
us; and just as he had drawn mrs. jellyby out, he drew mrs. pardiggle
out. mrs. pardiggle wrote a letter of introduction to my guardian in
behalf of her eloquent friend mr. gusher. with mr. gusher appeared
mr. quale again. mr. gusher, being a flabby gentleman with a moist
surface and eyes so much too small for his moon of a face that they
seemed to have been originally made
 
 ___________________________
 
k and that he sacrificed personal considerations to
ensure it. "my dear sir," said mr. turveydrop, "these young people
will live with me; my house is large enough for their accommodation,
and they shall not want the shelter of my roof. i could have
wished--you will understand the allusion, mr. jarndyce, for you
remember my illustrious patron the prince regent--i could have
wished that my son had married into a family where there was more
deportment, but the will of heaven be done!"

mr. and mrs. pardiggle were of the party--mr. pardiggle, an
obstinate-looking man with a large waistcoat and stubbly hair, who
was always talking in a loud bass voice about his mite, or mrs.
pardiggle's mite, or their five boys' mites. mr. quale, with his hair
brushed back as usual and his knobs of temples shining very much, was
also there, not in the character of a disappointed lover, but as the
accepted of a young--at least, an unmarried--lady, a miss wisk, who
was also there. miss wisk's mission, my guardian said,
 
 ___________________________
 
e
domestic mission was the very last thing to be endured among them;
indeed, miss wisk informed us, with great indignation, before we sat
down to breakfast, that the idea of woman's mission lying chiefly in
the narrow sphere of home was an outrageous slander on the part of
her tyrant, man. one other singularity was that nobody with a
mission--except mr. quale, whose mission, as i think i have formerly
said, was to be in ecstasies with everybody's mission--cared at all
for anybody's mission. mrs. pardiggle being as clear that the only
one infallible course was her course of pouncing upon the poor and
applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; as miss wisk
was that the only practical thing for the world was the emancipation
of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. mrs. jellyby, all the
while, sat smiling at the limited vision that could see anything but
borrioboola-gha.

but i am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the ride
home instead of first marrying caddy. we 
 
 ___________________________
 
o not say that he is--too far gone to recover."

"do you consider him in present danger, sir?" inquires the trooper.

"yes, i fear so."

"then, sir," returns the trooper in a decisive manner, "it appears to
me--being naturally in the vagabond way myself--that the sooner he
comes out of the street, the better. you, phil! bring him in!"

mr. squod tacks out, all on one side, to execute the word of command;
and the trooper, having smoked his pipe, lays it by. jo is brought
in. he is not one of mrs. pardiggle's tockahoopo indians; he is not
one of mrs. jellyby's lambs, being wholly unconnected with
borrioboola-gha; he is not softened by distance and unfamiliarity; he
is not a genuine foreign-grown savage; he is the ordinary home-made
article. dirty, ugly, disagreeable to all the senses, in body a
common creature of the common streets, only in soul a heathen. homely
filth begrimes him, homely parasites devour him, homely sores are in
him, homely rags are on him; native ignorance, the growth of englis