nt. but, when i went
upstairs to my own room, i surprised myself by beginning to laugh
about it and then surprised myself still more by beginning to cry
about it. in short, i was in a flutter for a little while and felt as
if an old chord had been more coarsely touched than it ever had been
since the days of the dear old doll, long buried in the garden.




chapter x

the law-writer


on the eastern borders of chancery lane, that is to say, more
particularly in cook's court, cursitor street, mr. snagsby,
law-stationer, pursues his lawful calling. in the shade of cook's
court, at most times a shady place, mr. snagsby has dealt in
all sorts of blank forms of legal process; in skins and rolls
of parchment; in paper--foolscap, brief, draft, brown, white,
whitey-brown, and blotting; in stamps; in office-quills, pens,
ink, india-rubber, pounce, pins, pencils, sealing-wax, and
wafers; in red tape and green ferret; in pocket-books, almanacs,
diaries, and law lists; in string boxes, rulers, inkstands--
 
 ___________________________
 
glass
and leaden--pen-knives, scissors, bodkins, and other small
office-cutlery; in short, in articles too numerous to mention, ever
since he was out of his time and went into partnership with peffer.
on that occasion, cook's court was in a manner revolutionized by the
new inscription in fresh paint, peffer and snagsby, displacing the
time-honoured and not easily to be deciphered legend peffer only. for
smoke, which is the london ivy, had so wreathed itself round peffer's
name and clung to his dwelling-place that the affectionate parasite
quite overpowered the parent tree.

peffer is never seen in cook's court now. he is not expected there,
for he has been recumbent this quarter of a century in the churchyard
of st. andrews, holborn, with the waggons and hackney-coaches roaring
past him all the day and half t
 
 ___________________________
 
 air himself again in
cook's court until admonished to return by the crowing of the
sanguine cock in the cellar at the little dairy in cursitor street,
whose ideas of daylight it would be curious to ascertain, since he
knows from his personal observation next to nothing about it--if
peffer ever do revisit the pale glimpses of cook's court, which no
law-stationer in the trade can positively deny, he comes invisibly,
and no one is the worse or wiser.

in his lifetime, and likewise in the period of snagsby's "time"
of seven long years, there dwelt with peffer in the same
law-stationering premises a niece--a short, shrewd niece, something
too violently compressed about the waist, and with a sharp nose like
a sharp autumn evening, inclining to be frosty towards the end. the
cook's courtiers had a rumour flying among them that the mother of
this niece did, in her daughter's childhood, moved by too jealous a
solicitude that her figure should approach perfection, lace her
up every morning with her mat
 
 ___________________________
 
ernal foot against the bed-post for
a stronger hold and purchase; and further, that she exhibited
internally pints of vinegar and lemon-juice, which acids, they held,
had mounted to the nose and temper of the patient. with whichsoever
of the many tongues of rumour this frothy report originated, it
either never reached or never influenced the ears of young snagsby,
who, having wooed and won its fair subject on his arrival at man's
estate, entered into two partnerships at once. so now, in cook's
court, cursitor street, mr. snagsby and the niece are one; and the
niece still cherishes her figure, which, however tastes may differ,
is unquestionably so far precious that there is mighty little of it.

mr. and mrs. snagsby are not only one bone and one flesh, but, to the
neighbours' thinking, one voice too. that voice, appearing to proceed
from mrs. snagsby alo
 
 ___________________________
 
s grey shop-coat and black calico sleeves, looking up at
the clouds, or stands behind a desk in his dark shop with a heavy
flat ruler, snipping and slicing at sheepskin in company with his two
'prentices, he is emphatically a retiring and unassuming man. from
beneath his feet, at such times, as from a shrill ghost unquiet in
its grave, there frequently arise complainings and lamentations in
the voice already mentioned; and haply, on some occasions when these
reach a sharper pitch than usual, mr. snagsby mentions to the
'prentices, "i think my little woman is a-giving it to guster!"

this proper name, so used by mr. snagsby, has before now sharpened
the wit of the cook's courtiers to remark that it ought to be the
name of mrs. snagsby, seeing that she might with great force and
expression be termed a guster, in compliment to her stormy character.
it is, however, the possession, and the only possession except fifty
shillings per annum and a very small box indifferently filled with
clothing, of a
 
 ___________________________
 
this unaccountable drawback of fits, and
is so apprehensive of being returned on the hands of her patron saint
that except when she is found with her head in the pail, or the sink,
or the copper, or the dinner, or anything else that happens to be
near her at the time of her seizure, she is always at work. she is a
satisfaction to the parents and guardians of the 'prentices, who feel
that there is little danger of her inspiring tender emotions in the
breast of youth; she is a satisfaction to mrs. snagsby, who can
always find fault with her; she is a satisfaction to mr. snagsby, who
thinks it a charity to keep her. the law-stationer's establishment
is, in guster's eyes, a temple of plenty and splendour. she believes
the little drawing-room upstairs, always kept, as one may say, with
its hair in papers and its pinafore on, to be the most elegant
apartment in christendom. the view it commands of cook's court at one
end (not to mention a squint into cursitor street) and of coavinses'
the sheriff's 
 
 ___________________________
 
officer's backyard at the other she regards as a
prospect of unequalled beauty. the portraits it displays in oil--and
plenty of it too--of mr. snagsby looking at mrs. snagsby and of mrs.
snagsby looking at mr. snagsby are in her eyes as achievements of
raphael or titian. guster has some recompenses for her many
privations.

mr. snagsby refers everything not in the practical mysteries of the
business to mrs. snagsby. she manages the money, reproaches the
tax-gatherers, appoints the times and places of devotion on sundays,
licenses mr. snagsby's entertainments, and acknowledges no
responsibility as to what she thinks fit to provide for dinner,
insomuch that she is the high standard of comparison among the
neighbouring wives a long way down chancery lane on both sides, and
even out in holborn, who in any domestic passages of arms habitually
call upon their husbands to look at the difference between their (th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
wives') position and mrs. snagsby's, and their (the husbands')
behaviour and mr. snagsby's. rumour, always flying bat-like about
cook's court and skimming in and out at everybody's windows, does say
that mrs. snagsby is jealous and inquisitive and that mr. snagsby is
sometimes worried out of house and home, and that if he had the
spirit of a mouse he wouldn't stand it. it is even observed that the
wives who quote him to their self-willed husbands as a shining
example in reality look down upon him and that nobody does so with
greater superciliousness than one particular lady whose lord is more
than suspected of laying his umbrella on her as an instrument of
correction. but these vague whisperings may arise from mr. snagsby's
being in his way rather a medi
 
 ___________________________
 
ellors and vices, and
masters of the rolls who are deceased; and he gets such a flavour of
the country out of telling the two 'prentices how he has heard say
that a brook "as clear as crystial" once ran right down the middle of
holborn, when turnstile really was a turnstile, leading slap away
into the meadows--gets such a flavour of the country out of this that
he never wants to go there.

the day is closing in and the gas is lighted, but is not yet fully
effective, for it is not quite dark. mr. snagsby standing at his
shop-door looking up at the clouds sees a crow who is out late skim
westward over the slice of sky belonging to cook's court. the crow
flies straight across chancery lane and lincoln's inn garden into
lincoln's inn fields.

here, in a large house, formerly a house of state, lives mr.
tulkinghorn. it is let off in sets of chambers now, and in those
shrunken fragments of its greatness, lawyers lie like maggots in
nuts. but its roomy staircases, passages, and antechambers still
rem
 
 ___________________________
 
kstand top,
the little sand-box. so! you to the middle, you to the right, you to
the left. this train of indecision must surely be worked out now or
never. now! mr. tulkinghorn gets up, adjusts his spectacles, puts on
his hat, puts the manuscript in his pocket, goes out, tells the
middle-aged man out at elbows, "i shall be back presently." very
rarely tells him anything more explicit.

mr. tulkinghorn goes, as the crow came--not quite so straight, but
nearly--to cook's court, cursitor street. to snagsby's,
law-stationer's, deeds engrossed and copied, law-writing executed in
all its branches, &c., &c., &c.

it is somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon, and a
balmy fragrance of warm tea hovers in cook's court. it hovers about
snagsby's door. the hours are early there: dinner at half-past one
and supper at half-past nine. mr. snagsby was about to descend into
the subterranean regions to take tea when he looked out of his door
just now and saw the crow who was out late.

"master at h
 
 ___________________________
 
ome?"

guster is minding the shop, for the 'prentices take tea in the
kitchen with mr. and mrs. snagsby; consequently, the robe-maker's two
daughters, combing their curls at the two glasses in the two
second-floor windows of the opposite house, are not driving the two
'prentices to distraction as they fondly suppose, but are merely
awakening the unprofitable admiration of guster, whose hair won't
grow, and never would, and it is confidently thought, never will.

"master at home?" says mr. tulkinghorn.

master is at home, and guster will fetch him. guster disappears, glad
to get out of the shop, w
 
 ___________________________
 
hich she regards with mingled dread and
veneration as a storehouse of awful implements of the great torture
of the law--a place not to be entered after the gas is turned off.

mr. snagsby appears, greasy, warm, herbaceous, and chewing. bolts a
bit of bread and butter. says, "bless my soul, sir! mr. tulkinghorn!"

"i want half a word with you, snagsby."

"certainly, sir! dear me, sir, why didn't you send your young man
round for me? pray walk into the back shop, sir." snagsby has
brightened in a moment.

the confined room, strong of parchment-grease, is warehouse,
counting-house, and copying-office. mr. tulkinghorn sits, facing
round, on a stool at the desk.

"jarndyce and jarndyce, snagsby."

"yes, sir." mr. snagsby turns up the gas and coughs behind his hand,
modestly anticipating profit. mr. snagsby, as a timid man, is
accustomed to cough with a variety of expressions, and so to save
words.

"you copied some affidavits in that cause for me lately."

"yes, sir, we
 
 ___________________________
 
 did."

"there was one of them," says mr. tulkinghorn, carelessly
feeling--tight, unopenable oyster of the old school!--in the wrong
coat-pocket, "the handwriting of which is peculiar, and i rather
like. as i happened to be passing, and thought i had it about me, i
looked in to ask you--but i haven't got it. no matter, any other time
will do. ah! here it is! i looked in to ask you who copied this."

"who copied this, sir?" says mr. snagsby, taking it, laying it flat
on the desk, and separating all the sheets at once with a twirl and a
twist of the left hand peculiar to lawstationers. "we gave this out,
sir. we were giving out rather a large quantity of work just at that
time. i can tell you in a moment who copied it, sir, by referring to
my book."

mr. snagsby takes his book down from the safe, makes another bolt of
the bit of bread and butter which seemed to have stopped short, eyes
the affidavit aside, and brings his right fore
 
 ___________________________
 
finger travelling down
a page of the book, "jewby--packer--jarndyce."

"jarndyce! here we are, sir," says mr. snagsby. "to be sure! i might
have remembered it. this was given out, sir, to a writer who lodges
just over on the opposite side of the lane."

mr. tulkinghorn has seen the entry, found it before the
law-stationer, read it while the forefinger was coming down the hill.

"what do you call him? nemo?" says mr. tulkinghorn. "nemo, sir. here
it is. forty-two folio. given out on the wednesday night at eight
o'clock, brought in on the thursday morning at half after nine."

"nemo!" repeats mr. tulkinghorn. "n
 
 ___________________________
 
emo is latin for no one."

"it must be english for some one, sir, i think," mr. snagsby submits
with his deferential cough. "it is a person's name. here it is, you
see, sir! forty-two folio. given out wednesday night, eight o'clock;
brought in thursday morning, half after nine."

the tail of mr. snagsby's eye becomes conscious of the head of mrs.
snagsby looking in at the shop-door to know what he means by
deserting his tea. mr. snagsby addresses an explanatory cough to mrs.
snagsby, as who should say, "my dear, a customer!"

"half after nine, sir," repeats mr. snagsby. "our law-writers, who
live by job-work, are a queer lot; and this may not be his name, but
it's the name he goes by. i remember now, sir, that he gives it in a
written advertisement he sticks up down at the rule office, and the
king's bench office, and the judges' chambers, and so forth. you know
the kind of document, sir--wanting employ?"

mr. tulkinghorn glan
 
 ___________________________
 
veral gentlemen under a cloud loom cloudily upon the blinds. mr.
snagsby takes the opportunity of slightly turning his head to glance
over his shoulder at his little woman and to make apologetic motions
with his mouth to this effect: "tul-king-horn--rich--in-flu-en-tial!"

"have you given this man work before?" asks mr. tulkinghorn.

"oh, dear, yes, sir! work of yours."

"thinking of more important matters, i forget where you said he
lived?"

"across the lane, sir. in fact, he lodges at a--" mr. snagsby makes
another bolt, as if the bit of bread and buffer were insurmountable
"--at a rag and bottle shop."

"can you show me the place as i go back?"

"with the greatest pleasure, sir!"

mr. snagsby pulls off his sleeves and his grey coat, pulls on his
black coat, takes his hat from its peg. "oh! here is my little
woman!" he says aloud. "my dear, will you be so kind as to tell one
of the lads to look after the shop while i step across the lane with
mr. tulkinghorn? mrs. snagsby, sir--i shan't be t
 
 ___________________________
 
wo minutes, my
love!"

mrs. snagsby bends to the lawyer, retires behind the counter, peeps
at them through the window-blind, goes softly into the back office,
refers to the entries in the book still lying open. is evidently
curious.

"you will find that the place is rough, sir," says mr. snagsby,
walking deferentially in the road and leaving the narrow pavement to
the lawyer; "and the party is very rough. but they're a wild lot in
general, sir. the advantage of this particular man is that he never
wants sleep. he'll go at it right on end if you want him to, as long
as ever you like."

it is quite dark now, and the gas-lamps have acquired their full
effect. jostling against clerks going to post the day's letters, and
against counsel and attorneys going home to dinner, and against
plaint
 
 ___________________________
 
r and the law-stationer come to a rag and
bottle shop and general emporium of much disregarded merchandise,
lying and being in the shadow of the wall of lincoln's inn, and kept,
as is announced in paint, to all whom it may concern, by one krook.

"this is where he lives, sir," says the law-stationer.

"this is where he lives, is it?" says the lawyer unconcernedly.
"thank you."

"are you not going in, sir?"

"no, thank you, no; i am going on to the fields at present. good
evening. thank you!" mr. snagsby lifts his hat and returns to his
little woman and his tea.

but mr. tulkinghorn does not go on to the fields at present. he goes
a short way, turns back, comes again to the shop of mr. krook, and
enters it straight. it is dim enough, with a blot-headed candle or so
in the windows, and an old man and a cat sitting in the back part by
a fire. the old man rises and comes forward, with another blot-headed
candle in his hand.

"pray is your lodger within?"

"male or female, sir?" says mr. krook.

"m
 
 ___________________________
 
he tone of a delicate musical instrument be inferred from its case,
as the tone of mr. tulkinghorn from his case.

he now interposes, addressing the young surgeon in his unmoved,
professional way.

"i looked in here," he observes, "just before you, with the
intention of giving this deceased man, whom i never saw alive, some
employment at his trade of copying. i had heard of him from my
stationer--snagsby of cook's court. since no one here knows anything
about him, it might be as well to send for snagsby. ah!" to the
little crazy woman, who has often seen him in court, and whom he has
often seen, and who proposes, in frightened dumb-show, to go for the
law-stationer. "suppose you do!"

while she is gone, the surgeon abandons his hopeless investigation
and covers its subject with the patchwork counterpane. mr. krook and
he interchange a word or two. mr. tulkinghorn says nothing, but
stands, ever, near the old portmanteau.

mr. snagsby arrives hastily in his grey coat and his black sleeves.
"dear
 
 ___________________________
 
 me, dear me," he says; "and it has come to this, has it! bless
my soul!"

"can you give the person of the house any information about this
unfortunate creature, snagsby?" inquires mr. tulkinghorn. "he was in
arrears with his rent, it seems. and he must be buried, you know."

"well, sir," says mr. snagsby, coughing his apologetic cough behind
his hand, "i really don't know what advice i could offer, except
sending for the beadle."

"i don't speak of advice," returns mr. tulkinghorn. "i could
advise--"

"no one better, sir, i am sure," says mr. snagsby, with his
deferential cough.

"i speak of affording some clue to his connexions, or to where he
came from, or to anything concerning him."

"i assure you, sir," says mr. snagsby after prefacing his reply with
his cough of general propitiation, "tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t i no more know where he came
from than i know--"

"where he has gone to, perhaps," suggests the surgeon to help him
out.

a pause. mr. tulkinghorn looking at the law-stationer. mr. krook,
with his mouth open, looking for somebody to speak next.

"as to his connexions, sir," says mr. snagsby, "if a person was to
say to me, 'snagsby, here's twenty thousand pound down, ready for you
in the bank of england if you'll only name one of 'em,' i couldn't do
it, sir! about a year and a half ago--to the best of my belief, at
the time when he first came to lodge at the present rag and bottle
shop--"

"that was the time!" says krook with a nod.

"about a year and a half ago," says mr. snagsby, strengthened, "he
came into our place one morning after breakfast, and finding my
little woman (which
 
 ___________________________
 
 i name mrs. snagsby when i use that appellation)
in our shop, produced a specimen of his handwriting and gave her to
understand that he was in want of copying work to do and was, not to
put too fine a point upon it," a favourite apology for plain speaking
with mr. snagsby, which he always offers with a sort of argumentative
frankness, "hard up! my little woman is not in general partial to
strangers, particular--not to put too fine a point upon it--when they
want anything. but she was rather took by something about this
person, whether by his being unshaved, or by his hair being in want
of attention, or by what other ladies' reasons, i leave you to judge;
and she accepted of the specimen, and likewise of the address. my
little woman hasn't a good ear for names," 
 
 ___________________________
 
proceeds mr. snagsby after
consulting his cough of consideration behind his hand, "and she
considered nemo equally the same as nimrod. in consequence of which,
she got into a habit of saying to me at meals, 'mr. snagsby, you
haven't found nimrod any work yet!' or 'mr. snagsby, why didn't you
give that eight and thirty chancery folio in jarndyce to nimrod?' or
such like. and that is the way he gradually fell into job-work at our
place; and that is the most i know of him except that he was a quick
hand, and a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him
out, say, five and forty folio on the wednesday night, you would have
it brought in on the thursday morning. all of which--" mr. snagsby
concludes by politely motioning with his hat towards the bed, as much
 
 ___________________________
 
 tulkinghorn to krook, "whether he
had any papers that may enlighten you? there will be an inquest, and
you will be asked the question. you can read?"

"no, i can't," returns the old man with a sudden grin.

"snagsby," says mr. tulkinghorn, "look over the room for him. he will
get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise. being here, i'll wait
if you make haste, and then i can testify on his behalf, if it should
ever be necessary, that all was fair and right. if you will hold the
candle for mr. snagsby, my friend, he'll soon see whether there is
anything to help you."

"in the first place, here's an old portmanteau, sir," says snagsby.

ah, to be sure, so there is! mr. tulkinghorn does not appear to have
seen it before, though he is standing so close to it, and though
there is very little else, heaven knows.

the marine-store merchant holds the light, and the law-stationer
conducts the search. the surgeon leans against the corner of the
chimney-piece; miss flite peeps and trembles just within
 
 ___________________________
 
 many
grains; took, such another day, so many more--begun some time ago, as
if with the intention of being regularly continued, but soon left
off. there are a few dirty scraps of newspapers, all referring to
coroners' inquests; there is nothing else. they search the cupboard
and the drawer of the ink-splashed table. there is not a morsel of an
old letter or of any other writing in either. the young surgeon
examines the dress on the law-writer. a knife and some odd halfpence
are all he finds. mr. snagsby's suggestion is the practical
suggestion after all, and the beadle must be called in.

so the little crazy lodger goes for the beadle, and the rest come out
of the room. "don't leave the cat there!" says the surgeon; "that
won't do!" mr. krook therefore drives her out before him, and she
goes furtively downstairs, winding her lithe tail and licking her
lips.

"good night!" says mr. tulkinghorn, and goes home to allegory and
meditation.

by this time the news has got into the court. groups of it
 
 ___________________________
 
whether he
ever wished to die, and similar strange questions. that when the man
had no money, he would say in passing, "i am as poor as you to-day,
jo," but that when he had any, he had always (as the boy most
heartily believes) been glad to give him some.

"he was wery good to me," says the boy, wiping his eyes with his
wretched sleeve. "wen i see him a-layin' so stritched out just now, i
wished he could have heerd me tell him so. he wos wery good to me, he
wos!"

as he shuffles downstairs, mr. snagsby, lying in wait for him, puts a
half-crown in his hand. "if you ever see me coming past your crossing
with my little woman--i mean a lady--" says mr. snagsby with his
finger on his nose, "don't allude to it!"

for some little time the jurymen hang about the sol's arms
colloquially. in the sequel, half-a-dozen are caught up in a cloud of
pipe-smoke that pervades the parlour of the sol's arms; two stroll to
hampstead; and four engage to go half-price to the play at night, and
top up with oysters. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 this
forlorn man could have been prophetically seen lying here by the
mother at whose breast he nestled, a little child, with eyes upraised
to her loving face, and soft hand scarcely knowing how to close upon
the neck to which it crept, what an impossibility the vision would
have seemed! oh, if in brighter days the now-extinguished fire within
him ever burned for one woman who held him in her heart, where is
she, while these ashes are above the ground!

it is anything but a night of rest at mr. snagsby's, in cook's court,
where guster murders sleep by going, as mr. snagsby himself
allows--not to put too fine a point upon it--out of one fit into
twenty. the occasion of this seizure is that guster has a tender
heart and a susceptible something that possibly might have been
imagination, but for tooting and her patron saint. be it what it may,
now, it was so direfully impressed at tea-time by mr. snagsby's
account of the inquiry at which he had assisted that at supper-time
she projected herself i
 
 ___________________________
 
nto the kitchen, preceded by a flying dutch
cheese, and fell into a fit of unusual duration, which she only came
out of to go into another, and another, and so on through a chain of
fits, with short intervals between, of which she has pathetically
availed herself by consuming them in entreaties to mrs. snagsby not
to give her warning "when she quite comes to," and also in appeals to
the whole establishment to lay her down on the stones and go to bed.
hence, mr. snagsby, at last hearing the cock at the little dairy in
cursitor street go into that disinterested ecstasy of his on the
subject of daylight, says, drawing a long breath, though the most
patient of men, "i thought you was dead, i am sure!"

what question this enthusiastic fowl supposes he settles when he
strains himself to such an extent, or why he should thus crow (so men
crow on various triumphant public occasions, however) about what
cannot be of any moment to him, is his affair. it is enough that

 
 ___________________________
 
ever is too hot) by his side. the sol's arms has
discontinued the harmonic meetings for the season, and little swills
is engaged at the pastoral gardens down the river, where he comes out
in quite an innocent manner and sings comic ditties of a juvenile
complexion calculated (as the bill says) not to wound the feelings of
the most fastidious mind.

over all the legal neighbourhood there hangs, like some great veil of
rust or gigantic cobweb, the idleness and pensiveness of the long
vacation. mr. snagsby, law-stationer of cook's court, cursitor
street, is sensible of the influence not only in his mind as a
sympathetic and contemplative man, but also in his business as a
law-stationer aforesaid. he has more leisure for musing in staple inn
and in the rolls yard during the long vacation than at other seasons,
and he says to the two 'prentices, what a thing it is in such hot
weather to think that you live in an island with the sea a-rolling
and a-bowling right round you.

guster is busy in the lit
 
 ___________________________
 
tle drawing-room on this present afternoon
in the long vacation, when mr. and mrs. snagsby have it in
contemplation to receive company. the expected guests are rather
select than numerous, being mr. and mrs. chadband and no more. from
mr. chadband's being much given to describe himself, both verbally
and in writing, as a vessel, he is occasionally mistaken by strangers
for a gentleman connected with navigation, but he is, as he expresses
it, "in the ministry." mr. chadband is attached to no particular
denomination and is considered by his persecutors to have nothing so
very remarkabl
 
 ___________________________
 
e to say on the greatest of subjects as to render his
volunteering, on his own account, at all incumbent on his conscience;
but he has his followers, and mrs. snagsby is of the number. mrs.
snagsby has but recently taken a passage upward by the vessel,
chadband; and her attention was attracted to that bark a 1, when she
was something flushed by the hot weather.

"my little woman," says mr. snagsby to the sparrows in staple inn,
"likes to have her religion rather sharp, you see!"

so guster, much impressed by regarding herself for the time as the
handmaid of chadband, whom she knows to be endowed with the gift of
holding forth for four hours at a stretch, prepares the little
drawing-room for tea. all the furniture is shaken and dusted, the
portraits of mr. and mrs. snagsby are touched up with a wet cloth,
the best tea-service is set forth, and there is excellent provision
made of dainty n
 
 ___________________________
 
ew bread, crusty twists, cool fresh butter, thin
slices of ham, tongue, and german sausage, and delicate little rows
of anchovies nestling in parsley, not to mention new-laid eggs, to be
brought up warm in a napkin, and hot buttered toast. for chadband is
rather a consuming vessel--the persecutors say a gorging vessel--and
can wield such weapons of the flesh as a knife and fork remarkably
well.

mr. snagsby in his best coat, looking at all the preparations when
they are completed and coughing his cough of deference behind his
hand, says to mrs. snagsby, "at what time did you expect mr. and mrs.
chadband, my love?"

"at six," says mrs. snagsby.

mr. snagsby observes in a mild and casual way that "it's gone that."

"perhaps you'd like to begin without them," is mrs. snagsby's
reproachful remark.

mr. snagsby does look as if he would like it very much, but he says,
with his cough of mildness, "no, my
 
 ___________________________
 
 dear, no. i merely named the
time."

"what's time," says mrs. snagsby, "to eternity?"

"very true, my dear," says mr. snagsby. "only when a person lays in
victuals for tea, a person does it with a view--perhaps--more to
time. and when a time is named for having tea, it's better to come up
to it."

"to come up to it!" mrs. snagsby repeats with severity. "up to it! as
if mr. chadband was a fighter!"

"not at all, my dear," says mr. snagsby.

here, guster, who had been looking out of the bedroom window, comes
rustling and scratching down the little staircase like a popular
ghost, and falling flushed into the drawing-room, announces that mr.
and mrs. chadband have appeared in the court. the bell at the inner
door in the passage immediately thereafter tinkling, she is
admonished by mrs. snagsby, on pain of instant reconsignment to her
patron saint, not to omit the ceremony of announcement. much
discomposed in her nerves (which were 
 
 ___________________________
 
 his great hand, as delivering a token to his hearers that he is
going to edify them.

"my friends," says mr. chadband, "peace be on this house! on the
master thereof, on the mistress thereof, on the young maidens, and on
the young men! my friends, why do i wish for peace? what is peace? is
it war? no. is it strife? no. is it lovely, and gentle, and
beautiful, and pleasant, and serene, and joyful? oh, yes! therefore,
my friends, i wish for peace, upon you and upon yours."

in consequence of mrs. snagsby looking deeply edified, mr. snagsby
thinks it expedient on the whole to say amen, which is well received.

"now, my friends," proceeds mr. chadband, "since i am upon this
theme--"

guster presents herself. mrs. snagsby, in a spectral bass voice and
without removing her eyes from chadband, says with dreadful
distinctness, "go away!"

"now, my friends," says chadband, "since i am upon this theme, and in
my lowly path improving it--"

guster is heard unaccountably to murmur "one thousing seven hun
 
 ___________________________
 
ousing seven hundred and eighty-two."

mr. chadband, pausing with the resignation of a man accustomed to be
persecuted and languidly folding up his chin into his fat smile,
says, "let us hear the maiden! speak, maiden!"

"one thousing seven hundred and eighty-two, if you please, sir. which
he wish to know what the shilling ware for," says guster, breathless.

"for?" returns mrs. chadband. "for his fare!"

guster replied that "he insistes on one and eightpence or on
summonsizzing the party." mrs. snagsby and mrs. chadband are
proceeding to grow shrill in indignation when mr. chadband quiets the
tumult by lifting up his hand.

"my friends," says he, "i remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday. it
is right that i should be chastened in some penalty. i ought not to
murmur. rachael, pay the eightpence!"

while mrs. snagsby, drawing her breath, looks hard at mr. snagsby, as
who should say, "you hear this apostle!" and while mr. chadband glows
with humility and train oil, mrs. chadband pays the money. i
 
 ___________________________
 
d to be an extract in
verse, mr. chadband stalks to the table, and before taking a chair,
lifts up his admonitory hand.

"my friends," says he, "what is this which we now behold as being
spread before us? refreshment. do we need refreshment then, my
friends? we do. and why do we need refreshment, my friends? because
we are but mortal, because we are but sinful, because we are but of
the earth, because we are not of the air. can we fly, my friends? we
cannot. why can we not fly, my friends?"

mr. snagsby, presuming on the success of his last point, ventures to
observe in a cheerful and rather knowing tone, "no wings." but is
immediately frowned down by mrs. snagsby.

"i say, my friends," pursues mr. chadband, utterly rejecting and
obliterating mr. snagsby's suggestion, "why can we not fly? is it
because we are calculated to walk? it is. could we walk, my friends,
without strength? we could not. what should we do without strength,
my friends? our legs would refuse to bear us, our knees would dou
 
 ___________________________
 
h like? it is. then let us partake of the good
things which are set before us!"

the persecutors denied that there was any particular gift in mr.
chadband's piling verbose flights of stairs, one upon another, after
this fashion. but this can only be received as a proof of their
determination to persecute, since it must be within everybody's
experience that the chadband style of oratory is widely received and
much admired.

mr. chadband, however, having concluded for the present, sits down at
mr. snagsby's table and lays about him prodigiously. the conversion
of nutriment of any sort into oil of the quality already mentioned
appears to be a process so inseparable from the constitution of this
exemplary vessel that in beginning to eat and drink, he may be
described as always becoming a kind of considerable oil mills or
other large factory for the production of that article on a wholesale
scale. on the present evening of the long vacation, in cook's court,
cursitor street, he does such a powerful
 
 ___________________________
 
s that the
warehouse appears to be quite full when the works cease.

at this period of the entertainment, guster, who has never recovered
her first failure, but has neglected no possible or impossible means
of bringing the establishment and herself into contempt--among which
may be briefly enumerated her unexpectedly performing clashing
military music on mr. chadband's head with plates, and afterwards
crowning that gentleman with muffins--at which period of the
entertainment, guster whispers mr. snagsby that he is wanted.

"and being wanted in the--not to put too fine a point upon it--in the
shop," says mr. snagsby, rising, "perhaps this good company will
excuse me for half a minute."

mr. snagsby descends and finds the two 'prentices intently
contemplating a police constable, who holds a ragged boy by the arm.

"why, bless my heart," says mr. snagsby, "what's the matter!"

"this boy," says the constable, "although he's repeatedly told to,
won't move on--"

"i'm always a-moving on, sar," cries
 
 ___________________________
 
 where can i possibly move to, sir, more nor i do
move!"

"he won't move on," says the constable calmly, with a slight
professional hitch of his neck involving its better settlement in his
stiff stock, "although he has been repeatedly cautioned, and
therefore i am obliged to take him into custody. he's as obstinate a
young gonoph as i know. he won't move on."

"oh, my eye! where can i move to!" cries the boy, clutching quite
desperately at his hair and beating his bare feet upon the floor of
mr. snagsby's passage.

"don't you come none of that or i shall make blessed short work of
you!" says the constable, giving him a passionless shake. "my
instructions are that you are to move on. i have told you so five
hundred times."

"but where?" cries the boy.

"well! really, constable, you know," says mr. snagsby wistfully, and
coughing behind his hand his cough of great perplexity and doubt,
"really, that does seem a question. where, you know?"

"my instructions don't go to that," replies the constabl
 
 ___________________________
 
e. "my
instructions are that this boy is to move on."

do you hear, jo? it is nothing to you or to any one else that the
great lights of the parliamentary sky have failed for some few years
in this business to set you the example of moving on. the one grand
recipe remains for you--the profound philosophical prescription--the
be-all and the end-all of your strange existence upon earth. move on!
you are by no means to move off, jo, for the great lights can't at
all agree about that. move on!

mr. snagsby says nothing to this effect, says nothing at all indeed,
but coughs his forlornest cough, expressive of no thoroughfare in any
direction. by this time mr. and mrs. chadband and mrs. snagsby,
hearing the altercation, have appeared upon the stairs. guster having
never left the end of the passage, the whole household are assembled.

"the simple question is, sir," says the constable, "whether you know
this boy. he says you do."

mrs. snagsby, from her elevation, instantly cries out, "no he don't!"

 
 ___________________________
 

"my lit-tle woman!" says mr. snagsby, looking up the staircase. "my
love, permit me! pray have a moment's patience, my dear. i do know
something of this lad, and in what i know of him, i can't say that
there's any harm; perhaps on the contrary, constable." to whom the
law-stationer relates his joful and woeful experience, suppressing
the half-crown fact.

"well!" says the constable, "so far, it seems, he had grounds for
what he said. when i took him into custody up in holborn, he said you
knew him. upon that, a young man who was i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the crowd said he was
acquainted with you, and you were a respectable housekeeper, and if
i'd call and make the inquiry, he'd appear. the young man don't seem
inclined to keep his word, but--oh! here is the young man!"

enter mr. guppy, who nods to mr. snagsby and touches his hat with the
chivalry of clerkship to the ladies on the stairs.

"i was strolling away from the office just now when i found this row
going on," says mr. guppy to the law-stationer, "and as your name was
mentioned, i thought it was right the thing should be looked into."

"it was very good-natured of you, sir," says mr. snagsby, "and i am
obliged to you." and mr. snagsby again relates his experience, again
suppressing the half-crown fact.

"now, i know where you live," says the 
 
 ___________________________
 
e in no nicer place, sir," replies jo. "they
wouldn't have nothink to say to me if i wos to go to a nice innocent
place fur to live. who ud go and let a nice innocent lodging to such
a reg'lar one as me!"

"you are very poor, ain't you?" says the constable.

"yes, i am indeed, sir, wery poor in gin'ral," replies jo. "i leave
you to judge now! i shook these two half-crowns out of him," says the
constable, producing them to the company, "in only putting my hand
upon him!"

"they're wot's left, mr. snagsby," says jo, "out of a sov-ring as wos
give me by a lady in a wale as sed she wos a servant and as come to
my crossin one night and asked to be showd this 'ere ouse and the
ouse wot him as you giv the writin to died at, and the berrin-ground
wot he's berrid in. she ses to me she ses 'are you the boy at the
inkwhich?' she ses. i ses 'yes' i ses. she ses to me she ses 'can you
show me all them places?' i ses 'yes i can' i ses. and she ses to me
'do it' and i dun it and she giv me a sov'ring and hoo
 
 ___________________________
 
en a young man he thieved
another five while i was asleep and another boy he thieved ninepence
and the landlord he stood drains round with a lot more on it."

"you don't expect anybody to believe this, about the lady and the
sovereign, do you?" says the constable, eyeing him aside with
ineffable disdain.

"i don't know as i do, sir," replies jo. "i don't expect nothink at
all, sir, much, but that's the true hist'ry on it."

"you see what he is!" the constable observes to the audience. "well,
mr. snagsby, if i don't lock him up this time, will you engage for
his moving on?"

"no!" cries mrs. snagsby from the stairs.

"my little woman!" pleads her husband. "constable, i have no doubt
he'll move on. you know you really must do it," says mr. snagsby.

"i'm everyways agreeable, sir," says the hapless jo.

"do it, then," observes the constable. "you know what you have got to
do. do it! and recollect you won't get off so easy next time. catch
hold of your money. now, the sooner you're five mile off, 
 
 ___________________________
 
away on the shady side, carrying his iron-bound hat
in his hand for a little ventilation.

now, jo's improbable story concerning the lady and the sovereign has
awakened more or less the curiosity of all the company. mr. guppy,
who has an inquiring mind in matters of evidence and who has
been suffering severely from the lassitude of the long vacation,
takes that interest in the case that he enters on a regular
cross-examination of the witness, which is found so interesting by
the ladies that mrs. snagsby politely invites him to step upstairs
and drink a cup of tea, if he will excuse the disarranged state of
the tea-table, consequent on their previous exertions. mr. guppy
yielding his assent to this proposal, jo is requested to follow into
the drawing-room doorway, where mr. guppy takes him in hand as a
witness, patting him into this shape, that shape, and the other shape
like a butterman dealing with so much butter, and worrying him
according to the best models. nor is the examination unlike ma
 
 ___________________________
 
agsby feels not only that it gratifies her inquisitive disposition,
but that it lifts her husband's establishment higher up in the law.
during the progress of this keen encounter, the vessel chadband,
being merely engaged in the oil trade, gets aground and waits to be
floated off.

"well!" says mr. guppy. "either this boy sticks to it like
cobbler's-wax or there is something out of the common here that beats
anything that ever came into my way at kenge and carboy's."

mrs. chadband whispers mrs. snagsby, who exclaims, "you don't say
so!"

"for years!" replied mrs. chadband.

"has known kenge and carboy's office for years," mrs. snagsby
triumphantly explains to mr. guppy. "mrs. chadband--this gentleman's
wife--reverend mr. chadband."

"oh, indeed!" says mr. guppy.

"before i married my present husband," says mrs. chadband.

"was you a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy, transferring
his cross-examination.

"no."

"not a party in anything, ma'am?" says mr. guppy.

mrs. chadband shakes her
 
 ___________________________
 
eplies mrs. chadband, humouring the joke
with a hard-favoured smile.

"not exactly that, either!" repeats mr. guppy. "very good. pray,
ma'am, was it a lady of your acquaintance who had some transactions
(we will not at present say what transactions) with kenge and
carboy's office, or was it a gentleman of your acquaintance? take
time, ma'am. we shall come to it presently. man or woman, ma'am?"

"neither," says mrs. chadband as before.

"oh! a child!" says mr. guppy, throwing on the admiring mrs. snagsby
the regular acute professional eye which is thrown on british
jurymen. "now, ma'am, perhaps you'll have the kindness to tell us
what child."

"you have got it at last, sir," says mrs. chadband with another
hard-favoured smile. "well, sir, it was before your time, most
likely, judging from your appearance. i was left in charge of a child
named esther summerson, who was put out in life by messrs. kenge and
carboy."

"miss summerson, ma'am!" cries mr. guppy, excited.

"i call her esther summerson,
 
 ___________________________
 
ther, do this! esther, do that!' and she was made to do it."

"my dear ma'am," returns mr. guppy, moving across the small
apartment, "the humble individual who now addresses you received that
young lady in london when she first came here from the establishment
to which you have alluded. allow me to have the pleasure of taking
you by the hand."

mr. chadband, at last seeing his opportunity, makes his accustomed
signal and rises with a smoking head, which he dabs with his
pocket-handkerchief. mrs. snagsby whispers "hush!"

"my friends," says chadband, "we have partaken in moderation" (which
was certainly not the case so far as he was concerned) "of the
comforts which have been provided for us. may this house live upon
the fatness of the land; may corn and wine be plentiful therein; may
it grow, may it thrive, may it prosper, may it advance, may it
proceed, may it press forward! but, my friends, have we partaken of
anything else? we have. my friends, of what else have we partaken? of
spiritual pr
 
 ___________________________
 
elf in that stream now, my young friend? no.
why do you not cool yourself in that stream now? because you are in a
state of darkness, because you are in a state of obscurity, because
you are in a state of sinfulness, because you are in a state of
bondage. my young friend, what is bondage? let us, in a spirit of
love, inquire."

at this threatening stage of the discourse, jo, who seems to have
been gradually going out of his mind, smears his right arm over his
face and gives a terrible yawn. mrs. snagsby indignantly expresses
her belief that he is a limb of the arch-fiend.

"my friends," says mr. chadband with his persecuted chin folding
itself into its fat smile again as he looks round, "it is right that
i should be humbled, it is right that i should be tried, it is right
that i should be mortified, it is right that i should be corrected. i
stumbled, on sabbath last, when i thought with pride of my three
hours' improving. the account is now favourably balanced: my creditor
has accepted a compo
 
 ___________________________
 
sition. o let us be joyful, joyful! o let us be
joyful!"

great sensation on the part of mrs. snagsby.

"my friends," says chadband, looking round him in conclusion, "i will
not proceed with my young friend now. will you come to-morrow, my
young friend, and inquire of this good lady where i am to be found to
deliver a discourse unto you, and will you come like the thirsty
swallow upon the next day, and upon the day after that, and upon the
day after that, and upon many pleasant days, to hear discourses?"
(this with a cow-like lightness.)

jo, whose immediate object seems to be to get away on an
 
 ___________________________
 
y terms,
gives a shuffling nod. mr. guppy then throws him a penny, and mrs.
snagsby calls to guster to see him safely out of the house. but
before he goes downstairs, mr. snagsby loads him with some broken
meats from the table, which he carries away, hugging in his arms.

so, mr. chadband--of whom the persecutors say that it is no wonder he
should go on for any length of time uttering such abominable
nonsense, but that the wonder rather is that he should ever leave
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life
until he invests a little capital of supper in the oil-trade. jo
moves on, through the long vacation, down to blackfriars bridge,
where he fin
 
 ___________________________
 
," says mr. guppy, "myself and our mutual friend smallweed--"

mr. smallweed modestly observes, "gentlemen both!" and drinks.

"--have had a little conversation on this matter more than once since
you--"

"say, got the sack!" cries mr. jobling bitterly. "say it, guppy. you
mean it."

"no-o-o! left the inn," mr. smallweed delicately suggests.

"since you left the inn, jobling," says mr. guppy; "and i have
mentioned to our mutual friend smallweed a plan i have lately thought
of proposing. you know snagsby the stationer?"

"i know there is such a stationer," returns mr. jobling. "he was not
ours, and i am not acquainted with him."

"he is ours, jobling, and i am acquainted with him," mr. guppy
retorts. "well, sir! i have lately become better acquainted with him
through some accidental circumstances that have made me a visitor of
his in private life. those circumstances it is not necessary to offer
in argument. they may--or they may not--have some reference to a
subject which may--or may not--have
 
 ___________________________
 
 cast its shadow on my existence."

as it is mr. guppy's perplexing way with boastful misery to tempt his
particular friends into this subject, and the moment they touch it,
to turn on them with that trenchant severity about the chords in the
human mind, both mr. jobling and mr. smallweed decline the pitfall by
remaining silent.

"such things may be," repeats mr. guppy, "or they may not be. they
are no part of the case. it is enough to mention that both mr. and
mrs. snagsby are very willing to oblige me and that snagsby has, in
busy times, a good deal of copying work to give out. he has all
tulkinghorn's, and an excellent business besides. i believe if our
mutual friend smallweed were put into the box, he could prove this?"

mr. smallweed nods and appears greedy to be sworn.

"now, gentlemen of the jury," says mr. guppy, "--i mean, now,
jobling--you may say this is a poor prospect of a living. granted.
but it's better than nothing, and better than enlistment. you 
 
 ___________________________
 
lso containing some old articles of furniture which he has dug up
from his inexhaustible stores. the terms are easily concluded--for
the lord chancellor cannot be hard on mr. guppy, associated as he is
with kenge and carboy, jarndyce and jarndyce, and other famous claims
on his professional consideration--and it is agreed that mr. weevle
shall take possession on the morrow. mr. weevle and mr. guppy then
repair to cook's court, cursitor street, where the personal
introduction of the former to mr. snagsby is effected and (more
important) the vote and interest of mrs. snagsby are secured. they
then report progress to the eminent smallweed, waiting at the office
in his tall hat for that purpose, and separate, mr. guppy explaining
that he would terminate his little entertainment by standing treat at
the play but that there are chords in the human mind which would
render it a hollow mockery.

on the morrow, in the dusk of evening, mr. weevle modestly appears at
krook's, by no means incommoded with l
 
 ___________________________
 
hen suddenly conceiving (as it is
supposed) an impression that it was too monotonous, gave his gold
watch to his hair-dresser one summer evening and walked leisurely
home to the temple and hanged himself.

but mr. tulkinghorn is not alone to-night to ponder at his usual
length. seated at the same table, though with his chair modestly and
uncomfortably drawn a little way from it, sits a bald, mild, shining
man who coughs respectfully behind his hand when the lawyer bids him
fill his glass.

"now, snagsby," says mr. tulkinghorn, "to go over this odd story
again."

"if you please, sir."

"you told me when you were so good as to step round here last
night--"

"for which i must ask you to excuse me if it was a liberty, sir; but
i remember that you had taken a sort of an interest in that person,
and i thought it possible that you might--just--wish--to--"

mr. tulkinghorn is not the man to help him to any conclusion or to
admit anything as to any possibility concerning himself. so mr.
snagsby trails 
 
 ___________________________
 
off into saying, with an awkward cough, "i must ask
you to excuse the liberty, sir, i am sure."

"not at all," says mr. tulkinghorn. "you told me, snagsby, that you
put on your hat and came round without mentioning your intention to
your wife. that was prudent i think, because it's not a matter of
such importance that it requires to be mentioned."

"well, sir," returns mr. snagsby, "you see, my little woman is--not
to put too fine a point upon it--inquisitive. she's inquisitive. poor
little thing, she's liable to spasms, and it's good for her to have
her mind employed. in consequence of which she employs it--i should
say upon every individual thing she can lay hold of, whether it
concerns her or not--especially not. my little woman has a very
active mind, sir."

mr. snagsby drinks and murmurs with an admiring cough behind his
hand, "dear me, very fine wine indeed!"

"the
 
 ___________________________
 
an is at present in--not
to put too fine a point on it--in a pious state, or in what she
considers such, and attends the evening exertions (which is the name
they go by) of a reverend party of the name of chadband. he has a
great deal of eloquence at his command, undoubtedly, but i am not
quite favourable to his style myself. that's neither here nor there.
my little woman being engaged in that way made it easier for me to
step round in a quiet manner."

mr. tulkinghorn assents. "fill your glass, snagsby."

"thank you, sir, i am sure," returns the stationer with his cough of
deference. "this is wonderfully fine wine, sir!"

"it is a rare wine now," says mr. tulkinghorn. "it is fifty years
old."

"is it indeed, sir? but i am not surprised to hear it, i am sure. it
might be--any age almost." after rendering this general tribute to
the port, mr. snagsby in his modesty coughs an apology behind his
hand for drinking anything so precious.

"will you run over, once again, what the boy said?" asks mr.

 
 ___________________________
 
tulkinghorn, putting his hands into the pockets of his rusty
smallclothes and leaning quietly back in his chair.

"with pleasure, sir."

then, with fidelity, though with some prolixity, the law-stationer
repeats jo's statement made to the assembled guests at his house. on
coming to the end of his narrative, he gives a great start and breaks
off with, "dear me, sir, i wasn't aware there was any other gentleman
present!"

mr. snagsby is dismayed to see, standing with an attentive face
between himself and the lawyer at a little distance from the table, a
person with a hat and stick in his hand who was not there when he
himself came in and has not since entered by the door or by either of
the windows. there is a press in the room, but its hinges have not
creaked, nor has a step been audible upon the floor. yet this third
person stands there with his attentive face, and his hat and stick in
his hands, and his hands behind him,
 
 ___________________________
 
 a composed and quiet listener.
he is a stoutly built, steady-looking, sharp-eyed man in black, of
about the middle-age. except that he looks at mr. snagsby as if he
were going to take his portrait, there is nothing remarkable about
him at first sight but his ghostly manner of appearing.

"don't mind this gentleman," says mr. tulkinghorn in his quiet way.
"this is only mr. bucket."

"oh, indeed, sir?" returns the stationer, expressing by a cough that
he is quite in the dark as to who mr. bucket may be.

"i wanted him to hear this story," says the lawyer, "because i have
half a mind (for a reason) to know more of it, and he is very
intelligent in su
 
 ___________________________
 
ch things. what do you say to this, bucket?"

"it's very plain, sir. since our people have moved this boy on, and
he's not to be found on his old lay, if mr. snagsby don't object to
go down with me to tom-all-alone's and point him out, we can have him
here in less than a couple of hours' time. i can do it without mr.
snagsby, of course, but this is the shortest way."

"mr. bucket is a detective officer, snagsby," says the lawyer in
explanation.

"is he indeed, sir?" says mr. snagsby with a strong tendency in his
clump of hair to stand on end.

"and if you have no real objection to accompany mr. bucket to the
place in question," pursues the lawyer, "i shall feel obliged to you
if you will do so."

in a moment's hesitation on the part of mr. snagsby, bucket dips down
to the bottom of his mind.

"don't you be afraid of hurting the boy," he says. "you won't do
that. it's all right as far as the boy's concerned. we shall only
bring him here to ask him a question or so i want to
 
 ___________________________
 
 put to him, and
he'll be paid for his trouble and sent away again. it'll be a good
job for him. i promise you, as a man, that you shall see the boy sent
away all right. don't you be afraid of hurting him; you an't going to
do that."

"very well, mr. tulkinghorn!" cries mr. snagsby cheerfully. and
reassured, "since that's the case--"

"yes! and lookee here, mr. snagsby," resumes bucket, taking him aside
by the arm, tapping him familiarly on the breast, and speaking in a
confidential tone. "you're a man of the world, you know, and a man of
business, and a man of sense. that's what you are."

"i am sure i am much obliged to you for your good opinion," returns
the stationer with his cough of modesty, "but--"

"that's what you are, you know," says bucket. "now, it an't necessary
to say to a man like you, engaged in your business, which is a
business of trust and 
 
 ___________________________
 
an't necessary to say to a man like you that
it's the best and wisest way to keep little matters like this quiet.
don't you see? quiet!"

"certainly, certainly," returns the other.

"i don't mind telling you," says bucket with an engaging appearance
of frankness, "that as far as i can understand it, there seems to be
a doubt whether this dead person wasn't entitled to a little
property, and whether this female hasn't been up to some games
respecting that property, don't you see?"

"oh!" says mr. snagsby, but not appearing to see quite distinctly.

"now, what you want," pursues bucket, again tapping mr. snagsby on
the breast in a comfortable and soothing manner, "is that every
person should have their rights according to justice. that's what you
want."

"to be sure," returns mr. snagsby with a nod.

"on account of which, and at the same time to oblige a--do you call
it, in your business, customer or client? i forget how my uncle used
to call it."

"why, i generally say customer myself," replies
 
 ___________________________
 
 mr. snagsby.

"you're right!" returns mr. bucket, shaking hands with him quite
affectionately. "--on account of which, and at the same time to
oblige a real good customer, you mean to go down with me, in
confidence, to tom-all-alone's and to keep the whole thing quiet ever
afterwards and never mention it to any one. that's about your
intentions, if i understand you?"

"you are right, sir. you are right," says mr. snagsby.

"then here's your hat," returns his new friend, quite as intimate
with it as if he had made it; "and if you're ready, i am."

they leave mr. tulkinghorn, without a ruffle on the surface of his
unfathomable depths, drinking his old wine, and go down into the
streets.

"you don't happen to know a very good sort of person of the name of
gridley, do you?" says bucket in friendly converse as they descend
the stairs.

"no," says mr. snagsby, considering, "i don't know anybody of that
name. why?"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing particular," says bucket; "only having allowed his temper to
get a little the better of him and having been threatening some
respectable people, he is keeping out of the way of a warrant i have
got against him--which it's a pity that a man of sense should do."

as they walk along, mr. snagsby observes, as a novelty, that however
quick their pace may be, his companion still seems in some
undefinable manner to lurk and lounge; also, that whenever he is
going to turn to the right or left, he pretends to have a fixed
purpose in his mind of going straight ahead, and wheels off, sharply,
at the very last moment. now and then, when they pass a
police-constable on his beat, mr. snagsby notices that both the
constable and his guide fall into a deep abstraction as they come
towards each other
 
 ___________________________
 
nstable on duty there, who then accompanies him with his own
particular bull's-eye at his waist. between his two conductors, mr.
snagsby passes along the middle of a villainous street, undrained,
unventilated, deep in black mud and corrupt water--though the roads
are dry elsewhere--and reeking with such smells and sights that he,
who has lived in london all his life, can scarce believe his senses.
branching from this street and its heaps of ruins are other streets
and courts so infamous that mr. snagsby sickens in body and mind and
feels as if he were going every moment deeper down into the infernal
gulf.

"draw off a bit here, mr. snagsby," says bucket as a kind of shabby
palanquin is borne towards them, surrounded by a noisy crowd. "here's
the fever coming up the street!"

as the unseen wretch goes by, the crowd, leaving that object of
attraction, hovers round the three visitors like a dream of horrible
faces and fades away up alleys and into ruins and behind walls, and
with occasional cries
 
 ___________________________
 
 and shrill whistles of warning, thenceforth
flits about them until they leave the place.

"are those the fever-houses, darby?" mr. bucket coolly asks as he
turns his bull's-eye on a line of stinking ruins.

darby replies that "all them are," and further that in all, for
months and months, the people "have been down by dozens" and have
been carried out dead and dying "like sheep with the rot." bucket
observing to mr. snagsby as they go on again that he looks a little
poorly, mr. snagsby answers that he feels as if he couldn't breathe
the dreadful air.

there is inquiry made at various houses for a boy named jo. as few
people are known in tom-all-alone's by any christian sign, there is
much reference to mr. snagsby whether he means carrots, or the
colonel, or gallows, or young chisel, or terrier tip, or lanky, or
the brick. mr. snagsby describes over and over again. there are
conflicting opinions respecting the original of his picture. some
think it must be carrots, some say th
 
 ___________________________
 
e brick. the colonel is
produced, but is not at all near the thing. whenever mr. snagsby and
his conductors are stationary, the crowd flows round, and from its
squalid depths obsequious advice heaves up to mr. bucket. whenever
they move, and the angry bull's-eyes glare, it fades away and flits
about them up the alleys, and in the ruins, and behind the walls, as
before.

at last there is a lair found out where toughy, or the tough subject,
lays him down at night; and it is thought that the tough subject may
be jo. comparison of notes between mr. snagsby and the proprietress
of the h
 
 ___________________________
 
. it is offensive to every
sense; even the gross candle burns pale and sickly in the polluted
air. there are a couple of benches and a higher bench by way of
table. the men lie asleep where they stumbled down, but the women sit
by the candle. lying in the arms of the woman who has spoken is a
very young child.

"why, what age do you call that little creature?" says bucket. "it
looks as if it was born yesterday." he is not at all rough about it;
and as he turns his light gently on the infant, mr. snagsby is
strangely reminded of another infant, encircled with light, that he
has seen in pictures.

"he is not three weeks old yet, sir," says the woman.

"is he your child?"

"mine."

the other woman, who was bending over it when they came in, stoops
down again and kisses it as it lies asleep.

"you seem as fond of it as if you were the mother yourself," says mr.
bucket.

"i was the mother of one like it, master, and it died."

"ah, jenny, jenny!" says the other woman to her. "better so. much
better
 
 ___________________________
 
 but quickly readjusts
it over the wounded and bruised bosom where the baby has been lying.

"it's my dead child," says jenny, walking up and down as she nurses,
"that makes me love this child so dear, and it's my dead child that
makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its being taken
away from her now. while she thinks that, i think what fortune would
i give to have my darling back. but we mean the same thing, if we
knew how to say it, us two mothers does in our poor hearts!"

as mr. snagsby blows his nose and coughs his cough of sympathy, a
step is heard without. mr. bucket throws his light into the doorway
and says to mr. snagsby, "now, what do you say to toughy? will he
do?"

"that's jo," says mr. snagsby.

jo stands amazed in the disk of light, like a ragged figure in a
magic-lantern, trembling to think that he has offended against the
law in not having moved on far enough. mr. snagsby, however, giving
him the consolatory assurance, "it's only a job you will be paid for,
jo," h
 
 ___________________________
 
e recovers; and on being taken outside by mr. bucket for a
little private confabulation, tells his tale satisfactorily, though
out of breath.

"i have squared it with the lad," says mr. bucket, returning, "and
it's all right. now, mr. snagsby, we're ready for you."

first, jo has to complete his errand of good nature by handing over
the physic he has been to get, which he delivers with the laconic
verbal direction that "it's to be all took d'rectly." secondly, mr.
snagsby has to lay upon the table half a crown, his usual panacea for
an immense variety of afflictions. thirdly, mr. bucket has to take jo
by the arm a little above the elbow and walk him on before him,
without which observance neither the tough subject nor any other
subj
 
 ___________________________
 
they give the women good night and come
out once more into black and foul tom-all-alone's.

by the noisome ways through which they descended into that pit, they
gradually emerge from it, the crowd flitting, and whistling, and
skulking about them until they come to the verge, where restoration
of the bull's-eyes is made to darby. here the crowd, like a concourse
of imprisoned demons, turns back, yelling, and is seen no more.
through the clearer and fresher streets, never so clear and fresh to
mr. snagsby's mind as now, they walk and ride until they come to mr.
tulkinghorn's gate.

as they ascend the dim stairs (mr. tulkinghorn's chambers being on
the first floor), mr. bucket mentions that he has the key of the
outer door in his pocket and that there is no need to ring. for a man
so expert in most things of that kind, bucket takes time to open the
door and makes some noise too. it may be that he sounds a note of
preparation.

howbeit, they come at last into the hall, where a lamp is burning,
and
 
 ___________________________
 
 so into mr. tulkinghorn's usual room--the room where he drank his
old wine to-night. he is not there, but his two old-fashioned
candlesticks are, and the room is tolerably light.

mr. bucket, still having his professional hold of jo and appearing to
mr. snagsby to possess an unlimited number of eyes, makes a little
way into this room, when jo starts and stops.

"what's the matter?" says bucket in a whisper.

"there she is!" cries jo.

"who!"

"the lady!"

a female figure, closely veiled, stands in the middle of the room,
where the light falls upon it. it is quite still and silent. the
front of the figure is towards them, but it takes no notice of their
entrance and remains like a statue.

"now, tell me," says bucket aloud, "how you know that to be the
 
 ___________________________
 
ht wot she wos, and she giv me a sov'ring and hooked it."

"well!" says mr. bucket slightly, "we haven't got much good out of
you. but, however, here's five shillings for you. take care how you
spend it, and don't get yourself into trouble." bucket stealthily
tells the coins from one hand into the other like counters--which is
a way he has, his principal use of them being in these games of
skill--and then puts them, in a little pile, into the boy's hand and
takes him out to the door, leaving mr. snagsby, not by any means
comfortable under these mysterious circumstances, alone with the
veiled figure. but on mr. tulkinghorn's coming into the room, the
veil is raised and a sufficiently good-looking frenchwoman is
revealed, though her expression is something of the intensest.

"thank you, mademoiselle hortense," says mr. tulkinghorn with his
usual equanimity. "i will give you no further trouble about this
little wager."

"you will do me the kindness to remember, sir, that i am not at
present place
 
 ___________________________
 
ted gratitude, dear sir."

"good night."

mademoiselle goes out with an air of native gentility; and mr.
bucket, to whom it is, on an emergency, as natural to be groom of the
ceremonies as it is to be anything else, shows her downstairs, not
without gallantry.

"well, bucket?" quoth mr. tulkinghorn on his return.

"it's all squared, you see, as i squared it myself, sir. there an't a
doubt that it was the other one with this one's dress on. the boy was
exact respecting colours and everything. mr. snagsby, i promised you
as a man that he should be sent away all right. don't say it wasn't
done!"

"you have kept your word, sir," returns the stationer; "and if i can
be of no further use, mr. tulkinghorn, i think, as my little woman
will be getting anxious--"

"thank you, snagsby, no further use," says mr. tulkinghorn. "i am
quite indebted to you for the trouble you have taken already."

"not at all, sir. i wish you good night."

"you see, mr. snagsby," says mr. bucket, accompanying him to the door

 
 ___________________________
 
and shaking hands with him over and over again, "what i like in you
is that you're a man it's of no use pumping; that's what you are.
when you know you have done a right thing, you put it away, and it's
done with and gone, and there's an end of it. that's what you do."

"that is certainly what i endeavour to do, sir," returns mr. snagsby.

"no, you don't do yourself justice. it an't what you endeavour to
do," says mr. bucket, shaking hands with him and blessing him in the
tenderest manner, "it's what you do. that's what i estimate in a man
in your way of business."

mr. snagsby makes a suitable response and goes homeward so confused
by the events of the evening that he is doubtful of his being awake
and out--doubtful of the reality of the streets through which he
goes--doubtful of the reality of the moon that shines above him. 
 
 ___________________________
 
he
is presently reassured on these subjects by the unchallengeable
reality of mrs. snagsby, sitting up with her head in a perfect
beehive of curl-papers and night-cap, who has dispatched guster to
the police-station with official intelligence of her husband's being
made away with, and who within the last two hours has passed through
every stage of swooning with the greatest decorum. but as the little
woman feelingly says, many thanks she gets for it!




chapter xxiii

esther's narrative


we came home from mr. boythorn's after six pleasant weeks. we were
often in the park and in the
 
 ___________________________
 
me the shadow of that pair, one
living and one dead, fell heavier on richard's departure than the
darkness of the darkest night. and through richard's farewell words i
heard it echoed: "of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits
and hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul
alone comes natural to me, and i am fit for. there is a tie of many
suffering years between us two, and it is the only tie i ever had on
earth that chancery has not broken!"




chapter xxv

mrs. snagsby sees it all


there is disquietude in cook's court, cursitor street. black
suspicion hides in that peaceful region. the mass of cook's courtiers
are in their usual state of mind, no better and no worse; but mr.
snagsby is changed, and his little woman knows it.

for tom-all-alone's and lincoln's inn fields persist in harnessing
themselves, a pair of ungovernable coursers, to the chariot of mr.
snagsby's imagination; and mr. bucket drives; and the passengers are
jo and mr. tulkinghorn; and the c
 
 ___________________________
 
omplete equipage whirls though the
law-stationery business at wild speed all round the clock. even in
the little front kitchen where the family meals are taken, it rattles
away at a smoking pace from the dinner-table, when mr. snagsby pauses
in carving the first slice of the leg of mutton baked with potatoes
and stares at the kitchen wall.

mr. snagsby cannot make out what it is that he has had to do with.
something is wrong somewhere, but what something, what may come of
it, to whom, when, and from which unthought of and unheard of quarter
is the puzzle of his life. his remote impressions of the robes and
coronets, the stars and garters, that sparkle through the
surface-dust of mr. tulkinghorn's chambers; his veneration for the
mysteries presided over by that best and closest of his customers,
whom all the inns of court, all chancery lane, a
 
 ___________________________
 
vaded or declined, persuade him that he is a party to some
dangerous secret without knowing what it is. and it is the fearful
peculiarity of this condition that, at any hour of his daily life, at
any opening of the shop-door, at any pull of the bell, at any
entrance of a messenger, or any delivery of a letter, the secret may
take air and fire, explode, and blow up--mr. bucket only knows whom.

for which reason, whenever a man unknown comes into the shop (as many
men unknown do) and says, "is mr. snagsby in?" or words to that
innocent effect, mr. snagsby's heart knocks hard at his guilty
breast. he undergoes so much from such inquiries that when they are
made by boys he revenges himself by flipping at their ears over the
counter and asking the young dogs what they mean by it and why they
can't speak out at once? more impracticable men and boys persist in
walking into mr. snagsby's sleep and terrifying him with
unaccountable questions, so that often when the cock at the little
dairy in cursitor 
 
 ___________________________
 
street breaks out in his usual absurd way about the
morning, mr. snagsby finds himself in a crisis of nightmare, with his
little woman shaking him and saying "what's the matter with the man!"

the little woman herself is not the least item in his difficulty. to
know that he is always keeping a secret from her, that he has under
all circumstances to conceal and hold fast a tender double tooth,
which her sharpness is ever ready to twist out of his head, gives mr.
snagsby, in her dentistical presence, much of the air of a dog who
has a reservation from his master and w
 
 ___________________________
 
ill look anywhere rather than
meet his eye.

these various signs and tokens, marked by the little woman, are not
lost upon her. they impel her to say, "snagsby has something on his
mind!" and thus suspicion gets into cook's court, cursitor street.
from suspicion to jealousy, mrs. snagsby finds the road as natural
and short as from cook's court to chancery lane. and thus jealousy
gets into cook's court, cursitor street. once there (and it was
always lurking thereabout), it is very active and nimble in mrs.
snagsby's breast, prompting her to nocturnal examinations of mr.
snagsby's pockets; to secret perusals of mr. snagsby's letters; to
private researches in the day book and ledger, till, cash-box, and
iron safe; to watchings at windows, listenings behind doors, and a
general put
 
 ___________________________
 
ting of this and that together by the wrong end.

mrs. snagsby is so perpetually on the alert that the house becomes
ghostly with creaking boards and rustling garments. the 'prentices
think somebody may have been murdered there in bygone times. guster
holds certain loose atoms of an idea (picked up at tooting, where
they were found floating among the orphans) that there is buried
money underneath the cellar, guarded by an old man with a white
beard, who cannot get out for seven thousand years because he said
the lord's prayer backwards.

"who was nimrod?" 
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. snagsby repeatedly inquires of herself. "who
was that lady--that creature? and who is that boy?" now, nimrod being
as dead as the mighty hunter whose name mrs. snagsby has
appropriated, and the lady being unproducible, she directs her mental
eye, for the present, with redoubled vigilance to the boy. "and who,"
quoth mrs. snagsby for the thousand and first time, "is that boy? who
is that--!" and there mrs. snagsby is seized with an inspiration.

he has no respect for mr. chadband. no, to be sure, and he wouldn't
have, of course. naturally he wouldn't, under those contagious
circumstances. he was invited and appointed by mr. chadband--why,
mrs. snagsby heard it herself with her own ears!--to come back, and
be told where he was to go, to be addressed by mr. chadband; and he
never came! why did he never come? because he was told not to come.
who told him not to come? who? ha, ha! mrs. snagsby sees it all.


 
 ___________________________
 
but happily (and mrs. snagsby tightly shakes her head and tightly
smiles) that boy was met by mr. chadband yesterday in the streets;
and that boy, as affording a subject which mr. chadband desires to
improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation, was
seized by mr. chadband and threatened with being delivered over to
the police unless he showed the reverend gentleman where he lived and
unless he entered into, and fulfilled, an undertaking to appear in
cook's court to-morrow night, "to--mor--row--night," mrs. sna
 
 ___________________________
 
gsby
repeats for mere emphasis with another tight smile and another tight
shake of her head; and to-morrow night that boy will be here, and
to-morrow night mrs. snagsby will have her eye upon him and upon some
one else; and oh, you may walk a long while in your secret ways (says
mrs. snagsby with haughtiness and scorn), but you can't blind me!

mrs. snagsby sounds no timbrel in anybody's ears, but holds her
purpose quietly, and keeps her counsel. to-morrow comes, the savoury
preparations for the oil trade come, the evening comes. comes mr.
snagsby in his black coat; come the chadbands; come (when the gorging
vessel is replete) the 'prentices and guster, to be edified; comes at
last, with his slouching head, and his shuffle backward, and his
shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, and his shuffle to the
left, and his bit of fur cap in his mu
 
 ___________________________
 
ddy hand, which he picks as if
it were some mangy bird he had caught and was plucking before eating
raw, jo, the very, very tough subject mr. chadband is to improve.

mrs. snagsby screws a watchful glance on jo as he is brought into the
little drawing-room by guster. he looks at mr. snagsby the moment he
comes in. aha! why does he look at mr. snagsby? mr. snagsby looks at
him. why should he do that, but that mrs. snagsby sees it all? why
else should that look pass between them, why else should mr. snagsby
be confused and cough a signal cough behind his hand? it is as clear
as crystal that mr. snagsby is that boy's father.

"peace, my friends," says chadband, rising and wiping the oily
exudations from his reverend visage. "peace be with us! my friends,
why with us? because," with his fat smile, "it cannot be against us,
because it must be for us; because it is not hardening, because it is
softening; because it d
 
 ___________________________
 
ion with great difficulty and every possible
manifestation of reluctance.

when he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, mr. chadband, retiring
behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, "my friends!"
this is the signal for a general settlement of the audience. the
'prentices giggle internally and nudge each other. guster falls into
a staring and vacant state, compounded of a stunned admiration of mr.
chadband and pity for the friendless outcast whose condition touches
her nearly. mrs. snagsby silently lays trains of gunpowder. mrs.
chadband composes herself grimly by the fire and warms her knees,
finding that sensation favourable to the reception of eloquence.

it happens that mr. chadband has a pulpit habit of fixing some member
of his congregation with his eye and fatly arguing his points with
that particular person, who is understood to be expected to be moved
to an occasional grunt, groan, gasp, or other audible expression of
inward working, which expression of inward working, b
 
 ___________________________
 
eing echoed by
some elderly lady in the next pew and so communicated like a game of
forfeits through a circle of the more fermentable sinners present,
serves the purpose of parliamentary cheering and gets mr. chadband's
steam up. from mere force of habit, mr. chadband in saying "my
friends!" has rested his eye on mr. snagsby and proceeds to make that
ill-starred stationer, already sufficiently confused, the immediate
recipient of his discourse.

"we have here among us, my friends," says chadband, "a gentile and a
heathen, a dweller in the tents of tom-all-alone's and a mover-on
upon the surface of the earth. we have here among us, my friends,"
and mr. chadband, untwisting the point with his dirty thumb-nail,
bestows an oily smile on mr. snagsby, signifying that he will throw
him an argumentative back-fall presently
 
 ___________________________
 
 if he be not already down,
"a brother and a boy. devoid of parents, devoid of relations, devoid
of flocks and herds, devoid of gold and silver and of precious
stones. now, my friends, why do i say he is devoid of these
possessions? why? why is he?" mr. chadband states the question as if
he were propounding an entirely new riddle of much ingenuity and
merit to mr. snagsby and entreating him not to give it up.

mr. snagsby, greatly perplexed by the mysterious look he received
just now from his little woman--at about the period when mr. chadband
mentioned the word parents--is tempted into modestly remarking, "i
don't know, i'm sure, sir." on which interruption mrs. chadband
glares and mrs. snagsby says, "for shame!"

"i hear a voice," says chadband; "is it a still small voice, my
friends? i fear not, though i fain would hope so--"

"ah--h!" from mrs. snagsby.

"which says, 'i don't know.' then i will tell you why.
 
 ___________________________
 
 i say this
brother present here among us is devoid of parents, devoid of
relations, devoid of flocks and herds, devoid of gold, of silver, and
of precious stones because he is devoid of the light that shines in
upon some of us. what is that light? what is it? i ask you, what is
that light?"

mr. chadband draws back his head and pauses, but mr. snagsby is not
to be lured on to his destruction again. mr. chadband, leaning
forward over the table, pierces what he has got to follow directly
into mr. snagsby with the thumb-nail already mentioned.

"it is," says chadband, "the ray of rays, the sun of suns, the moon
of moons, the star of stars. it is the light of terewth."

mr. chadband draws himself up again and looks triumphantly at mr.
snagsby as if he would be glad to know how he feels after that.

"of terewth," says mr. chadband, hitting him again. "say not to me
that it is not the lamp of lamps. i say to you it is. i say to you, a
million of times over, it is. it is! i say to you that i will
pr
 
 ___________________________
 
oclaim it to you, whether you like it or not; nay, that the less
you like it, the more i will proclaim it to you. with a
speaking-trumpet! i say to you that if you rear yourself against it,
you shall fall, you shall be bruised, you shall be battered, you
shall be flawed, you shall be smashed."

the present effect of this flight of oratory--much admired for its
general power by mr. chadband's followers--being not only to make mr.
chadband unpleasantly warm, but to represent the innocent mr. snagsby
in the light of a determined enemy to virtue, with a forehead of
brass and a heart of adamant, that unfortunate tradesman becomes yet
more disconcerted and is in a very advanced state of low spirits and
false position when mr. chadband accidentally finishes him.

"my friends," he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some
time--and it smokes to such an extent that he seems to light his
pocket-handkerchief at it, which smokes, too, after every dab--"to
pursue the subject we are endeavouring wit
 
 ___________________________
 
," suddenly addressing the
'prentices and guster, to their consternation, "if i am told by the
doctor that calomel or castor-oil is good for me, i may naturally ask
what is calomel, and what is castor-oil. i may wish to be informed of
that before i dose myself with either or with both. now, my young
friends, what is this terewth then? firstly (in a spirit of love),
what is the common sort of terewth--the working clothes--the
every-day wear, my young friends? is it deception?"

"ah--h!" from mrs. snagsby.

"is it suppression?"

a shiver in the negative from mrs. snagsby.

"is it reservation?"

a shake of the head from mrs. snagsby--very long and very tight.

"no, my friends, it is neither of these. neither of these names
belongs to it. when this young heathen now among us--who is now, my
friends, asleep, the seal of indifference and perdition being set
upon his eyelids; but do not wake him, for it is right that i should
have to wrestle, and to combat and to struggle, and to conquer, for
his sak
 
 ___________________________
 
e--when this young hardened heathen told us a story of a cock,
and of a bull, and of a lady, and of a sovereign, was that the
terewth? no. or if it was partly, was it wholly and entirely? no, my
friends, no!"

if mr. snagsby could withstand his little woman's look as it enters
at his eyes, the windows of his soul, and searches the whole
tenement, he were other than the man he is. he cowers and droops.

"or, my juvenile friends," says chadband, descending to the level of
their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his
greasily meek smile of coming a long way downstairs for the purpose,
"if the master of this house was to go forth into the city and there
see an eel, and was to come back, and was to cal
 
 ___________________________
 
l unto him the
mistress of this house, and was to say, 'sarah, rejoice with me, for
i have seen an elephant!' would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby in tears.

"or put it, my juvenile friends, that he saw an elephant, and
returning said 'lo, the city is barren, i have seen but an eel,'
would that be terewth?"

mrs. snagsby sobbing loudly.

"or put it, my juvenile friends," said chadband, stimulated by the
sound, "that the unnatural parents of this slumbering heathen--for
parents he had, my juvenile friends, beyond a doubt--after casting
him forth to the wolves and the vultures, and the wild dogs and the
young gazelles, and the serpents, went back to their dwellings and
had their pipes, and their pots, and their flutings and their
dancings, and their malt liquors, and their butcher's meat and
poultry, would that b
 
 ___________________________
 
e terewth?"

mrs. snagsby replies by delivering herself a prey to spasms, not an
unresisting prey, but a crying and a tearing one, so that cook's
court re-echoes with her shrieks. finally, becoming cataleptic, she
has to be carried up the narrow staircase like a grand piano. after
unspeakable suffering, productive of the utmost consternation, she is
pronounced, by expresses from the bedroom, free from pain, though
much exhausted, in which state of affairs mr. snagsby, trampled and
crushed in the piano-forte removal, and extremely timid and feeble,
ventures to come out from behind the door in the drawing-room.

all this time jo has been standing on the spot where he woke up, ever
picking his cap and putting bits of fur in his mouth. he spits them
out with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in his nature to
be an unimprovable reprobate and that it's no good his trying to keep
awake, for he won't never know nothink. though it may be, jo, that
there is a
 
 ___________________________
 
m the
light, would but show it thee in simple reverence, would but leave it
unimproved, would but regard it as being eloquent enough without
their modest aid--it might hold thee awake, and thou might learn from
it yet!

jo never heard of any such book. its compilers and the reverend
chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the reverend
chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear him
talk for five minutes. "it an't no good my waiting here no longer,"
thinks jo. "mr. snagsby an't a-going to say nothink to me to-night."
and downstairs he shuffles.

but downstairs is the charitable guster, holding by the handrail of
the kitchen stairs and warding off a fit, as yet doubtfully, the same
having been induced by mrs. snagsby's screaming. she has her own
supper of bread and cheese to hand to jo, with whom she ventures to
interchange a word or so for the first time.

"here's something to eat, poor boy," says guster.

"thank'ee, mum," says jo.

"are you hungry?"

"jist!" say
 
 ___________________________
 
etrified. for this orphan
charge of the christian saint whose shrine was at tooting has patted
him on the shoulder, and it is the first time in his life that any
decent hand has been so laid upon him.

"i never know'd nothink about 'em," says jo.

"no more didn't i of mine," cries guster. she is repressing symptoms
favourable to the fit when she seems to take alarm at something and
vanishes down the stairs.

"jo," whispers the law-stationer softly as the boy lingers on the
step.

"here i am, mr. snagsby!"

"i didn't know you were gone--there's another half-crown, jo. it was
quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other night when
we were out together. it would breed trouble. you can't be too quiet,
jo."

"i am fly, master!"

and so, good night.

a ghostly shade, frilled and night-capped, follows the law-stationer
to the room he came from and glides higher up. and henceforth he
begins, go where he will, to be attended by another shadow than his
own, hardly less constant than his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
ixed his attention or his eyes, it was only for a very
little while. he soon began to droop his head again, and roll it
heavily, and speak as if he were half awake.

"when did he come from london?" i asked.

"i come from london yes'day," said the boy himself, now flushed and
hot. "i'm a-going somewheres."

"where is he going?" i asked.

"somewheres," repeated the boy in a louder tone. "i have been moved
on, and moved on, more nor ever i was afore, since the t'other one
give me the sov'ring. mrs. snagsby, she's always a-watching, and
a-driving of me--what have i done to her?--and they're all a-watching
and a-driving of me. every one of 'em's doing of it, from the time
when i don't get up, to the time when i don't go to bed. and i'm
a-going somewheres. that's where i'm a-going. she told me, down in
tom-all-alone's, as she came from stolbuns, and so i took the
stolbuns road. it's as good as another."

he always concluded by addressing charley.

"what is to be done with him?" said i, taking the wo
 
 ___________________________
 
e something in himself that is
in fault; but mr. weevle, otherwise jobling, is very ill at ease. he
comes and goes between his own room and the open street door twenty
times an hour. he has been doing so ever since it fell dark. since
the chancellor shut up his shop, which he did very early to-night,
mr. weevle has been down and up, and down and up (with a cheap tight
velvet skull-cap on his head, making his whiskers look out of all
proportion), oftener than before.

it is no phenomenon that mr. snagsby should be ill at ease too, for
he always is so, more or less, under the oppressive influence of the
secret that is upon him. impelled by the mystery of which he is a
partaker and yet in which he is not a sharer, mr. snagsby haunts what
seems to be its fountain-head--the rag and bottle shop in the court.
it has an irresistible attraction for him. even now, coming round by
the sol's arms with the intention of passing down the court, and out
at the chancery lane end, and so terminating his unpreme
 
 ___________________________
 
ditated
after-supper stroll of ten minutes' long from his own door and back
again, mr. snagsby approaches.

"what, mr. weevle?" says the stationer, stopping to speak. "are you
there?"

"aye!" says weevle, "here i am, mr. snagsby."

"airing yourself, as i am doing, before you go to bed?" the stationer
inquires.

"why, there's not much air to be got here; and what there is, is not
very freshening," weevle answers, glancing up and down the court.

"very true, sir. don't you observe," says mr. snagsby, pausing to
sniff and taste the air a little, "don't you observe, mr. weevle,
that you're--not to put too fine a point upon it--that you're rather
greasy here, sir?"

"why, i have noticed myself that there is a queer kind of flavour in
the place to-night," mr. weevle rejoins. "i suppose it's chops at the
sol's arms."

"chops, do you think? oh! chops, eh?" mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes
again. "well, sir, i suppose it is. but i should say their cook at
the sol wanted a little looking after. she h
 
 ___________________________
 
as been burning 'em, sir!
and i don't think"--mr. snagsby sniffs and tastes again and then
spits and wipes his mouth--"i don't think--not to put too fine a
point upon it--that they were quite fresh when they were shown the
gridiron."

"that's very likely. it's a tainting sort of weather."

"it is a tainting sort of weather," says mr. snagsby, "and i find it
sinking to the spirits."

"by george! i find it gives me the horrors," returns mr. weevle.

"then, you see, you live in a lonesome way, and in a lonesome room,
with a black circumstance hanging over it," says mr. snagsby, looking
in past the other's shoulder along the dark passage and then falling
back a step to look up at the house. "i couldn't live in that room
alone, as you do, sir. i should get so fidgety and worried of an
evening, sometimes, that i should be driven to come 
 
 ___________________________
 
to the door and
stand here sooner than sit there. but then it's very true that you
didn't see, in your room, what i saw there. that makes a difference."

"i know quite enough about it," returns tony.

"it's not agreeable, is it?" pursues mr. snagsby, coughing his cough
of mild persuasion behind his hand. "mr. krook ought to consider it
in the rent. i hope he does, i am sure."

"i hope he does," says tony. "but i doubt it."

"you find the rent too high, do you, sir?" returns the stationer.
"rents are high about here. i don't know how it is exactly, but the
law seems to put things up in price. not," adds mr. snagsby with his
apologetic cough, "that i mean to say a word against the profession i
get my living by."

mr. weevle again glances up 
 
 ___________________________
 
and down the court and then looks at the
stationer. mr. snagsby, blankly catching his eye, looks upward for a
star or so and coughs a cough expressive of not exactly seeing his
way out of this conversation.

"it's a curious fact, sir," he observes, slowly rubbing his hands,
"that he should have been--"

"who's he?" interrupts mr. weevle.

"the deceased, you know," says mr. snagsby, twitching his head and
right eyebrow towards the staircase and tapping his acquaintance on
the button.

"ah, to be sure!" returns the other as if he were not over-fond of
the subject. "i thought we had done with him."

"i was only going to say it's a curious fact, sir, that he should
have come and lived here, and been one of my writers, and then that
you should come and live here, and be one of my writers too. which
there is nothing derogatory, but far from it in the appellation,"
says mr. sna
 
 ___________________________
 
e into brewers' houses and done
really very respectable indeed. eminently respectable, sir," adds mr.
snagsby with a misgiving that he has not improved the matter.

"it's a curious coincidence, as you say," answers weevle, once more
glancing up and down the court.

"seems a fate in it, don't there?" suggests the stationer.

"there does."

"just so," observes the stationer with his confirmatory cough. "quite
a fate in it. quite a fate. well, mr. weevle, i am afraid i must bid
you good night"--mr. snagsby speaks as if it made him desolate to go,
though he has been casting about for any means of escape ever since
he stopped to speak--"my little woman will be looking for me else.
good night, sir!"

if mr. snagsby hastens home to save his little woman the trouble of
looking for him, he might set his mind at rest on that score. his
little woman has had her eye upon him round the sol's arms all this
time and now glides after him with a pocket handkerchief wrapped over
her head, honouring mr. weevle a
 
 ___________________________
 
py, looking
at him, snuffers in hand, as he sits down with his elbow on the
table.

"william guppy," replies the other, "i am in the downs. it's this
unbearably dull, suicidal room--and old boguey downstairs, i
suppose." mr. weevle moodily pushes the snuffers-tray from him with
his elbow, leans his head on his hand, puts his feet on the fender,
and looks at the fire. mr. guppy, observing him, slightly tosses his
head and sits down on the other side of the table in an easy
attitude.

"wasn't that snagsby talking to you, tony?"

"yes, and he--yes, it was snagsby," said mr. weevle, altering the
construction of his sentence.

"on business?"

"no. no business. he was only sauntering by and stopped to prose."

"i thought it was snagsby," says mr. guppy, "and thought it as well
that he shouldn't see me, so i waited till he was gone."

"there we go again, william g.!" cried tony, looking up for an
instant. "so mysterious and secret! by george, if we were going to
commit a murder, we couldn't have more
 
 ___________________________
 
hast.

"why, tony, what on earth is going on in this house to-night? is
there a chimney on fire?"

"chimney on fire!"

"ah!" returns mr. guppy. "see how the soot's falling. see here, on my
arm! see again, on the table here! confound the stuff, it won't blow
off--smears like black fat!"

they look at one another, and tony goes listening to the door, and a
little way upstairs, and a little way downstairs. comes back and says
it's all right and all quiet, and quotes the remark he lately made to
mr. snagsby about their cooking chops at the sol's arms.

"and it was then," resumes mr. guppy, still glancing with remarkable
aversion at the coat-sleeve, as they pursue their conversation before
the fire, leaning on opposite sides of the table, with their heads
very near together, "that he told you of his having taken the bundle
of letters from his lodger's portmanteau?"

"that was the time, sir," answers tony, faintly adjusting his
whiskers. "whereupon i wrote a line to my dear boy, the honourable
willi
 
 ___________________________
 
er and above the faces that have fallen
drowsily on tables and the heels that lie prone on hard floors
instead of beds, the brick and mortar physiognomy of the very court
itself looks worn and jaded. and now the neighbourhood, waking up and
beginning to hear of what has happened, comes streaming in, half
dressed, to ask questions; and the two policemen and the helmet (who
are far less impressible externally than the court) have enough to do
to keep the door.

"good gracious, gentlemen!" says mr. snagsby, coming up. "what's this
i hear!"

"why, it's true," returns one of the policemen. "that's what it is.
now move on here, come!"

"why, good gracious, gentlemen," says mr. snagsby, somewhat promptly
backed away, "i was at this door last night betwixt ten and eleven
o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodges here."

"indeed?" returns the policeman. "you will find the young man next
door then. now move on here, some of you."

"not hurt, i hope?" says mr. snagsby.

"hurt? no. what's to h
 
 ___________________________
 
urt him!"

mr. snagsby, wholly unable to answer this or any question in his
troubled mind, repairs to the sol's arms and finds mr. weevle
languishing over tea and toast with a considerable expression on him
of exhausted excitement and exhausted tobacco-smoke.

"and mr. guppy likewise!" quoth mr. snagsby. "dear, dear, dear! what
a fate there seems in all this! and my lit--"

mr. snagsby's power of speech deserts him in the formation of the
words "my little woman." for to see that injured female walk into the
sol's arms at that hour of the morning and stand before the
beer-engine, with her eyes fixed upon him like an accusing spirit,
strikes him dumb.

"my dear," says mr. snagsby when his tongue is loosened, "will you
take anything? a little--not to put too fine a point upon it--drop of
shrub?"

"no," says mrs. snagsby.

"my love, you know these two gentlemen?"

"yes!" says mrs
 
 ___________________________
 
. snagsby, and in a rigid manner acknowledges their
presence, still fixing mr. snagsby with her eye.

the devoted mr. snagsby cannot bear this treatment. he takes mrs.
snagsby by the hand and leads her aside to an adjacent cask.

"my little woman, why do you look at me in that way? pray don't do
it."

"i can't help my looks," says mrs. snagsby, "and if i could i
wouldn't."

mr. snagsby, with his cough of meekness, rejoins, "wouldn't you
really, my dear?" and meditates. then coughs his cough of trouble and
says, "this is a dreadful mystery, my love!" still fearfully
disconcerted by mrs. snagsby's eye.

"it is," returns mrs. snagsby, shaking her head, "a dreadful
mystery."

"my little woman," urges mr. snagsby in a piteous manner, "don't for
goodness' sake speak to me with that bitter expression and look at me
in that searching way! i beg and entreat of you not to do it. good
l
 
 ___________________________
 
ord, you don't suppose that i would go spontaneously combusting any
person, my dear?"

"i can't say," returns mrs. snagsby.

on a hasty review of his unfortunate position, mr. snagsby "can't
say" either. he is not prepared positively to deny that he may have
had something to do with it. he has had something--he don't know
what--to do with so much in this connexion that is mysterious that it
is possible he may even be implicated, without knowing it, in the
present transaction. he faintly wipes his forehead with his
handkerchief and gasps.

"my life," says the unhappy stationer, "would you have any objections
to mention why, being in general so delicately circumspect in your
c
 
 ___________________________
 
onduct, you come into a wine-vaults before breakfast?"

"why do you come here?" inquires mrs. snagsby.

"my dear, merely to know the rights of the fatal accident which has
happened to the venerable party who has been--combusted." mr. snagsby
has made a pause to suppress a groan. "i should then have related
them to you, my love, over your french roll."

"i dare say you would! you relate everything to me, mr. snagsby."

"every--my lit--"

"i should be glad," says mrs. snagsby after contemplating his
increased confusion with a severe and sinister smile, "if you would
come home with me; i think you may be safer there, mr. snagsby, than
anywhere else."

"my love, i don't know but what i may be, i am sure. i am ready to
go."

mr. snagsby casts his eye forlornly round the bar, gives messrs.
weevle and guppy good morning, assures them of the satisfaction with
which he sees them uninjured, and accompanies mrs. snagsby from the
sol's arms. before night his doubt whether he 
 
 ___________________________
 
auntering home. in the oven made by
the hot pavements and hot buildings, he has baked himself dryer than
usual; and he has in his thirsty mind his mellowed port-wine half a
century old.

the lamplighter is skipping up and down his ladder on mr.
tulkinghorn's side of the fields when that high-priest of noble
mysteries arrives at his own dull court-yard. he ascends the
door-steps and is gliding into the dusky hall when he encounters, on
the top step, a bowing and propitiatory little man.

"is that snagsby?"

"yes, sir. i hope you are well, sir. i was just giving you up, sir,
and going home."

"aye? what is it? what do you want with me?"

"well, sir," says mr. snagsby, holding his hat at the side of his
head in his deference towards his best customer, "i was wishful to
say a word to you, sir."

"can you say it here?"

"perfectly, sir."

"say it then." the lawyer turns, leans his arms on the iron railing
at the top of the steps, and looks at the lamplighter lighting the
court-yard.

"it is relatin
 
 ___________________________
 
g," says mr. snagsby in a mysterious low voice, "it is
relating--not to put too fine a point upon it--to the foreigner,
sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn eyes him with some surprise. "what foreigner?"

"the foreign female, sir. french, if i don't mistake? i am not
acquainted with that language myself, but i should judge from her
manners and appearance that she was french; anyways, certainly
foreign. her that was upstairs, sir, when mr. bucket and me had the
honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping-boy that night."

"oh! y
 
 ___________________________
 
es, yes. mademoiselle hortense."

"indeed, sir?" mr. snagsby coughs his cough of submission behind his
hat. "i am not acquainted myself with the names of foreigners in
general, but i have no doubt it would be that." mr. snagsby appears
to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of repeating
the name, but on reflection coughs again to excuse himself.

"and what can you have to say, snagsby," demands mr. tulkinghorn,
"about her?"

"well, sir," returns the stationer, shading his communication with
his hat, "it falls a little hard upon me. my domestic happiness is
very great--at least, it's as great as can be expected, i'm sure--but
my little woman is rather given to jealousy. not to put too fine a
point upon it, she is very much given to jealousy. and you see, a
foreign female of that genteel appearance coming into the shop, and
hovering--i should be the last to make use of a stron
 
 ___________________________
 
g expression if
i could avoid it, but hovering, sir--in the court--you know it
is--now ain't it? i only put it to yourself, sir."

mr. snagsby, having said this in a very plaintive manner, throws in a
cough of general application to fill up all the blanks.

"why, what do you mean?" asks mr. tulkinghorn.

"just so, sir," returns mr. snagsby; "i was sure you would feel it
yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of my feelings when
coupled with the known excitableness of my little woman. you see, the
foreign female--which you mentioned her name just now, with quite a
native sound i am sure--caught up the word snagsby that night, being
uncommon quick, and made inquiry, and got the direction and come at
dinner-time. now guster, our young woman, is timid and has fits, and
she, taking fright at the foreigner's looks--which are fier
 
 ___________________________
 
nk are never gone into, or come out of, in
any house but ours. consequently there was by good fortune ample
occupation for my little woman, and only me to answer the shop. when
she did say that mr. tulkinghorn, being always denied to her by his
employer (which i had no doubt at the time was a foreign mode of
viewing a clerk), she would do herself the pleasure of continually
calling at my place until she was let in here. since then she has
been, as i began by saying, hovering, hovering, sir"--mr. snagsby
repeats the word with pathetic emphasis--"in the court. the effects
of which movement it is impossible to calculate. i shouldn't wonder
if it might have already given rise to the painfullest mistakes even
in the neighbours' minds, not mentioning (if such a thing was
possible) my little woman. whereas, goodness knows," says mr.
snagsby, shaking his head, "i never had an idea of a foreign female,
except as being formerly connected with a bunch of brooms and a baby,
or at the present time with a t
 
 ___________________________
 
ambourine and earrings. i never had, i
do assure you, sir!"

mr. tulkinghorn had listened gravely to this complaint and inquires
when the stationer has finished, "and that's all, is it, snagsby?"

"why yes, sir, that's all," says mr. snagsby, ending with a cough
that plainly adds, "and it's enough too--for me."

"i don't know what mademoiselle hortense may want or mean, unless she
is mad," says the lawyer.

"even if she was, you know, sir," mr. snagsby pleads, "it wouldn't be
a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a foreign
dagger planted in the family."

"no," says the other. "well, well! this shall be stopped. i am sorry
you have been inconvenienced. if she comes again, send her here."

mr. snagsby, with much bowing and short apologetic coughing, takes
his leave, lightened in heart. mr. tulkinghorn goes upstairs, saying
to himself, "these women were created to give trouble the whole earth
over. the mistress not being en
 
 ___________________________
 
 tulkinghorn, tapping his chin with the
key and looking imperturbably at her, "how this matter stands."

"ah! let us see," mademoiselle assents, with many angry and tight
nods of her head.

"you come here to make a remarkably modest demand, which you have
just stated, and it not being conceded, you will come again."

"and again," says mademoiselle with more tight and angry nods. "and
yet again. and yet again. and many times again. in effect, for ever!"

"and not only here, but you will go to mr. snagsby's too, perhaps?
that visit not succeeding either, you will go again perhaps?"

"and again," repeats mademoiselle, cataleptic with determination.
"and yet again. and yet again. and many times again. in effect, for
ever!"

"very well. now, mademoiselle hortense, let me recommend you to take
the candle and pick up that money of yours. i think you will find it
behind the clerk's partition in the corner yonder."

she merely throws a laugh over her shoulder and stands her ground
with folded arms.

"y
 
 ___________________________
 
 of our good english
citizens from being troubled, even by a lady's visits against his
desire. and on his complaining that he is so troubled, it takes hold
of the troublesome lady and shuts her up in prison under hard
discipline. turns the key upon her, mistress." illustrating with the
cellar-key.

"truly?" returns mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice. "that is
droll! but--my faith!--still what does it matter to me?"

"my fair friend," says mr. tulkinghorn, "make another visit here, or
at mr. snagsby's, and you shall learn."

"in that case you will send me to the prison, perhaps?"

"perhaps."

it would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle's state of
agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth, otherwise a tigerish
expansion thereabouts might look as if a very little more would make
her do it.

"in a word, mistress," says mr. tulkinghorn, "i am sorry to be
unpolite, but if you ever present yourself uninvited here--or
there--again, i will give you over to the police. their gallantry is
grea
 
 ___________________________
 
ere
ever since?"

"wishermaydie if i seen tom-all-alone's till this blessed morning,"
replies jo hoarsely.

"why have you come here now?"

jo looks all round the confined court, looks at his questioner no
higher than the knees, and finally answers, "i don't know how to do
nothink, and i can't get nothink to do. i'm wery poor and ill, and i
thought i'd come back here when there warn't nobody about, and lay
down and hide somewheres as i knows on till arter dark, and then go
and beg a trifle of mr. snagsby. he wos allus willin fur to give me
somethink he wos, though mrs. snagsby she was allus a-chivying on
me--like everybody everywheres."

"where have you come from?"

jo looks all round the court again, looks at his questioner's knees
again, and concludes by laying his profile against the hoarding in a
sort of resignation.

"did you hear me ask you where you have come from?"

"tramp then," says jo.

"now tell me," proceeds allan, making a strong effort to overcome his
repugnance, going very near 
 
 ___________________________
 
ist to say to mr. sangsby that jo, wot he known once, is a-moving
on right forards with his duty, and i'll be wery thankful. i'd be
more thankful than i am aready if it wos any ways possible for an
unfortnet to be it."

he makes so many of these references to the law-stationer in the
course of a day or two that allan, after conferring with mr.
jarndyce, good-naturedly resolves to call in cook's court, the
rather, as the cart seems to be breaking down.

to cook's court, therefore, he repairs. mr. snagsby is behind his
counter in his grey coat and sleeves, inspecting an indenture of
several skins which has just come in from the engrosser's, an immense
desert of law-hand and parchment, with here and there a resting-place
of a few large letters to break the awful monotony and save the
traveller from despair. mr snagsby puts up at one of these inky wells
and greets the stranger with his cough of general preparation for
business.

"you don't remember me, mr. snagsby?"

the stationer's heart begins t
 
 ___________________________
 
not to
put too fine a point upon it--that i never saw you before, sir."

"twice before," says allan woodcourt. "once at a poor bedside, and
once--"

"it's come at last!" thinks the afflicted stationer, as recollection
breaks upon him. "it's got to a head now and is going to burst!" but
he has sufficient presence of mind to conduct his visitor into the
little counting-house and to shut the door.

"are you a married man, sir?"

"no, i am not."

"would you make the attempt, though single," says mr. snagsby in a
melancholy whisper, "to speak as low as you can? for my little woman
is a-listening somewheres, or i'll forfeit the business and five
hundred pound!"

in deep dejection mr. snagsby sits down on his stool, with his back
against his desk, protesting, "i never had a secret of my own, sir. i
can't charge my memory with ever having once attempted to deceive my
little woman on my own account since she named the day. i wouldn't
have done it, sir. not to put too fine a point upon it, i couldn't
ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve done it, i dursn't have done it. whereas, and nevertheless, i
find myself wrapped round with secrecy and mystery, till my life is a
burden to me."

his visitor professes his regret to hear it and asks him does he
remember jo. mr. snagsby answers with a suppressed groan, oh, don't
he!

"you couldn't name an individual human being--except myself--that my
little woman is more set and determined against than jo," says mr.
snagsby.

allan asks why.

"why?" repeats mr. snagsby, in his desperation clutching at the clump
of hair at the back of his bald head. "how should i know why? but you
are a single person, sir, and may you long be spared to ask a married
person such a question!"

with this beneficent wish, mr. snagsby coughs a cough of dismal
resignation and submits himself to hear what the visitor has to
communicate.

"there again!" says mr. snagsby, who, between the earnestness of his
feelings and the suppressed tones of his voice is discoloured in the
face. "at 
 
 ___________________________
 
it again, in a new direction! a certain person charges me,
in the solemnest way, not to talk of jo to any one, even my little
woman. then comes another certain person, in the person of yourself,
and charges me, in an equally solemn way, not to mention jo to that
other certain person above all other persons. why, this is a private
asylum! why, not to put too fine a point upon it, this is bedlam,
sir!" says mr. snagsby.

but it is better than he expected after all, being no explosion of
the mine below him or deepening of the pit into which he has fallen.
and being tender-hearted and affected by the account he hears of jo's
condition, he readily engages to "look round" as early in the evening
as he can manage it quietly. he looks round very quietly when the
evening comes, but it may turn out that mrs. snagsby is as quiet a
manager as he.

jo is very glad to see his old friend and says, when they are left
alone
 
 ___________________________
 
, that he takes it uncommon kind as mr. sangsby should come so
far out of his way on accounts of sich as him. mr. snagsby, touched
by the spectacle before him, immediately lays upon the table half a
crown, that magic balsam of his for all kinds of wounds.

"and how do you find yourself, my poor lad?" inquires the stationer
with his cough of sympathy.

"i am in luck, mr. sangsby, i am," returns jo, "and don't want for
nothink. i'm more cumfbler nor you can't think. mr. sangsby! i'm wery
sorry that i done it, but i didn't go fur to do it, sir."

the stationer softly lays down another half-crown and asks him what
it 
 
 ___________________________
 
pitching your voice so high. but as she ain't
here; just pitch it an octave or two lower, will you, and i'll not
only be obliged to you, but it'll do you more credit," says mr.
bucket. "this other gentleman is in the preaching line, i think?"

"name of chadband," mr. smallweed puts in, speaking henceforth in a
much lower key.

"once had a friend and brother serjeant of the same name," says mr.
bucket, offering his hand, "and consequently feel a liking for it.
mrs. chadband, no doubt?"

"and mrs. snagsby," mr. smallweed introduces.

"husband a law-stationer and a friend of my own," says mr. bucket.
"love him like a brother! now, what's up?"

"do you mean what business have we come upon?" mr. smallweed asks, a
little dashed by the suddenness of this turn.

"ah! you know what i mean. let us hear what it's all about in
presence of sir leicester dedlock, baronet. come."

mr. smallweed, beckoning mr. chadband, takes a moment's counsel with
him in a whisper. mr. chadband, expressing a considerable am
 
 ___________________________
 
early so--when she
was born. but she's alive, and i know her." with these words, and a
laugh, and laying a bitter stress on the word "ladyship," mrs.
chadband folds her arms and looks implacably at mr. bucket.

"i suppose now," returns that officer, "you will be expecting a
twenty-pound note or a present of about that figure?"

mrs. chadband merely laughs and contemptuously tells him he can
"offer" twenty pence.

"my friend the law-stationer's good lady, over there," says mr.
bucket, luring mrs. snagsby forward with the finger. "what may your
game be, ma'am?"

mrs. snagsby is at first prevented, by tears and lamentations, from
stating the nature of her game, but by degrees it confusedly comes to
light that she is a woman overwhelmed with injuries and wrongs, whom
mr. snagsby has habitually deceived, abandoned, and sought to keep in
darkness, and whose chief comfort, under her afflictions, has been
the sympathy of the late mr. tulkinghorn, who showed so much
commiseration for her on one occasio
 
 ___________________________
 
n of his calling in cook's court
in the absence of her perjured husband that she has of late
habitually carried to him all her woes. everybody it appears, the
present company excepted, has plotted against mrs. snagsby's peace.
there is mr. guppy, clerk to kenge and carboy, who was at first as
open as the sun at noon, but who suddenly shut up as close as
midnight, under the influence--no doubt--of mr. snagsby's suborning
and tampering. there is mr. weevle, friend of mr. guppy, who lived
mysteriously up a court, owing to the like coherent causes. there was
krook, deceased; there was nimrod, deceased; and there was jo,
deceased; and they were "all in it." in what, mrs. snagsby does not
with particularity express, but she knows that jo was mr. snagsby's
son, "as well as if a trumpet had spoken it," and she followed mr.
snagsby when he went on his last visit to the boy, and if he was not
his son why did
 
 ___________________________
 
 he go? the one occupation of her life has been, for
some time back, to follow mr. snagsby to and fro, and up and down,
and to piece suspicious circumstances together--and every
circumstance that has happened has been most suspicious; and in this
way she has pursued her object of detecting and confounding her false
husband, night and day. thus did it come to pass that she brought the
chadbands and mr. tulkinghorn together, and conferred with mr.
tulkinghorn on the change in mr. guppy, and helped to turn up the
circumstances in which the present company are interested, casually,
by th
 
 ___________________________
 
e wayside, being still and ever on the great high road that is
to terminate in mr. snagsby's full exposure and a matrimonial
separation. all this, mrs. snagsby, as an injured woman, and the
friend of mrs. chadband, and the follower of mr. chadband, and the
mourner of the late mr. tulkinghorn, is here to certify under the
seal of confidence, with every possible confusion and involvement
possible and impossible, having no pecuniary motive whatever, no
scheme or project but the one mentioned, and bringing here, and
taking everywhere, her own dense atmosphere of dust, arising from the
ceaseless working of her mill of jealousy.

while this exordium is in h
 
 ___________________________
 
and--and it takes some time--mr. bucket,
who has seen through the transparency of mrs. snagsby's vinegar at a
glance, confers with his familiar demon and bestows his shrewd
attention on the chadbands and mr. smallweed. sir leicester dedlock
remains immovable, with the same icy surface upon him, except that he
once or twice looks towards mr. bucket, as relying on that officer
alone of all mankind.

"very good," says mr. bucket. "now i understand you, you know, and
being deputed by sir leicester dedlock, baronet, to look into this
little matter," again sir leicester mechanically bows in co
 
 ___________________________
 
the gentleman of the house?" he asks in an insinuating
tone.

nobody having the hardihood to object to his doing so, he does it,
and the party retire as they came up. mr. bucket follows them to the
door, and returning, says with an air of serious business, "sir
leicester dedlock, baronet, it's for you to consider whether or not
to buy this up. i should recommend, on the whole, it's being bought
up myself; and i think it may be bought pretty cheap. you see, that
little pickled cowcumber of a mrs. snagsby has been used by all sides
of the speculation and has done a deal more harm in bringing odds and
ends together than if she had meant it. mr. tulkinghorn, deceased, he
held all these horses in his hand and could have drove 'em his own
way, i haven't a doubt; but he was fetched off the box head-foremost,
and now they have got their legs over the traces, and are all
dragging and pulling their own ways. so it is, and such is life. the
cat's away, and the mice they play; the frost breaks up, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
h which i knew he had
inspired my darling, and the comfort he was to her; could i separate
all this from his promise to me? how thankless i must have been if it
had not recalled the words he said to me when he was so moved by the
change in my appearance: "i will accept him as a trust, and it shall
be a sacred one!"

we now turned into another narrow street. "mr. woodcourt," said mr.
bucket, who had eyed him closely as we came along, "our business
takes us to a law-stationer's here, a certain mr. snagsby's. what,
you know him, do you?" he was so quick that he saw it in an instant.

"yes, i know a little of him and have called upon him at this place."

"indeed, sir?" said mr. bucket. "then you will be so good as to let
me leave miss summerson with you for a moment while i go and have
half a word with him?"

the last police-officer with whom he had conferred was standing
silently behind us. i was not aware of it until he struck in on my
saying i heard some one crying.

"don't be alarmed, miss," h
 
 ___________________________
 
e returned. "it's snagsby's servant."

"why, you see," said mr. bucket, "the girl's subject to fits, and has
'em bad upon her to-night. a most contrary circumstance it is, for i
want certain information out of that girl, and she must be brought to
reason somehow."

"at all events, they wouldn't be up yet if it wasn't for her, mr.
bucket," said the other man. "she's been at it pretty well all night,
sir."

"well, that's true," he returned. "my light's burnt out. show yours a
moment."

all this passed in a whisper a door 
 
 ___________________________
 
ether; although it was cold and
raw, it smelt close too from being up all night. in the passage
behind the door stood a scared, sorrowful-looking little man in a
grey coat who seemed to have a naturally polite manner and spoke
meekly.

"downstairs, if you please, mr. bucket," said he. "the lady will
excuse the front kitchen; we use it as our workaday sitting-room. the
back is guster's bedroom, and in it she's a-carrying on, poor thing,
to a frightful extent!"

we went downstairs, followed by mr. snagsby, as i soon found the
little man to be. in the front kitchen, sitting by the fire, was mrs.
snagsby, with very red eyes and a very severe expression of face.

"my little woman," said mr. snagsby, entering behind us, "to
wave--not to put too fine a point upon it, my dear--hostilities for
one single moment in the course of this prolonged night, here is
inspector bucket, mr. woodcourt, and a lady."

she looked very much astonished, as she had reason for doing, and
looked particularly hard at me.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
my little woman," said mr. snagsby, sitting down in the remotest
corner by the door, as if he were taking a liberty, "it is not
unlikely that you may inquire of me why inspector bucket, mr.
woodcourt, and a lady call upon us in cook's court, cursitor street,
at the present hour. i don't know. i have not the least idea. if i
was to be informed, i should despair of understanding, and i'd rather
not be told."

he appeared so miserable, sitting with his head upon his hand, and i
appeared so unwelcome, that i was going to offer an ap
 
 ___________________________
 
ology when mr.
bucket took the matter on himself.

"now, mr. snagsby," said he, "the best thing you can do is to go
along with mr. woodcourt to look after your guster--"

"my guster, mr. bucket!" cried mr. snagsby. "go on, sir, go on. i
shall be charged with that next."

"and to hold the candle," pursued mr. bucket without correcting
himself, "or hold her, or make yourself useful in any way you're
asked. which there's not a man alive more ready to do, for you're a
man of urbanity and suavity, you know, and you've got the sort of
heart that can feel for another. mr. woodcourt, would you be so good
as see to her, and if you can get that letter from her, to let me
have it as soon as ever you can?"

as they 
 
 ___________________________
 
went out, mr. bucket made me sit down in a corner by the fire
and take off my wet shoes, which he turned up to dry upon the fender,
talking all the time.

"don't you be at all put out, miss, by the want of a hospitable look
from mrs. snagsby there, because she's under a mistake altogether.
she'll find that out sooner than will be agreeable to a lady of her
generally correct manner of forming her thoughts, because i'm a-going
to explain it to her." here, standing on the hearth with his wet hat
and shawls in his hand, himself a pile of wet, he turned to mrs.
snagsby. "now, the first thing that i say to you, as a married woman
possessing what you may call charms, you know--'believe me, if all
those endearing,' and cetrer--you're well 
 
 ___________________________
 
acquainted with the song,
because it's in vain for you to tell me that you and good society are
strangers--charms--attractions, mind you, that ought to give you
confidence in yourself--is, that you've done it."

mrs. snagsby looked rather alarmed, relented a little and faltered,
what did mr. bucket mean.

"what does mr. bucket mean?" he repeated, and i saw by his face that
all the time he talked he was listening for the discovery of the
letter, to my own great agitation, for i knew then how important it
must be; "i'll tell you what he means, ma'am. go and see othello
acted. that's the tragedy for you."

mrs. snagsby consciously asked why.

"why?" said mr. bucket. "because you'll come to that if you don't
look out. 
 
 ___________________________
 
why, at the very moment while i speak, i know what your
mind's not wholly free from respecting this young lady. but shall i
tell you who this young lady is? now, come, you're what i call an
intellectual woman--with your soul too large for your body, if you
come to that, and chafing it--and you know me, and you recollect
where you saw me last, and what was talked of in that circle. don't
you? yes! very well. this young lady is that young lady."

mrs. snagsby appeared to understand the reference better than i did
at the time.

"and toughey--him as you call jo--was mixed up in the same business,
and no other; and the law-writer that you know of was mixed up in the
same business, and no other; and your husband, with no more knowledge
of it than your great grandfather, was mixed up (by mr. tulkinghorn,
deceased, his best customer) in the same business, and no other; and
the whole bileing of people was mixed up in the same business, and no
other. and ye
 
 ___________________________
 
t a married woman, possessing your attractions, shuts
her eyes (and sparklers too), and goes and runs her delicate-formed
head against a wall. why, i am ashamed of you! (i expected mr.
woodcourt might have got it by this time.)"

mrs. snagsby shook her head and put her handkerchief to her eyes.

"is that all?" said mr. bucket excitedly. "no. see what happens.
another person mixed up in that business and no other, a person in a
wretched state, comes here to-night and is seen a-speaking to your
maid-servant; and between her and your maid-servant there passes
a paper that i would give a hundred pound for, down. what do
you do? you hide and you watch 'em, and you pounce upon that
maid-servant--knowing what she's subject to and what a li
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle thing
will bring 'em on--in that surprising manner and with that severity
that, by the lord, she goes off and keeps off, when a life may be
hanging upon that girl's words!"

he so thoroughly meant what he said now that i involuntarily clasped
my hands and felt the room turning away from me. but it stopped. mr.
woodcourt came in, put a paper into his hand, and went away again.

"now, mrs. snagsby, the only amends you can make," said mr. bucket,
rapidly glancing at it, "is to let me speak a word to this young lady
in private here. and if you know of any help that you can give to
that gentleman in the next kitchen there or can think of any one
thing that's likelier than another to bring the girl round, do your
swiftest and best!" in an instant she was gone, and he had shut the
door. "now my dear, you're steady and quite sure of yourself?"

"quite," said i.

"whose writing is that?"

it wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ough it was still a little wild. i
kneeled on the ground beside her and put her poor head upon my
shoulder, whereupon she drew her arm round my neck and burst into
tears.

"my poor girl," said i, laying my face against her forehead, for
indeed i was crying too, and trembling, "it seems cruel to trouble
you now, but more depends on our knowing something about this letter
than i could tell you in an hour."

she began piteously declaring that she didn't mean any harm, she
didn't mean any harm, mrs. snagsby!

"we are all sure of that," said i. "but pray tell me how you got it."

"yes, dear lady, i will, and tell you true. i'll tell true, indeed,
mrs. snagsby."

"i am sure of that," said i. "and how was it?"

"i had been out on an errand, dear lady--long after it was
dark--quite late; and when i came home, i found a common-looking
person, all wet and muddy, looking up at our house. when she saw me
coming in at the door, she called me back and said did i live here.
and i said yes, and she said she k
 
 ___________________________
 
new only one or two places about
here, but had lost her way and couldn't find them. oh, what shall i
do, what shall i do! they won't believe me! she didn't say any harm
to me, and i didn't say any harm to her, indeed, mrs. snagsby!"

it was necessary for her mistress to comfort her--which she did, i
must say, with a good deal of contrition--before she could be got
beyond this.

"she could not find those places," said i.

"no!" cried the girl, shaking her head. "no! couldn't find them. and
she was so faint, and lame, and miserable, oh so wretched, that if
you had seen her, mr. snagsby, you'd have given her half a crown, i
know!"

"well, guster, my girl," said he, at first not knowing what to say.
"i hope i should."

"and 
 
 ___________________________
 
t she said she meant a poor burying ground not very far
from here, where there was an archway, and a step, and an iron gate."

as i watched her face and soothed her to go on, i saw that mr. bucket
received this with a look which i could not separate from one of
alarm.

"oh, dear, dear!" cried the girl, pressing her hair back with her
hands. "what shall i do, what shall i do! she meant the burying
ground where the man was buried that took the sleeping-stuff--that
you came home and told us of, mr. snagsby--that frightened me so,
mrs. snagsby. oh, i am frightened again. hold me!"

"you are so much better now," sald i. "pray, pray tell me more."

"yes i will, yes i will! but don't be angry with me, that's a dear
lady, because i have been so ill."

angry with her, poor soul!

"there! now i will, now i will. so she said, could i tell her how to
find it, and i said yes, and i told her; and she looked at me with
eyes like almost as if she was blind, and herself all waving back.
and so she took out the
 
 ___________________________
 
ubbed out and not minded
and never sent; and would i take it from her, and send it, and the
messenger would be paid at the house. and so i said yes, if it was no
harm, and she said no--no harm. and so i took it from her, and she
said she had nothing to give me, and i said i was poor myself and
consequently wanted nothing. and so she said god bless you, and
went."

"and did she go--"

"yes," cried the girl, anticipating the inquiry. "yes! she went the
way i had shown her. then i came in, and mrs. snagsby came behind me
from somewhere and laid hold of me, and i was frightened."

mr. woodcourt took her kindly from me. mr. bucket wrapped me up, and
immediately we were in the street. mr. woodcourt hesitated, but i
said, "don't leave me now!" and mr. bucket added, "you'll be better
with us, we may want you; don't lose time!"

i have the most confused impressions of that walk. i recollect that
it was neither night nor day, that morning was dawning but the
street-lamps were not yet put out, that the s