il he got out of the coach a
little way short of reading, when he advised me to be a good girl and
to be studious, and shook hands with me. i must say i was relieved by
his departure. we left him at a milestone. i often walked past it
afterwards, and never for a long time without thinking of him and
half expecting to meet him. but i never did; and so, as time went on,
he passed out of my mind.

when the coach stopped, a very neat lady looked up at the window and
said, "miss donny."

"no, ma'am, esther summerson."

"that is quite right," said the lady, "miss donny."

i now understood that she introduced herself by that name, and begged
miss donny's pardon for my mistake, and pointed out my boxes at her
request. under the direction of a very neat maid, they were put
outside a very small green carriage; and then miss donny, the maid,
and i got inside and were driven away.

"everything is ready for you, esther," said miss donny, "and the
scheme of your pursuits has been arranged in exact accordance with
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 ct of chy, a ward of the ct in this
   cause, for whom he wishes to secure an elgble compn,
   directs us to inform you that he will be glad of your
   serces in the afsd capacity.

   we have arrngd for your being forded, carriage free, pr
   eight o'clock coach from reading, on monday morning next,
   to white horse cellar, piccadilly, london, where one of
   our clks will be in waiting to convey you to our offe as
   above.

   we are, madam, your obedt servts,

   kenge and carboy

   miss esther summerson


oh, never, never, never shall i forget the emotion this letter caused
in the house! it was so tender in them to care so much for me, it was
so gracious in that father who had not forgotten me to have made my
orphan way so smooth and easy and to have inclined so many youthful
natures towards me, that i could hardly bear it. not that i would
have had them less sorry--i am afraid not; but the pleasure of it,
and the pain of it, and the pride and joy of it, and the humble
regret of it were so ble
 
 ___________________________
 
l-remembered
voice of my godmother. this made me think, did lady dedlock's face
accidentally resemble my godmother's? it might be that it did, a
little; but the expression was so different, and the stern decision
which had worn into my godmother's face, like weather into rocks, was
so completely wanting in the face before me that it could not be that
resemblance which had struck me. neither did i know the loftiness and
haughtiness of lady dedlock's face, at all, in any one. and yet i--i,
little esther summerson, the child who lived a life apart and on
whose birthday there was no rejoicing--seemed to arise before my own
eyes, evoked out of the past by some power in this fashionable lady,
whom i not only entertained no fancy that i had ever seen, but whom i
perfectly well knew i had never seen until that hour.

it made me tremble so to be thrown into this unaccountable agitation
that i was conscious of being distressed even by the observation of
the french maid, though i knew she had been looking watchf
 
 ___________________________
 
ome to it presently. man or woman, ma'am?"

"neither," says mrs. chadband as before.

"oh! a child!" says mr. guppy, throwing on the admiring mrs. snagsby
the regular acute professional eye which is thrown on british
jurymen. "now, ma'am, perhaps you'll have the kindness to tell us
what child."

"you have got it at last, sir," says mrs. chadband with another
hard-favoured smile. "well, sir, it was before your time, most
likely, judging from your appearance. i was left in charge of a child
named esther summerson, who was put out in life by messrs. kenge and
carboy."

"miss summerson, ma'am!" cries mr. guppy, excited.

"i call her esther summerson," says mrs. chadband with austerity.
"there was no miss-ing of the girl in my time. it was esther.
'esther, do this! esther, do that!' and she was made to do it."

"my dear ma'am," returns mr. guppy, moving across the small
apartment, "the humble individual who now addresses you received that
young lady in london when she first came here from the establishment
 
 ___________________________
 
s, to
whom he says in his confusion, "i beg your pardon, i am sure." this
does not tend to the greater legibility of his notes. he murmurs,
growing warm and red and holding the slip of paper now close to his
eyes, now a long way off, "c.s. what's c.s. for? oh! c.s.! oh, i
know! yes, to be sure!" and comes back enlightened.

"i am not aware," says mr. guppy, standing midway between my lady and
his chair, "whether your ladyship ever happened to hear of, or to
see, a young lady of the name of miss esther summerson."

my lady's eyes look at him full. "i saw a young lady of that name not
long ago. this past autumn."

"now, did it strike your ladyship that she was like anybody?" asks
mr. guppy, crossing his arms, holding his head on one side, and
scratching the corner of his mouth with his memoranda.

my lady removes her eyes from him no more.

"no."

"not like your ladyship's family?"

"no."

"i think your ladyship," says mr. guppy, "can hardly remember miss
summerson's face?"

"i remember the young lady v
 
 ___________________________
 
ery well. what has this to do with me?"

"your ladyship, i do assure you that having miss summerson's image
imprinted on my 'eart--which i mention in confidence--i found, when i
had the honour of going over your ladyship's mansion of chesney wold
while on a short out in the county of lincolnshire with a friend,
such a resemblance between miss esther summerson and your ladyship's
own portrait that it completely knocked me over, so much so that i
didn't at the moment even know what it was that knocked me over. and
now i have the honour of beholding your ladyship near (i have often,
since that, taken the liberty of looking at your ladyship in your
carriage in the park, when i dare say you was not aware of me, but i
never saw your ladyship so near), it's really more surprising than i
thought it."

young man of the name of guppy! there have been times, w
 
 ___________________________
 
 these notes! oh! 'mrs. chadband.' yes." mr.
guppy draws his chair a little forward and seats himself again. my
lady reclines in her chair composedly, though with a trifle less of
graceful ease than usual perhaps, and never falters in her steady
gaze. "a--stop a minute, though!" mr. guppy refers again. "e.s.
twice? oh, yes! yes, i see my way now, right on."

rolling up the slip of paper as an instrument to point his speech
with, mr. guppy proceeds.

"your ladyship, there is a mystery about miss esther summerson's
birth and bringing up. i am informed of that fact because--which i
mention in confidence--i know it in the way of my profession at kenge
and carboy's. now, as i have already mentioned to your ladyship, miss
summerson's image is imprinted on my 'eart. if i could clear this
mystery for her, or prove her to be well related, or find that having
the honour to be a remote branch of your ladyship's family she had a
right to be made a party in jarndyce and jarndyce, why, i might make
a sort of a clai
 
 ___________________________
 
? yes." after each of these
interrogatories, she has inclined her head. "very good! now, this
miss barbary was extremely close--seems to have been extraordinarily
close for a female, females being generally (in common life at least)
rather given to conversation--and my witness never had an idea
whether she possessed a single relative. on one occasion, and only
one, she seems to have been confidential to my witness on a single
point, and she then told her that the little girl's real name was not
esther summerson, but esther hawdon."

"my god!"

mr. guppy stares. lady dedlock sits before him looking him through,
with the same dark shade upon her face, in the same attitude even to
the holding of the screen, with her lips a little apart, her brow a
little contracted, but for the moment dead. he sees her consciousness
return, sees a tremor pass across her frame like a ripple over water,
sees her lips shake, sees her compose them by a great effort, sees
her force herself back to the knowledge of his presenc
 
 ___________________________
 
."

ever looking about, he has opened a dainty little chest in an inner
drawer. his great hand, turning over some gloves which it can
scarcely feel, they are so light and soft within it, comes upon a
white handkerchief.

"hum! let's have a look at you," says mr. bucket, putting down the
light. "what should you be kept by yourself for? what's your motive?
are you her ladyship's property, or somebody else's? you've got a
mark upon you somewheres or another, i suppose?"

he finds it as he speaks, "esther summerson."

"oh!" says mr. bucket, pausing, with his finger at his ear. "come,
i'll take you."

he completes his observations as quietly and carefully as he has
carried them on, leaves everything else precisely as he found it,
glides away after some five minutes in all, and passes into the
street. with a glance upward at the dimly lighted windows of sir
leicester's room, he sets off, full-swing, to the nearest
coach-stand, picks out the horse for his money, and directs to be
driven to the shooting galle
 
 ___________________________
 
outhed, and gallops away again,
and gets out in a cloud of steam again.

mr. jarndyce, the only person up in the house, is just going to bed,
rises from his book on hearing the rapid ringing at the bell, and
comes down to the door in his dressing-gown.

"don't be alarmed, sir." in a moment his visitor is confidential with
him in the hall, has shut the door, and stands with his hand upon the
lock. "i've had the pleasure of seeing you before. inspector bucket.
look at that handkerchief, sir, miss esther summerson's. found it
myself put away in a drawer of lady dedlock's, quarter of an hour
ago. not a moment to lose. matter of life or death. you know lady
dedlock?"

"yes."

"there has been a discovery there to-day. family affairs have come
out. sir leicester dedlock, baronet, has had a fit--apoplexy or
paralysis--and couldn't be brought to, and precious time has been
lost. lady dedlock disappeared this afternoon and left a letter for
him that looks bad. run your eye over it. here it is!"

mr. jarndyce, h
 
 ___________________________
 
when i returned," he told me, "when i came back, no richer than when
i went away, and found you newly risen from a sick bed, yet so
inspired by sweet consideration for others and so free from a selfish
thought--"

"oh, mr. woodcourt, forbear, forbear!" i entreated him. "i do not
deserve your high praise. i had many selfish thoughts at that time,
many!"

"heaven knows, beloved of my life," said he, "that my praise is not a
lover's praise, but the truth. you do not know what all around you
see in esther summerson, how many hearts she touches and awakens,
what sacred admiration and what love she wins."

"oh, mr. woodcourt," cried i, "it is a great thing to win love, it is
a great thing to win love! i am proud of it, and honoured by it; and
the hearing of it causes me to shed these tears of mingled joy and
sorrow--joy that i have won it, sorrow that i have not deserved it
better; but i am not free to think of yours."

i said it with a stronger heart, for when he praised me thus and when
i heard his voice 
 
 ___________________________
 
i will ask you--if you'll be so
good--to look over a letter for me. i brought it with me to send from
these parts, as chesney wold might be a painful name just now to the
person it's written to. i am not much accustomed to correspondence
myself, and i am particular respecting this present letter because i
want it to be both straightforward and delicate."

herewith he hands a letter, closely written in somewhat pale ink but
in a neat round hand, to the ironmaster, who reads as follows:


   miss esther summerson,

   a communication having been made to me by inspector bucket
   of a letter to myself being found among the papers of a
   certain person, i take the liberty to make known to you
   that it was but a few lines of instruction from abroad,
   when, where, and how to deliver an enclosed letter to a
   young and beautiful lady, then unmarried, in england. i
   duly observed the same.

   i further take the liberty to make known to you that it
   was got from me as a proof of handwriting only and