and the girl both laughed. two friends of the young
man, whom we had attracted to the doorway and who stood there with
their hands in their pockets, echoed the laugh noisily.

"you can't tire me, good people," said mrs. pardiggle to these
latter. "i enjoy hard work, and the harder you make mine, the better
i like it."

"then make it easy for her!" growled the man upon the floor. "i wants
it done, and over. i wants a end of these liberties took with my
place. i wants an end of being drawed like a badger. now you're
a-going to poll-pry and question according to custom--i know what
you're a-going to be up to. well! you haven't got no occasion to be
up to it. i'll save you the trouble. is my daughter a-washin? yes,
she is a-washin. look at the water. smell it! that's wot we drinks.
how do you like it, and what do you think of gin instead! an't my
place dirty? yes, it is dirty--it's nat'rally dirty, and it's
nat'rally onwholesome; and we've had five dirty and onwholesome
children, as is all dead i
 
 ___________________________
 
time, i really should have had no rest from him.

while we were making this round of gaieties, in which mr. guppy so
extraordinarily participated, the business which had helped to bring
us to town was not neglected. mr. kenge's cousin was a mr. bayham
badger, who had a good practice at chelsea and attended a large
public institution besides. he was quite willing to receive richard
into his house and to superintend his studies, and as it seemed that
those could be pursued advantageously under mr. badger's roof, and
mr. badger liked richard, and as richard said he liked mr. badger
"well enough," an agreement was made, the lord chancellor's consent
was obtained, and it was all settled.

on the day when matters were concluded between richard and mr.
badger, we were all under engagement to dine at mr. badger's house.
we were to be "merely a family party," mrs. badger's note said; and
we found no lady there but mrs. badger herself. she was surrounded in
the drawing-room by various objects, indicati
 
 ___________________________
 
ve of her painting a
little, playing the piano a little, playing the guitar a little,
playing the harp a little, singing a little, working a little,
reading a little, writing poetry a little, and botanizing a little.
she was a lady of about fifty, i should think, youthfully dressed,
and of a very fine complexion. if i add to the little list of her
accomplishments that she rouged a little, i do not mean that there
was any harm in it.

mr. bayham badger himself was a pink, fresh-faced, crisp-looking
gentleman with a weak voice, white teeth, light hair, and surprised
eyes, some years younger, i should say, than mrs. bayham badger. he
admired her exceedingly, but principally, and to begin with, on the
curious ground (as it seemed to us) of her having had three husbands.
we had barely taken our seats when he said to mr. jarndyce quite
triumphantly, "you would hardly suppose that i am mrs. bayham
badger's third!"

"indeed?" said mr. jarndyce.

"he
 
 ___________________________
 
r third!" said mr. badger. "mrs. bayham badger has not the
appearance, miss summerson, of a lady who has had two former
husbands?"

i said "not at all!"

"and most remarkable men!" said mr. badger in a tone of confidence.
"captain swosser of the royal navy, who was mrs. badger's first
husband, was a very distinguished officer indeed. the name of
professor dingo, my immediate predecessor, is one of european
reputation."

mrs. badger overheard him and smiled.

"yes, my dear!" mr. badger replied to the smile, "i was observing to
mr. jarndyce and miss summerson that you had had two former
husbands--both very distinguished men. and they found it, as people
generally do, difficult to believe."

"i was barely twenty," said mrs. badger, "when i married captain
swosser of the royal navy. i was in the mediterranean with him; i am
quite a sailor. on the twelfth anniversary of my wedding-day, i
became the wife of professor dingo."

"of european reputation," added mr. badger in an undert
 
 ___________________________
 
one.

"and when mr. badger and myself were married," pursued mrs. badger,
"we were married on the same day of the year. i had become attached
to the day."

"so that mrs. badger has been married to three husbands--two of them
highly distinguished men," said mr. badger, summing up the facts,
"and each time upon the twenty-first of march at eleven in the
forenoon!"

we all expressed our admiration.

"but for mr. badger's modesty," said mr. jarndyce, "i would take
leave to correct him and say three distinguished men."

"thank you, mr. jarndyce! what i always tell him!" observed mrs.
badger.

"and, my dear," said mr. badger, "what do i always tell you? that
without any affectation of disparaging such professional distinction
as i may have attained (which our friend mr. carstone will have many
opportunities of estimating), i am not so weak--no, really," said mr.
badger to us generally, "so unreasonable--as to pu
 
 ___________________________
 
t my reputation on
the same footing with such first-rate men as captain swosser and
professor dingo. perhaps you may be interested, mr. jarndyce,"
continued mr. bayham badger, leading the way into the next
drawing-room, "in this portrait of captain swosser. it was taken on
his return home from the african station, where he had suffered from
the fever of the country. mrs. badger considers it too yellow. but
it's a very fine head. a very fine head!"

we all echoed, "a very fine head!"

"i feel when i look at it," said mr. badger, "'that's a man i should
like to have seen!' it strikingly bespeaks the first-class man that
captain swosser pre-eminently was. on the other side, professor
dingo. i knew him well--attended him in his last illness--a speaking
likeness! over the piano, mrs. bayham badger when mrs. swosser. over
the sofa, mrs. bayham badger when mrs. dingo. of mrs
 
 ___________________________
 
. bayham badger
in esse, i possess the original and have no copy."

dinner was now announced, and we went downstairs. it was a very
genteel entertainment, very handsomely served. but the captain and
the professor still ran in mr. badger's head, and as ada and i had
the honour of being under his particular care, we had the full
benefit of them.

"water, miss summerson? allow me! not in that tumbler, pray. bring me
the professor's goblet, james!"

ada very much admired some artificial flowers under a glass.

"astonishing how they keep!" said mr. badger. "they were presented to
mrs. bayham badger when she was in the mediterranean."

he invited mr. jarndyce to take a glass of claret.

"not that claret!" he said. "excuse me! this i
 
 ___________________________
 
s an occasion, and on
an occasion i produce some very special claret i happen to have.
(james, captain swosser's wine!) mr. jarndyce, this is a wine that
was imported by the captain, we will not say how many years ago. you
will find it very curious. my dear, i shall be happy to take some of
this wine with you. (captain swosser's claret to your mistress,
james!) my love, your health!"

after dinner, when we ladies retired, we took mrs. badger's first and
second husband with us. mrs. badger gave us in the drawing-room a
biographical sketch of the life and services of captain swosser
before his marriage and a more minute account of him dating from the
time when he fell in love with her at a ball on board the crippler,
given to the officers of that ship when she lay in plymouth harbour.

"the dear old crippler!" said mrs. badger, shaking her head. "she was
a noble vessel. trim, ship-shape, all a taunto, as captain swosser
used to say. you must excuse me if i occasionally introduce a
 
 ___________________________
 

nautical expression; i was quite a sailor once. captain swosser loved
that craft for my sake. when she was no longer in commission, he
frequently said that if he were rich enough to buy her old hulk, he
would have an inscription let into the timbers of the quarter-deck
where we stood as partners in the dance to mark the spot where he
fell--raked fore and aft (captain swosser used to say) by the fire
from my tops. it was his naval way of mentioning my eyes."

mrs. badger shook her head, sighed, and looked in the glass.

"it was a great change from captain swosser to professor dingo," she
resumed with a plaintive smile. "i felt it a good deal at first. such
an entire revolution in my mode of life! but custom, combined with
science--particularly science--inured me to it. being the professor's
sole companion in his botanical excursions, i almost forgot that i
had ever been afloat, and became quite learned. it is singular that
the professor was the antipodes of cap
 
 ___________________________
 
tain swosser and that mr.
badger is not in the least like either!"

we then passed into a narrative of the deaths of captain swosser and
professor dingo, both of whom seem to have had very bad complaints.
in the course of it, mrs. badger signified to us that she had never
madly loved but once and that the object of that wild affection,
never to be recalled in its fresh enthusiasm, was captain swosser.
the professor was yet dying by inches in the most dismal manner, and
mrs. badger was giving us imitations of his way of saying, with great
difficulty, "where is laura? let laura give me my toast and water!"
when the entrance of the gentlemen consigned him to the tomb.

now, i observed that evening, as i had observed for some days past,
that ada and richard were more than ever attached to each other's
society, which was but natural, seeing that they were going to be
separated so soon. i was therefore not very much surprised when we
got home, and ada and i retired upstairs, t
 
 ___________________________
 
ons not because i believe that this or any
other thing was so because i thought so, but only because i did think
so and i want to be quite candid about all i thought and did. these
were my thoughts about richard. i thought i often observed besides
how right my guardian was in what he had said, and that the
uncertainties and delays of the chancery suit had imparted to his
nature something of the careless spirit of a gamester who felt that
he was part of a great gaming system.

mr. and mrs. bayham badger coming one afternoon when my guardian was
not at home, in the course of conversation i naturally inquired after
richard.

"why, mr. carstone," said mrs. badger, "is very well and is, i assure
you, a great acquisition to our society. captain swosser used to say
of me that i was always better than land a-head and a breeze a-starn
to the midshipmen's mess when the purser's junk had become as tough
as the fore-topsel weather earings. it was his naval way of
mentioning generally that i was an acquis
 
 ___________________________
 
ition to any society. i may
render the same tribute, i am sure, to mr. carstone. but i--you won't
think me premature if i mention it?"

i said no, as mrs. badger's insinuating tone seemed to require such
an answer.

"nor miss clare?" said mrs. bayham badger sweetly.

ada said no, too, and looked uneasy.

"why, you see, my dears," said mrs. badger, "--you'll excuse me
calling you my dears?"

we entreated mrs. badger not to mention it.

"because you really are, if i may take the liberty of saying so,"
pursued mrs. badger, "so perfectly charming. you see, my dears, that
although i am still young--or mr. bayham badger pays me the
compliment of saying so--"

"no," mr. badger called out like some one contradicting at a public
meeting. "not at all!"

"very well," smiled mrs. badger, "we will say still young."

"undoubtedly," said mr. badger.

"my dears, though still young, i have had many opportunities of
observ
 
 ___________________________
 
 after that, when i was with captain swosser
in the mediterranean, i embraced every opportunity of knowing and
befriending the midshipmen under captain swosser's command. you never
heard them called the young gentlemen, my dears, and probably would
not understand allusions to their pipe-claying their weekly accounts,
but it is otherwise with me, for blue water has been a second home to
me, and i have been quite a sailor. again, with professor dingo."

"a man of european reputation," murmured mr. badger.

"when i lost my dear first and became the wife of my dear second,"
said mrs. badger, speaking of her former husbands as if they were
parts of a charade, "i still enjoyed opportunities of observing
youth. the class attendant on professor dingo's lectures was a large
one, and it became my pride, as the wife of an eminent scientific man
seeking herself in science the utmost consolation it could impart, to
throw our house open to the students as a kind of scientific
exchange. every tuesday evenin
 
 ___________________________
 
g there was lemonade and a mixed
biscuit for all who chose to partake of those refreshments. and there
was science to an unlimited extent."

"remarkable assemblies those, miss summerson," said mr. badger
reverentially. "there must have been great intellectual friction
going on there under the auspices of such a man!"

"and now," pursued mrs. badger, "now that i am the wife of my dear
third, mr. badger, i still pursue those habits of observation which
were formed during the lifetime of captain swosser and adapted to new
and unexpected purposes during the lifetime of professor dingo. i
therefore have not come to the consideration of mr. carstone as a
neophyte. and yet i am very much of the opinion, my dears, that he
has not chosen his profession advisedly."

ada looked so very anxious now that i asked mrs. badger on what she
founded her supposition.

"my dear miss summerson," she replied, "on 
 
 ___________________________
 
terest in it which makes it his vocation. if he has any decided
impression in reference to it, i should say it was that it is a
tiresome pursuit. now, this is not promising. young men like mr.
allan woodcourt who take it from a strong interest in all that it can
do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work for a
very little money and through years of considerable endurance and
disappointment. but i am quite convinced that this would never be the
case with mr. carstone."

"does mr. badger think so too?" asked ada timidly.

"why," said mr. badger, "to tell the truth, miss clare, this view of
the matter had not occurred to me until mrs. badger mentioned it. but
when mrs. badger put it in that light, i naturally gave great
consideration to it, knowing that mrs. badger's mind, in addition to
its natural advantages, has had the rare advantage of being formed by
two such very distinguished (i will even say illustrious) public men
as captain swosser of the royal navy and professor ding
 
 ___________________________
 
o. the
conclusion at which i have arrived is--in short, is mrs. badger's
conclusion."

"it was a maxim of captain swosser's," said mrs. badger, "speaking in
his figurative naval manner, that when you make pitch hot, you cannot
make it too hot; and that if you only have to swab a plank, you
should swab it as if davy jones were after you. it appears to me that
this maxim is applicable to the medical as well as to the nautical
profession.

"to all professions," observed mr. badger. "it was admirably said by
captain swosser. beautifully said."

"people objected to professor dingo when we were staying in the north
of devon after our marriage," said mrs. badger, "that he disfigured
some of the houses and other buildings by chipping off fragments of
those edifices with his little geological hammer. but the professor
replied that he knew of no building save the temple of science. the
principle is the same, i think?"

"precisely the same," said mr. badger. "finely expressed! t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
professor made the same remark, miss summerson, in his last illness,
when (his mind wandering) he insisted on keeping his little hammer
under the pillow and chipping at the countenances of the attendants.
the ruling passion!"

although we could have dispensed with the length at which mr. and
mrs. badger pursued the conversation, we both felt that it was
disinterested in them to express the opinion they had communicated to
us and that there was a great probability of its being sound. we
agreed to say nothing to mr. jarndyce until we had spoken to richard;
and as he was coming next evening, we resolved to have a very serious
talk with him.

so after he had been a little while with ada, i went in and found my
darling (as i knew she would be) prepared to consider him thoroughly
right in whatever h
 
 ___________________________
 
again.

"no, but richard," said i, "and my dear ada! consider how important
it is to you both, and what a point of honour it is towards your
cousin, that you, richard, should be quite in earnest without any
reservation. i think we had better talk about this, really, ada. it
will be too late very soon."

"oh, yes! we must talk about it!" said ada. "but i think richard is
right."

what was the use of my trying to look wise when she was so pretty,
and so engaging, and so fond of him!

"mr. and mrs. badger were here yesterday, richard," said i, "and they
seemed disposed to think that you had no great liking for the
profession."

"did they though?" said richard. "oh! well, that rather alters the
case, because i had no idea that they thought so, and i should not
have liked to disappoint or inconvenience them. the fact is, i don't
care much about it. but, oh, it don't matter! it'll do as well as
anything else!"

"you hear him, ada!" said i.

"the fact is," richard proceeded, half thoughtfully and ha
 
 ___________________________
 
lf
jocosely, "it is not quite in my way. i don't take to it. and i get
too much of mrs. bayham badger's first and second."

"i am sure that's very natural!" cried ada, quite delighted. "the
very thing we both said yesterday, esther!"

"then," pursued richard, "it's monotonous, and to-day is too like
yesterday, and to-morrow is too like to-day."

"but i am afraid," said i, "this is an objection to all kinds of
application--to life itself, except under some very uncommon
circumstances."

"do you think so?" returned richard, still considering. "perhaps! ha!
why, then, you know," he added, suddenly
 
 ___________________________
 
 assert that he disliked it; perhaps he liked
it as well as he liked any other--suppose he gave it one more chance!
upon that, he shut himself up for a few weeks with some books and
some bones and seemed to acquire a considerable fund of information
with great rapidity. his fervour, after lasting about a month, began
to cool, and when it was quite cooled, began to grow warm again. his
vacillations between law and medicine lasted so long that midsummer
arrived before he finally separated from mr. badger and entered on an
experimental course of messrs. kenge and carboy. for all his
waywardness, he took great credit to himself as being determined to
be in earnest "this time." and he was so good-natured throughout, and
in such high spirits, and so fond of ada, that it was very difficult
indeed to be otherwise than pleased with him.

"as to mr. jarndyce," who, i may mention, found the wind much given,
during this period, to stick in the east; "as to mr. jarndyce,"
richard would say to me, "he is t
 
 ___________________________
 
reless, but fully
persuaded that he was rather calculating and prudent. i happened to
say to ada, in his presence, half jestingly, half seriously, about
the time of his going to mr. kenge's, that he needed to have
fortunatus' purse, he made so light of money, which he answered in
this way, "my jewel of a dear cousin, you hear this old woman! why
does she say that? because i gave eight pounds odd (or whatever it
was) for a certain neat waistcoat and buttons a few days ago. now, if
i had stayed at badger's i should have been obliged to spend twelve
pounds at a blow for some heart-breaking lecture-fees. so i make four
pounds--in a lump--by the transaction!"

it was a question much discussed between him and my guardian what
arrangements should be made for his living in london while he
experimented on the law, for we had long since gone back to bleak
house, and it was too far off to admit of his coming there oftener
than once a week. my guardian told me that if richard were to settle
down at mr. k
 
 ___________________________
 
answered richard.

we walked a little way without speaking, and presently richard
addressed me in his frankest and most feeling manner, thus: "my dear
esther, i understand you, and i wish to heaven i were a more constant
sort of fellow. i don't mean constant to ada, for i love her
dearly--better and better every day--but constant to myself.
(somehow, i mean something that i can't very well express, but you'll
make it out.) if i were a more constant sort of fellow, i should have
held on either to badger or to kenge and carboy like grim death, and
should have begun to be steady and systematic by this time, and
shouldn't be in debt, and--"

"are you in debt, richard?"

"yes," said richard, "i am a little so, my dear. also, i have taken
rather too much to billiards and that sort of thing. now the murder's
out; you despise me, esther, don't you?"

"you know i don't," said i.

"you are kinder to me than i often am to myself," he returned. "my
dear esther, i am a very unfortunate dog not to be more 
 
 ___________________________
 
papers, esther. i have been deep in them
for months," he continued, recovering his cheerfulness in a moment,
"and you may rely upon it that we shall come out triumphant. as to
years of delay, there has been no want of them, heaven knows! and
there is the greater probability of our bringing the matter to a
speedy close; in fact, it's on the paper now. it will be all right at
last, and then you shall see!"

recalling how he had just now placed messrs. kenge and carboy in the
same category with mr. badger, i asked him when he intended to be
articled in lincoln's inn.

"there again! i think not at all, esther," he returned with an
effort. "i fancy i have had enough of it. having worked at jarndyce
and jarndyce like a galley slave, i have slaked my thirst for the law
and satisfied myself that i shouldn't like it. besides, i find it
unsettles me more and more to be so constantly upon the scene of
action. so what," continued richard, confident again by this time,
"do i naturally turn my thoughts to?
 
 ___________________________
 
, i hope?" said my guardian, smiling.

"not much of that, sir, though that has happened. mostly they come
for skill--or idleness. six of one, and half-a-dozen of the other. i
beg your pardon," said mr. george, sitting stiffly upright and
squaring an elbow on each knee, "but i believe you're a chancery
suitor, if i have heard correct?"

"i am sorry to say i am."

"i have had one of your compatriots in my time, sir."

"a chancery suitor?" returned my guardian. "how was that?"

"why, the man was so badgered and worried and tortured by being
knocked about from post to pillar, and from pillar to post," said mr.
george, "that he got out of sorts. i don't believe he had any idea of
taking aim at anybody, but he was in that condition of resentment and
violence that he would come and pay for fifty shots and fire away
till he was red hot. one day i said to him when there was nobody by
and he had been talking to me angrily about his wrongs, 'if this
practice is a safety-valve, comrade, well and good; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
er's ears; and yet this cry is in the house,
going upward from a wild figure on its knees.

"o my child, my child! not dead in the first hours of her life, as my
cruel sister told me, but sternly nurtured by her, after she had
renounced me and my name! o my child, o my child!"




chapter xxx

esther's narrative


richard had been gone away some time when a visitor came to pass a
few days with us. it was an elderly lady. it was mrs. woodcourt, who,
having come from wales to stay with mrs. bayham badger and having
written to my guardian, "by her son allan's desire," to report that
she had heard from him and that he was well "and sent his kind
remembrances to all of us," had been invited by my guardian to make a
visit to bleak house. she stayed with us nearly three weeks. she took
very kindly to me and was extremely confidential, so much so that
sometimes she almost made me uncomfortable. i had no right, i knew
very well, to be uncomfortable because she confided in me, and i felt
it was unreaso
 
 ___________________________
 
 but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains he
took that it is not to be wondered at, i am sure. i saw a good deal
of mr. woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might be
supposed, for knowing caddy to be safe in his hands, i often slipped
home at about the hours when he was expected. we frequently met,
notwithstanding. i was quite reconciled to myself now, but i still
felt glad to think that he was sorry for me, and he still was sorry
for me i believed. he helped mr. badger in his professional
engagements, which were numerous, and had as yet no settled projects
for the future.

it was when caddy began to recover that i began to notice a change in
my dear girl. i cannot say how it first presented itself to me,
because i observed it in many slight particulars which were nothing
in themselves and only became something when they were pieced
together. but i made it out, by putting them together, that ada was
not so frankly cheerful with me as she used to be. her tender
 
 ___________________________
 
what he chose, and after a dogged silence the
latter turned his shaggy head towards me.

"i'm not partial to gentlefolks coming into my place, as you've heerd
me say afore now, i think, miss. i let their places be, and it's
curious they can't let my place be. there'd be a pretty shine made if
i was to go a-wisitin them, i think. howsoever, i don't so much
complain of you as of some others, and i'm agreeable to make you a
civil answer, though i give notice that i'm not a-going to be drawed
like a badger. will jenny be here soon? no she won't. where is she?
she's gone up to lunnun."

"did she go last night?" i asked.

"did she go last night? ah! she went last night," he answered with a
sulky jerk of his head.

"but was she here when the lady came? and what did the lady say to
her? and where is the lady gone? i beg and pray you to be so kind as
to tell me," said i, "for i am in great distress to know."

"if my master would let me speak, and not say a word of harm--" the
woman timidly began.

"yo
 
 ___________________________
 
son by
herself and was not quite prepared for your esteemed presence. but
miss summerson has mentioned to you, perhaps, that something has
passed between us on former occasions?"

"miss summerson," returned my guardian, smiling, "has made a
communication to that effect to me."

"that," said mr. guppy, "makes matters easier. sir, i have come out
of my articles at kenge and carboy's, and i believe with satisfaction
to all parties. i am now admitted (after undergoing an examination
that's enough to badger a man blue, touching a pack of nonsense that
he don't want to know) on the roll of attorneys and have taken out my
certificate, if it would be any satisfaction to you to see it."

"thank you, mr. guppy," returned my guardian. "i am quite willing--i
believe i use a legal phrase--to admit the certificate."

mr. guppy therefore desisted from taking something out of his pocket
and proceeded without it.

"i have no capital myself, but my mother has a little property which
takes the form of an annuit