 there is no plot, and plays the deepest games of
chess without any adversary.

it is a source of much gratification to mr. guppy, therefore, to find
the new-comer constantly poring over the papers in jarndyce and
jarndyce, for he well knows that nothing but confusion and failure
can come of that. his satisfaction communicates itself to a third
saunterer through the long vacation in kenge and carboy's office, to
wit, young smallweed.

whether young smallweed (metaphorically called small and eke chick
weed, as it were jocularly to express a fledgling) was ever a boy is
much doubted in lincoln's inn. he is now something under fifteen and
an old limb of the law. he is facetiously understood to entertain a
passion for a lady at a cigar-shop in the neighbourhood of chancery
lane and for her sake to have broken off a contract with another
lady, to whom he had been engaged some years. he is a town-made
article, of small stature and weazen features, but may be perceived
from a considerable distance
 
 ___________________________
 
n upon bald
patriarchs, who keep them more than ten minutes afterwards. it is of
no use trying him with anything less than a full-sized "bread" or
proposing to him any joint in cut unless it is in the very best cut.
in the matter of gravy he is adamant.

conscious of his elfin power and submitting to his dread experience,
mr. guppy consults him in the choice of that day's banquet, turning
an appealing look towards him as the waitress repeats the catalogue
of viands and saying "what do you take, chick?" chick, out of the
profundity of his artfulness, preferring "veal and ham and french
beans--and don't you forget the stuffing, polly" (with an unearthly
cock of his venerable eye), mr. guppy and mr. jobling give the like
order. three pint pots of half-and-half are superadded. quickly the
waitress returns bearing what is apparently a model of the tower of
babel but what is really a pile of plates and flat tin dish-covers.
mr. smallweed, approving of what is set before him, conveys
intelligent b
 
 ___________________________
 
al article into which
his papers and himself, and all his clients, and all things of earth,
animate and inanimate, are resolving, mr. tulkinghorn sits at one of
the open windows enjoying a bottle of old port. though a hard-grained
man, close, dry, and silent, he can enjoy old wine with the best. he
has a priceless bin of port in some artful cellar under the fields,
which is one of his many secrets. when he dines alone in chambers, as
he has dined to-day, and has his bit of fish and his steak or chicken
brought in from the coffee-house, he descends with a candle to the
echoing regions below the deserted mansion, and heralded by a remote
reverberation of thundering doors, comes gravely back encircled by an
earthy atmosphere and carrying a bottle from which he pours a radiant
nectar, two score and ten years old, that blushes in the glass to
find itself so famous and fills the whole room with the fragrance of
southern grapes.

mr. tulkinghorn, sitting in the twilight by the open window, enjoys

 
 ___________________________
 
 to
the public. inside the coach, and consequently not so manifest to the
multitude, though sufficiently so to the two friends, for the coach
stops almost at their feet, are the venerable mr. smallweed and mrs.
smallweed, accompanied by their granddaughter judy.

an air of haste and excitement pervades the party, and as the tall
hat (surmounting mr. smallweed the younger) alights, mr. smallweed
the elder pokes his head out of window and bawls to mr. guppy, "how
de do, sir! how de do!"

"what do chick and his family want here at this time of the morning,
i wonder!" says mr. guppy, nodding to his familiar.

"my dear sir," cries grandfather smallweed, "would you do me a
favour? would you and your friend be so very obleeging as to carry me
into the public-house in the court, while bart and his sister bring
their grandmother along? would you do an old man that good turn,
sir?"

mr. guppy looks at his friend, repeating inquiringly, "the
public-house in the court?" and they prepare to bear the ven
 
 ___________________________
 
t to "pull him through" the
court of chancery. mr. vholes, who never gives hopes, lays his palm
upon the client's shoulder and answers with a smile, "always here,
sir. personally, or by letter, you will always find me here, sir,
with my shoulder to the wheel." thus they part, and vholes, left
alone, employs himself in carrying sundry little matters out of his
diary into his draft bill book for the ultimate behoof of his three
daughters. so might an industrious fox or bear make up his account of
chickens or stray travellers with an eye to his cubs, not to
disparage by that word the three raw-visaged, lank, and buttoned-up
maidens who dwell with the parent vholes in an earthy cottage
situated in a damp garden at kennington.

richard, emerging from the heavy shade of symond's inn into the
sunshine of chancery lane--for there happens to be sunshine there
to-day--walks thoughtfully on, and turns into lincoln's inn, and
passes under the shadow of the lincoln's inn trees. on many such
loungers hav