said mr. skimpole. "vholes!"

we asked if that were a friend of richard's.

"friend and legal adviser," said mr. skimpole. "now, my dear miss
summerson, if you want common sense, responsibility, and
respectability, all united--if you want an exemplary man--vholes is
the man."

we had not known, we said, that richard was assisted by any gentleman
of that name.

"when he emerged from legal infancy," returned mr. skimpole, "he
parted from our conversational friend kenge and took up, i believe,
with vholes. indeed, i know he did, because i introduced him to
vholes."

"had you known him long?" asked ada.

"vholes? my dear miss clare, i had had that kind of acquaintance with
him which i have had with several gentlemen of his profession. he had
done something or other in a very agreeable, civil manner--taken
proceedings, i think, is the expression--which ended in the
proceeding of his taking me. somebody was so good as to step in and
pay the money--something and fourpence was the amount; i forget th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
pounds and shillings, but i know it ended with fourpence, because it
struck me at the time as being so odd that i could owe anybody
fourpence--and after that i brought them together. vholes asked me
for the introduction, and i gave it. now i come to think of it," he
looked inquiringly at us with his frankest smile as he made the
discovery, "vholes bribed me, perhaps? he gave me something and
called it commission. was it a five-pound note? do you know, i think
it must have been a five-pound note!"

his further consideration of the point was prevented by richard's
coming back to us in an excited state and hastily representing mr.
vholes--a sallow man with pinched lips that looked as
 
 ___________________________
 
 if they were
cold, a red eruption here and there upon his face, tall and thin,
about fifty years of age, high-shouldered, and stooping. dressed in
black, black-gloved, and buttoned to the chin, there was nothing so
remarkable in him as a lifeless manner and a slow, fixed way he had
of looking at richard.

"i hope i don't disturb you, ladies," said mr. vholes, and now i
observed that he was further remarkable for an inward manner of
speaking. "i arranged with mr. carstone that he should always know
when his cause was in the chancellor's paper, and being informed by
one of my clerks last night after post time that it stood, rather
unexpectedly, in the paper for to-morrow, i put myself into the coach
early this morning and came down to confer with him."

"yes," said richard, flushed, and looking triumphantly at ada and me,
"we don't do these things in
 
 ___________________________
 
 the old slow way now. we spin along now!
mr. vholes, we must hire something to get over to the post town in,
and catch the mail to-night, and go up by it!"

"anything you please, sir," returned mr. vholes. "i am quite at your
service."

"let me see," said richard, looking at his watch. "if i run down to
the dedlock, and get my portmanteau fastened up, and order a gig, or
a chaise, or whatever's to be got, we shall have an hour then before
starting. i'll come back to tea. cousin ada, will you and esther take
care of mr. vholes when i am gone?"

he was away directly, in his heat and hurry, and was soon lost in the
dusk of evening. we who were left walked on towards the house.

"is mr. carstone's p
 
 ___________________________
 
resence necessary to-morrow, sir?" said i. "can
it do any good?"

"no, miss," mr. vholes replied. "i am not aware that it can."

both ada and i expressed our regret that he should go, then, only to
be disappointed.

"mr. carstone has laid down the principle of watching his own
interests," said mr. vholes, "and when a client lays down his own
principle, and it is not immoral, it devolves upon me to carry it
out. i wish in business to be exact and open. i am a widower with
three daughters--emma, jane, and caroline--and my desire is so to
discharge the duties of life as to leave them a good name. this
appears to be a pleasant spot, miss."

the remark being made to me in consequence of my being next him as we
walked, i assented and enumerated its chief attractions.

"indeed?" said mr. vholes. "i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve the privilege of supporting an
aged father in the vale of taunton--his native place--and i admire
that country very much. i had no idea there was anything so
attractive here."

to keep up the conversation, i asked mr. vholes if he would like to
live altogether in the country.

"there, miss," said he, "you touch me on a tender string. my health
is not good (my digestion being much impaired), and if i had only
myself to consider, i should take refuge in rural habits, especially
as the cares of business have prevented me from ever coming much into
contact with general society, and particularly with ladies' society,
which i have most wished to mix in. but with my three daughters,
emma, jane, and caroline--and my aged f
 
 ___________________________
 
ender
it indispensable that the mill should be always going."

it required some attention to hear him on account of his inward
speaking and his lifeless manner.

"you will excuse my having mentioned my daughters," he said. "they
are my weak point. i wish to leave the poor girls some little
independence, as well as a good name."

we now arrived at mr. boythorn's house, where the tea-table, all
prepared, was awaiting us. richard came in restless and hurried
shortly afterwards, and leaning over mr. vholes's chair, whispered
something in his ear. mr. vholes replied aloud--or as nearly aloud i
suppose as he had ever replied to anything--"you will drive me, will
you, sir? it is all the same to me, sir. anything you please. i am
quite at your service."

we understood from what followed that mr. skimpole was to be left
until the morning to occupy the two places which had been already
paid for. as ada and i were both in low spirits concerning richard
and very sorry so to part with him, we made it as p
 
 ___________________________
 
skimpole to the dedlock arms
and retire when the night-travellers were gone.

richard's high spirits carrying everything before them, we all went
out together to the top of the hill above the village, where he had
ordered a gig to wait and where we found a man with a lantern
standing at the head of the gaunt pale horse that had been harnessed
to it.

i never shall forget those two seated side by side in the lantern's
light, richard all flush and fire and laughter, with the reins in his
hand; mr. vholes quite still, black-gloved, and buttoned up, looking
at him as if he were looking at his prey and charming it. i have
before me the whole picture of the warm dark night, the summer
lightning, the dusty track of road closed in by hedgerows and high
trees, the gaunt pale horse with his ears pricked up, and the driving
away at speed to jarndyce and jarndyce.

my dear girl told me that night how richard's being thereafter
prosperous or ruined, befriended or deserted, could only make this
difference 
 
 ___________________________
 
 you may rely upon me in every respect save and except the
tender passion only!"

the struggle in mr. guppy's breast and the numerous oscillations it
occasioned him between his mother's door and us were sufficiently
conspicuous in the windy street (particularly as his hair wanted
cutting) to make us hurry away. i did so with a lightened heart; but
when we last looked back, mr. guppy was still oscillating in the same
troubled state of mind.




chapter xxxix

attorney and client


the name of mr. vholes, preceded by the legend ground-floor, is
inscribed upon a door-post in symond's inn, chancery lane--a little,
pale, wall-eyed, woebegone inn like a large dust-binn of two
compartments and a sifter. it looks as if symond were a sparing man
in his way and constructed his inn of old building materials which
took kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all things decaying and
dismal, and perpetuated symond's memory with congenial shabbiness.
quartered in this dingy hatchment commemorative of symond a
 
 ___________________________
 
re the
legal bearings of mr. vholes.

mr. vholes's office, in disposition retiring and in situation
retired, is squeezed up in a corner and blinks at a dead wall. three
feet of knotty-floored dark passage bring the client to mr. vholes's
jet-black door, in an angle profoundly dark on the brightest
midsummer morning and encumbered by a black bulk-head of cellarage
staircase against which belated civilians generally strike their
brows. mr. vholes's chambers are on so small a scale that one clerk
can open the door without getting off his stool, while the other who
elbows him at the same desk has equal facilities for poking the fire.
a smell as of unwholesome sheep blending with the smell of must and
dust is referable to the nightly (and often daily) consumption of
mutton fat in candles and to the fretting of parchment forms and
skins in greasy drawers. the atmosphere is otherwise stale and close.
the place was last painted or whitewashed
 
 ___________________________
 
 beyond the memory of man,
and the two chimneys smoke, and there is a loose outer surface of
soot everywhere, and the dull cracked windows in their heavy frames
have but one piece of character in them, which is a determination to
be always dirty and always shut unless coerced. this accounts for the
phenomenon of the weaker of the two usually having a bundle of
firewood thrust between its jaws in hot weather.

mr. vholes is a very respectable man. he has not a large business,
but he is a very respectable man. he is allowed by the greater
attorneys who have made good fortunes or are making them to be a most
respectable man. he never misses a chance in his practice, which is a
mark of respectability. he never takes any pleasure, which is another
mark of respectability. he is reserved and serious, which is another
mark of respectability. his digestion is impaired, which is highly
respectable. and he is making hay 
 
 ___________________________
 
used way--the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket, with a
bad grace, and do grumble very much. then this respectability of mr.
vholes is brought into powerful play against them. "repeal this
statute, my good sir?" says mr. kenge to a smarting client. "repeal
it, my dear sir? never, with my consent. alter this law, sir, and
what will be the effect of your rash proceeding on a class of
practitioners very worthily represented, allow me to say to you, by
the opposite attorney in the case, mr. vholes? sir, that class of
practitioners would be swept from the face of the earth. now you
cannot afford--i will say, the social system cannot afford--to lose
an order of men like mr. vholes. diligent, persevering, steady, acute
in business. my dear sir, i understand your present feelings against
the existing state of things, which i grant to be a little hard in
your case; but i can never raise my voice for the demolition of a
class of men like mr. vholes." the respectability of mr. vholes has
even b
 
 ___________________________
 
ctice
indisputably occasion delay? answer: yes, some delay. question: and
great expense? answer: most assuredly they cannot be gone through for
nothing. question: and unspeakable vexation? answer: i am not
prepared to say that. they have never given me any vexation; quite
the contrary. question: but you think that their abolition would
damage a class of practitioners? answer: i have no doubt of it.
question: can you instance any type of that class? answer: yes. i
would unhesitatingly mention mr. vholes. he would be ruined.
question: mr. vholes is considered, in the profession, a respectable
man? answer:"--which proved fatal to the inquiry for ten years--"mr.
vholes is considered, in the profession, a most respectable man."

so in familiar conversation, private authorities no less
disinterested will remark that they don't know what this age is
coming to, that we are plunging down precipices, that now here is
something else gone, that these changes are death to people like
vholes--a man of undo
 
 ___________________________
 
ubted respectability, with a father in the vale
of taunton, and three daughters at home. take a few steps more in
this direction, say they, and what is to become of vholes's father?
is he to perish? and of vholes's daughters? are they to be
shirt-makers, or governesses? as though, mr. vholes and his relations
being minor cannibal chiefs and it being proposed to abolish
cannibalism, indignant champions were to put the case thus: make
man-eating unlawful, and you starve the vholeses!

in a word, mr. vholes, with his three daughters and his father in the
vale of taunton, is continually doing duty, like a piece of timber,
to shore up some decayed foundation that has become a pitfall and a
nuisance. and with a great many people in a great many instances, the
question is never one of a change from wrong to right (which is quite
an extraneous consideration), but is always one of injury or
advantage to that eminently respectable legion, vholes.

the chancellor is, within these
 
 ___________________________
 
 ten minutes, "up" for the long
vacation. mr. vholes, and his young client, and several blue bags
hastily stuffed out of all regularity of form, as the larger sort of
serpents are in their first gorged state, have returned to the
official den. mr. vholes, quiet and unmoved, as a man of so much
respectability ought to be, takes off his close black gloves as if he
were skinning his hands, lifts off his tight hat as if he were
scalping himself, and sits down at his desk. the client throws his
hat and gloves upon the ground--tosses them anywhere, without looking
after them or caring where they go; flings himself into a chair, half
sighing and half groaning; rests his aching head upon his hand and
looks the portrait of young despair.

"again nothing
 
 ___________________________
 
 done!" says richard. "nothing, nothing done!"

"don't say nothing done, sir," returns the placid vholes. "that is
scarcely fair, sir, scarcely fair!"

"why, what is done?" says richard, turning gloomily upon him.

"that may not be the whole question," returns vholes, "the question
may branch off into what is doing, what is doing?"

"and what is doing?" asks the moody client.

vholes, sitting with his arms on the desk, quietly bringing the tips
of his five right fingers to meet the tips of his five left fingers,
and quietly separating them again, and fixedly and slowly looking at
his client, replies, "a good deal is doing, sir. we have put our
shoulders to the wheel, mr. carstone, and the wheel is going round."

"yes, with ixion on it. how am i to get throu
 
 ___________________________
 
gh the next four or five
accursed months?" exclaims the young man, rising from his chair and
walking about the room.

"mr. c.," returns vholes, following him close with his eyes wherever
he goes, "your spirits are hasty, and i am sorry for it on your
account. excuse me if i recommend you not to chafe so much, not to be
so impetuous, not to wear yourself out so. you should have more
patience. you should sustain yourself better."

"i ought to imitate you, in fact, mr. vholes?" says richard, sitting
down again with an impatient laugh and beating the devil's tattoo
with his boot on the patternless carpet.

"sir," returns vholes, always looking at the client as if he were
making a lingering meal of him with his eyes as well as with his
professional appetite. "sir," returns vholes with his inward manner
of speech and his bloodless quietude, "i should not have had the
presumption to propose myself as a model for your imitation or any
man's. let me but leave the good nam
 
 ___________________________
 
e to my three daughters, and that
is enough for me; i am not a self-seeker. but since you mention me so
pointedly, i will acknowledge that i should like to impart to you a
little of my--come, sir, you are disposed to call it insensibility,
and i am sure i have no objection--say insensibility--a little of my
insensibility."

"mr. vholes," explains the client, somewhat abashed, "i had no
intention to accuse you of insensibility."

"i think you had, sir, without knowing it," returns the equable
vholes. "very naturally. it is my duty to attend to your interests
with a cool head, and i can quite understand that to your excited
feelings i may appear, at such times as the present, insensible. my
daughters may know me better; my aged father may know me better. but
they have known me much longer than you have, and the confiding eye
of
 
 ___________________________
 
 affection is not the distrustful eye of business. not that i
complain, sir, of the eye of business being distrustful; quite the
contrary. in attending to your interests, i wish to have all possible
checks upon me; it is right that i should have them; i court inquiry.
but your interests demand that i should be cool and methodical, mr.
carstone; and i cannot be otherwise--no, sir, not even to please
you."

mr. vholes, after glancing at the official cat who is patiently
watching a mouse's hole, fixes his charmed gaze again on his young
client and proceeds in his buttoned-up, half-audible voice as if
there were an unclean spirit in him that will neither come out nor
speak out, "what are you to do, sir, you inquire, during the
vacation. i should hope you gentlemen of the army may find many means
of amusing yourselves if you give your minds to it. if you had asked
me what i was to do during the vacation, i coul
 
 ___________________________
 
d have answered you
more readily. i am to attend to your interests. i am to be found
here, day by day, attending to your interests. that is my duty, mr.
c., and term-time or vacation makes no difference to me. if you wish
to consult me as to your interests, you will find me here at all
times alike. other professional men go out of town. i don't. not that
i blame them for going; i merely say i don't go. this desk is your
rock, sir!"

mr. vholes gives it a rap, and it sounds as hollow as a coffin. not
to richard, though. there is encouragement in the sound to him.
perhaps mr. vholes knows there is.

"i am perfectly aware, mr. vholes," says richard, more familiarly and
good-humouredly, "that you are the most reliable fellow in the world
and that to have to do with you is to have to do with a man of
business who is not to be hoodwinked. but put yourself in my case,
dragging on this dislocated life, sinking deeper and deeper into
difficul
 
 ___________________________
 
ty every day, continually hoping and continually
disappointed, conscious of change upon change for the worse in
myself, and of no change for the better in anything else, and you
will find it a dark-looking case sometimes, as i do."

"you know," says mr. vholes, "that i never give hopes, sir. i told
you from the first, mr. c., that i never give hopes. particularly in
a case like this, where the greater part of the costs comes out of
the estate, i should not be considerate of my good name if i gave
hopes. it might seem as if costs were my object. still, when you say
there is no change for the better, i must, as a bare matter of fact,
deny that."

"aye?" returns richard, brightening. "but how do you make it out?"

"mr. carstone, you are represented by--
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"you said just now--a rock."

"yes, sir," says mr. vholes, gently shaking his head and rapping the
hollow desk, with a sound as if ashes were falling on ashes, and dust
on dust, "a rock. that's something. you are separately represented,
and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of others. that's
something. the suit does not sleep; we wake it up, we air it, we walk
it about. that's something. it's not all jarndyce, in fact as well as
in name. that's something. nobody has it all his own way now, sir.
and that's something, surely."

richard, his fac
 
 ___________________________
 
e flushing suddenly, strikes the desk with his
clenched hand.

"mr. vholes! if any man had told me when i first went to john
jarndyce's house that he was anything but the disinterested friend he
seemed--that he was what he has gradually turned out to be--i could
have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; i could not
have defended him too ardently. so little did i know of the world!
whereas now i do declare to you that he becomes to me the embodiment
of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is john
jarndyce; that the more i suffer, the mo
 
 ___________________________
 
re indignant i am with him;
that every new delay and every new disappointment is only a new
injury from john jarndyce's hand."

"no, no," says vholes. "don't say so. we ought to have patience, all
of us. besides, i never disparage, sir. i never disparage."

"mr. vholes," returns the angry client. "you know as well as i that
he would have strangled the suit if he could."

"he was not active in it," mr. vholes admits with an appearance of
reluctance. "he certainly was not active in it. but however, but
however, he might have had amiable intentions. who can read the
heart, mr. c.!"

"you can," returns richard.

"i, mr. c.?"

"well enough to know what his intentions were. are or are not our
interests conflicting? tell--me--that!" says richard, accompanying
his last three words with three raps on his rock of trust.

"mr. c.," returns vholes, immovable in attitude and never winking his
hungry eyes, "i sh
 
 ___________________________
 
sts as identical with the interests of mr.
jarndyce. they are no such thing, sir. i never impute motives; i both
have and am a father, and i never impute motives. but i must not
shrink from a professional duty, even if it sows dissensions in
families. i understand you to be now consulting me professionally as
to your interests? you are so? i reply, then, they are not identical
with those of mr. jarndyce."

"of course they are not!" cries richard. "you found that out long
ago."

"mr. c.," returns vholes, "i wish to say no more of any third party
than is necessary. i wish to leave my good name unsullied, together
with any little property of which i may become possessed through
industry and perseverance, to my daughters emma, jane, and caroline.
i also desire to live in amity with my professional brethren. when
mr. skimpole did me the honour, sir--i will not say the very high
honour, for i never stoop to flattery--of bringing us together in
this room, i mentioned to you that i could offer no opi
 
 ___________________________
 
 may have heard me
mention, are not in a good state, and rest might improve them; but i
shall not rest, sir, while i am your representative. whenever you
want me, you will find me here. summon me anywhere, and i will come.
during the long vacation, sir, i shall devote my leisure to studying
your interests more and more closely and to making arrangements for
moving heaven and earth (including, of course, the chancellor) after
michaelmas term; and when i ultimately congratulate you, sir," says
mr. vholes with the severity of a determined man, "when i ultimately
congratulate you, sir, with all my heart, on your accession to
fortune--which, but that i never give hopes, i might say something
further about--you will owe me nothing beyond whatever little balance
may be then outstanding of the costs as between solicitor and client
not included in the taxed costs allowed out of the estate. i pretend
to no claim upon you, mr. c., but for the zealous and active
discharge--not the languid and routine dis
 
 ___________________________
 
charge, sir: that much
credit i stipulate for--of my professional duty. my duty prosperously
ended, all between us is ended."

vholes finally adds, by way of rider to this declaration of his
principles, that as mr. carstone is about to rejoin his regiment,
perhaps mr. c. will favour him with an order on his agent for twenty
pounds on account.

"for there have been many little consultations and attendances of
late, sir," observes vholes, turning over the leaves of his diary,
"and these things mount up, and i don't profess to be a man of
capital. when we first entered on our present relations i stated to
you openly--it is a principle of mine that there never can be too
much openness between solicitor and client--that i was not a man of
capital and that if capital was your object you had better leave your
papers in kenge's office. no, mr. c., you will find none of the
advantages or disadvantages of capital here, sir. this," vhol
 
 ___________________________
 
es gives
the desk one hollow blow again, "is your rock; it pretends to be
nothing more."

the client, with his dejection insensibly relieved and his vague
hopes rekindled, takes pen and ink and writes the draft, not without
perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may bear,
implying scant effects in the agent's hands. all the while, vholes,
buttoned up in body and mind, looks at him attentively. all the
while, vholes's official cat watches the mouse's hole.

lastly, the client, shaking hands, beseeches mr. vholes, for heaven's
sake and earth's sake, to do his utmost to "pull him through" the
court of chancery. mr. vholes, who never gives hopes, lays his palm
upon the client's shoulder and answers with a smile, "always here,
sir. personally, or by letter, you will always find me here, sir,
with my shoulder to the wheel." thus they part, and vholes, left
alone, employs himself in carrying sundry little matter
 
 ___________________________
 
s out of his
diary into his draft bill book for the ultimate behoof of his three
daughters. so might an industrious fox or bear make up his account of
chickens or stray travellers with an eye to his cubs, not to
disparage by that word the three raw-visaged, lank, and buttoned-up
maidens who dwell with the parent vholes in an earthy cottage
situated in a damp garden at kennington.

richard, emerging from the heavy shade of symond's inn into the
sunshine of chancery lane--for there happens to be sunshine there
to-day--walks thoughtfully on, and turns into lincoln's inn, and
passes under the shadow of the lincoln's inn trees. on many such
loungers have the speckled shadows of those trees often fallen; on
the like bent head, the bitten nail, the lowering eye, the lingering
step, the purposeless and dreamy air, th
 
 ___________________________
 
he recalls how different his first visit
there, how different he, how different all the colours of his mind.
but injustice breeds injustice; the fighting with shadows and being
defeated by them necessitates the setting up of substances to combat;
from the impalpable suit which no man alive can understand, the time
for that being long gone by, it has become a gloomy relief to turn to
the palpable figure of the friend who would have saved him from this
ruin and make him his enemy. richard has told vholes the truth. is he
in a hardened or a softened mood, he still lays his injuries equally
at that door; he was thwarted, in that quarter, of a set purpose, and
that purpose could only originate in the one subject that is
resolving his existence into itself; besides, it is a justification
to him in his own eyes to have an embodied antagonist and oppressor.

is richard a monster in all this, or would chancery be found rich in
such precedents too if they could be got for citation from the
recording an
 
 ___________________________
 
 to any training
that would have balanced and adjusted them, and so he became what he
is. hey?" said my guardian, stopping short and looking at us
hopefully. "what do you think, you two?"

ada, glancing at me, said she thought it was a pity he should be an
expense to richard.

"so it is, so it is," returned my guardian hurriedly. "that must not
be. we must arrange that. i must prevent it. that will never do."

and i said i thought it was to be regretted that he had ever
introduced richard to mr. vholes for a present of five pounds.

"did he?" said my guardian with a passing shade of vexation on his
face. "but there you have the man. there you have the man! there is
nothing mercenary in that with him. he has no idea of the value of
money. he introduces rick, and then he is good friends with mr.
vholes and borrows five pounds of him. he means nothing by it and
thinks nothing of it. he told you himself, i'll be bound, my dear?"

"oh, yes!" said i.

"exactly!" cried my guardian, quite triumphant.
 
 ___________________________
 
i returned.

i put my two arms round his neck and kissed him, and he said was this
the mistress of bleak house, and i said yes; and it made no
difference presently, and we all went out together, and i said
nothing to my precious pet about it.




chapter xlv

in trust


one morning when i had done jingling about with my baskets of keys,
as my beauty and i were walking round and round the garden i happened
to turn my eyes towards the house and saw a long thin shadow going in
which looked like mr. vholes. ada had been telling me only that
morning of her hopes that richard might exhaust his ardour in the
chancery suit by being so very earnest in it; and therefore, not to
damp my dear girl's spirits, i said nothing about mr. vholes's
shadow.

presently came charley, lightly winding among the bushes and tripping
along the paths, as rosy and pretty as one of flora's attendants
instead of my maid, saying, "oh, if you please, miss, would you step
and speak to mr. jarndyce!"

it was one of charley's p
 
 ___________________________
 
of words to "step and speak" to
mr. jarndyce long before i heard her. and when i did hear her, she
had said it so often that she was out of breath.

i told ada i would make haste back and inquired of charley as we went
in whether there was not a gentleman with mr. jarndyce. to which
charley, whose grammar, i confess to my shame, never did any credit
to my educational powers, replied, "yes, miss. him as come down in
the country with mr. richard."

a more complete contrast than my guardian and mr. vholes i suppose
there could not be. i found them looking at one another across a
table, the one so open and the other so close, the one so broad and
upright and the other so narrow and stooping, the one giving out what
he had to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other keeping it
in in such a cold-blooded, gasping, fish-like manner that i thought i
never had seen two people so unmatched.

"you know mr. vholes, my dear," said my guardian. not with the
greatest urbanity, i must say.

mr. vholes r
 
 ___________________________
 
ose, gloved and buttoned up as usual, and seated himself
again, just as he had seated himself beside richard in the gig. not
having richard to look at, he looked straight before him.

"mr. vholes," said my guardian, eyeing his black figure as if he were
a bird of ill omen, "has brought an ugly report of our most
unfortunate rick." laying a marked emphasis on "most unfortunate" as
if the words were rather descriptive of his connexion with mr.
vholes.

i sat down between them; mr. vholes remained immovable, except that
he secretly picked at one of the red pimples on his yellow face with
his black glove.

"and as rick and you are happily good friends, i should like to
know," said my guardian, "what you think, my dear. would you be so
good as to--as to speak up, mr. vholes?"

doing anything but that, mr. vholes observed, "i have been saying
that i have reason to know, miss summerson, as mr. c.'s professional
adviser, that mr. c.'s circumstances are at the present moment in an
emb
 
 ___________________________
 
have made some advances out of pocket
to accommodate these unpleasantnesses, but i necessarily look to
being repaid, for i do not pretend to be a man of capital, and i have
a father to support in the vale of taunton, besides striving to
realize some little independence for three dear girls at home. my
apprehension is, mr. c.'s circumstances being such, lest it should
end in his obtaining leave to part with his commission, which at all
events is desirable to be made known to his connexions."

mr. vholes, who had looked at me while speaking, here emerged into
the silence he could hardly be said to have broken, so stifled was
his tone, and looked before him again.

"imagine the poor fellow without even his present resource," said my
guardian to me. "yet what can i do? you know him, esther. he would
never accept of help from me now. to offer it or hint at it would be
to drive him to an extremity, if nothing else did."

mr. vholes hereupon addressed me again.

"what mr. jarndyce remarks, miss, is 
 
 ___________________________
 
be openly carried on and that it may not be said afterwards that
everything was not openly carried on. my wish is that everything
should be openly carried on. i desire to leave a good name behind me.
if i consulted merely my own interests with mr. c., i should not be
here. so insurmountable, as you must well know, would be his
objections. this is not a professional attendance. this can he
charged to nobody. i have no interest in it except as a member of
society and a father--and a son," said mr. vholes, who had nearly
forgotten that point.

it appeared to us that mr. vholes said neither more nor less than the
truth in intimating that he sought to divide the responsibility, such
as it was, of knowing richard's situation. i could only suggest that
i should go down to deal, where richard was then stationed, and see
him, and try if it were possible to avert the worst. without
consulting mr. vholes on this point, i took my guardian aside to
propose it, while mr. vholes gauntly stalked to the fire 
 
 ___________________________
 
and warmed
his funeral gloves.

the fatigue of the journey formed an immediate objection on my
guardian's part, but as i saw he had no other, and as i was only too
happy to go, i got his consent. we had then merely to dispose of mr.
vholes.

"well, sir," said mr. jarndyce, "miss summerson will communicate with
mr. carstone, and you can only hope that his position may be yet
retrievable. you will allow me to order you lunch after your journey,
sir."

"i thank you, mr. jarndyce," said mr. vholes, putting out his long
black sleeve to check the ringing of the bell, "not any. i thank you,
no, not a morsel. my digestion is much impaired, and i am but a poor
knife and fork at any time. if i was to partake of solid food at this
period of the day, i don't know what the consequences might be.
everything having been openly carried on, sir, i will now with your
permission take my leave."

"and i would that you could take your leave, and we could all take
our leave, mr. vholes," returned my guard
 
 ___________________________
 
ian bitterly, "of a cause
you know of."

mr. vholes, whose black dye was so deep from head to foot that it had
quite steamed before the fire, diffusing a very unpleasant perfume,
made a short one-sided inclination of his head from the neck and
slowly shook it.

"we whose ambition it is to be looked upon in the light of
respectable practitioners, sir, can but put our shoulders to the
wheel. we do it, sir. at least, i do it myself; and i wish to think
well of my professional brethren, one and all. you are sensible of an
obligation not to refer to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ar rather be without me than with me. and they are right.
apart from debts and duns and all such drawbacks, i am not fit even
for this employment. i have no care, no mind, no heart, no soul, but
for one thing. why, if this bubble hadn't broken now," he said,
tearing the letter he had written into fragments and moodily casting
them away, by driblets, "how could i have gone abroad? i must have
been ordered abroad, but how could i have gone? how could i, with my
experience of that thing, trust even vholes unless i was at his
back!"

i suppose he knew by my face what i was about to say, but he caught
the hand i had laid upon his arm and touched my own lips with it to
prevent me from going on.

"no, dame durden! two subjects i forbid--must forbid. the first is
john jarndyce. the second, you know what. call it madness, and i tell
you i can't help it now, and can't be sane. but it is no such thing;
it is the one object i have to pursue. it is a pity i ever was
prevailed upon to turn out of my road f
 
 ___________________________
 
his offer, my dear esther," said he, sitting down beside
me and resuming our conversation, "--once more, pray, pray forgive
me; i am deeply grieved--to accept my dearest cousin's offer is, i
need not say, impossible. besides, i have letters and papers that i
could show you which would convince you it is all over here. i have
done with the red coat, believe me. but it is some satisfaction, in
the midst of my troubles and perplexities, to know that i am pressing
ada's interests in pressing my own. vholes has his shoulder to the
wheel, and he cannot help urging it on as much for her as for me,
thank god!"

his sanguine hopes were rising within him and lighting up his
features, but they made his face more sad to me than it had been
before.

"no, no!" cried richard exultingly. "if every farthing of ada's
little fortune were mine, no part of it should be spent in retaining
me in what i am not fit for, can take no interest in, and am weary
of. it should be devoted to what promises a better return, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd should
be used where she has a larger stake. don't be uneasy for me! i shall
now have only one thing on my mind, and vholes and i will work it. i
shall not be without means. free of my commission, i shall be able to
compound with some small usurers who will hear of nothing but their
bond now--vholes says so. i should have a balance in my favour
anyway, but that would swell it. come, come! you shall carry a letter
to ada from me, esther, and you must both of you be more hopeful of
me and not believe that i am quite cast away just yet, my dear."

i will not repeat what i said to richard. i know it was tiresome, and
no
 
 ___________________________
 
im. i saw too, and had experienced in
this very interview, the sense of my guardian's remark that it was
even more mischievous to use persuasion with him than to leave him as
he was.

therefore i was driven at last to asking richard if he would mind
convincing me that it really was all over there, as he had said, and
that it was not his mere impression. he showed me without hesitation
a correspondence making it quite plain that his retirement was
arranged. i found, from what he told me, that mr. vholes had copies
of these papers and had been in consultation with him throughout.
beyond ascertaining this, and having been the bearer of ada's letter,
and being (as i was going to be) richard's companion back to london,
i had done no good by coming down. admitting this to myself with a
reluctant heart, i said i would return to the hotel and wait until he
joined me there, so he threw a cloak over his shoulders and saw me to
the gate, and charley and i went back along the beach.

there was a concours
 
 ___________________________
 
him--we all love
him, but ada loves him as we cannot. i will tell her what you say.
thank you, and god bless you, in her name!"

richard came back as we finished exchanging these hurried words and
gave me his arm to take me to the coach.

"woodcourt," he said, unconscious with what application, "pray let us
meet in london!"

"meet?" returned the other. "i have scarcely a friend there now but
you. where shall i find you?"

"why, i must get a lodging of some sort," said richard, pondering.
"say at vholes's, symond's inn."

"good! without loss of time."

they shook hands heartily. when i was seated in the coach and richard
was yet standing in the street, mr. woodcourt laid his friendly hand
on richard's shoulder and looked at me. i understood him and waved
mine in thanks.

and in his last look as we drove away, i saw that he was very sorry
for me. i was glad to see it. i felt for my old self as the dead may
feel if they ever revisit these scenes. i was glad to be tenderly
remembered, to be gentl
 
 ___________________________
 
ess amiable i must have been than they thought me, how much
less amiable than i thought myself, to be so preoccupied with my own
cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rested with me
to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace!

but i lay down, self-deceived, in that belief. and i awoke in it next
day to find that there was still the same shade between me and my
darling.




chapter li

enlightened


when mr. woodcourt arrived in london, he went, that very same day, to
mr. vholes's in symond's inn. for he never once, from the moment when
i entreated him to be a friend to richard, neglected or forgot his
promise. he had told me that he accepted the charge as a sacred
trust, and he was ever true to it in that spirit.

he found mr. vholes in his office and informed mr. vholes of his
agreement with richard that he should call there to learn his
address.

"just so, sir," said mr. vholes. "mr. c.'s address is not a hundred
miles from here, sir, mr. c.'s address is not a hundr
 
 ___________________________
 
ed miles from
here. would you take a seat, sir?"

mr. woodcourt thanked mr. vholes, but he had no business with him
beyond what he had mentioned.

"just so, sir. i believe, sir," said mr. vholes, still quietly
insisting on the seat by not giving the address, "that you have
influence with mr. c. indeed i am aware that you have."

"i was not aware of it myself," returned mr. woodcourt; "but i
suppose you know best."

"sir," rejoined mr. vholes, self-contained as usual, voice and all,
"it is a part of my professional duty to know best. it is a part of
my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who
confides his interests to me. in my professional duty i shall not be
wanting, sir, if i know it. i may, with the best intentions, be
wanting in it without knowing it; but not if i know it, sir."

mr. woodcourt again mentioned the address.

"give me leave, sir," said mr. vholes. "bear with me for a moment.
sir, mr. c. is play
 
 ___________________________
 
ing for a considerable stake, and cannot play
without--need i say what?"

"money, i presume?"

"sir," said mr. vholes, "to be honest with you (honesty being my
golden rule, whether i gain by it or lose, and i find that i
generally lose), money is the word. now, sir, upon the chances of mr.
c.'s game i express to you no opinion, no opinion. it might be highly
impolitic in mr. c., after playing so long and so high, to leave off;
it might be the reverse; i say nothing. no, sir," said mr. vholes,
bringing his hand flat down upon his desk in a positive manner,
"nothing."

"you seem to forget," returned mr. woodcourt, "that i ask you to say
nothing and have no interest in anything you say."

"pardon me, sir!" retorted mr. vholes. "you do yourself an injustice.
no, sir! pardon me! you shall not--shall not in my office, if i know
it--do yourself an injustice. you are interested in anything, and in
everything, that relates to your friend. i know human nature much
better, sir, than to admit 
 
 ___________________________
 
for an instant that a gentleman of your
appearance is not interested in whatever concerns his friend."

"well," replied mr. woodcourt, "that may be. i am particularly
interested in his address."

"the number, sir," said mr. vholes parenthetically, "i believe i have
already mentioned. if mr. c. is to continue to play for this
considerable stake, sir, he must have funds. understand me! there are
funds in hand at present. i ask for nothing; there are funds in hand.
but for the onward play, more funds must be provided, unless mr. c.
is to throw away what he has already ventured, which is wholly and
solely a point for his consideration. this, sir, i take the
opportunity of stating openly to you as the friend of mr. c. without
 
 ___________________________
 
to appear and act for mr. c. to the
extent of all such costs as are safe to be allowed out of the estate,
not beyond that. i could not go beyond that, sir, without wronging
some one. i must either wrong my three dear girls or my venerable
father, who is entirely dependent on me, in the vale of taunton; or
some one. whereas, sir, my resolution is (call it weakness or folly
if you please) to wrong no one."

mr. woodcourt rather sternly rejoined that he was glad to hear it.

"i wish, sir," said mr. vholes, "to leave a good name behind me.
therefore i take every opportunity of openly stating to a friend of
mr. c. how mr. c. is situated. as to myself, sir, the labourer is
worthy of his hire. if i undertake to put my shoulder to the wheel, i
do it, and i earn what i get. i am here for that purpose. my name is
painted on the door outside, with that object."

"and mr. carstone's address, mr. vholes?"

"sir," returned mr. vholes, "as i believe i have already mentioned,
it is next door. on the second s
 
 ___________________________
 
tory you will find mr. c.'s
apartments. mr. c. desires to be near his professional adviser, and i
am far from objecting, for i court inquiry."

upon this mr. woodcourt wished mr. vholes good day and went in search
of richard, the change in whose appearance he began to understand now
but too well.

he found him in a dull room, fadedly furnished, much as i had found
him in his barrack-room but a little while before, except that he was
not writing but was sitting with a book before him, from which his
eyes and thoughts were far astray. as the door chanced to be standing
open, mr. woodcourt was in his presence for some moments without
being perceived, and he told me that he never 
 
 ___________________________
 
can
strike a purpose out of anything. you and i are very different
creatures."

he spoke regretfully and lapsed for a moment into his weary
condition.

"well, well!" he cried, shaking it off. "everything has an end. we
shall see! so you will take me as i am, and make the best of me?"

"aye! indeed i will." they shook hands upon it laughingly, but in
deep earnestness. i can answer for one of them with my heart of
hearts.

"you come as a godsend," said richard, "for i have seen nobody here
yet but vholes. woodcourt, there is one subject i should like to
mention, for once and for all, in the beginning of our treaty. you
can hardly make the best of me if i don't. you know, i dare say, that
i have an attachment to my cousin ada?"

mr. woodcourt replied that i had hinted as much to him. "now pray,"
returned richard, "don't think me a heap of selfishness. don't
suppose that i am splitting my head and half breaking my heart over
this miserable chancery suit for my own rights and interests alone.
ada'
 
 ___________________________
 
s are bound up with mine; they can't be separated; vholes works
for both of us. do think of that!"

he was so very solicitous on this head that mr. woodcourt gave him
the strongest assurances that he did him no injustice.

"you see," said richard, with something pathetic in his manner of
lingering on the point, though it was off-hand and unstudied, "to an
upright fellow like you, bringing a friendly face like yours here, i
cannot bear the thought of appearing selfish and mean. i want to see
ada righted, woodcourt, as well as myself; i want to do my ut
 
 ___________________________
 
most to
right her, as well as myself; i venture what i can scrape together to
extricate her, as well as myself. do, i beseech you, think of that!"

afterwards, when mr. woodcourt came to reflect on what had passed, he
was so very much impressed by the strength of richard's anxiety on
this point that in telling me generally of his first visit to
symond's inn he particularly dwelt upon it. it revived a fear i had
had before that my dear girl's little property would be absorbed by
mr. vholes and that richard's justification to himself would be
sincerely this. it was just as i began to take care of caddy that the
interview took place, and i now return to the time when caddy had
recovered and the shade was still between me and my darling.

i proposed to ada that morning that we should go and see richard. it
a little surprised me to find that she hesitated and was not so
radiantly willing as i had expected.

"my dear," said i, "you have not had any difference with richard
since i have
 
 ___________________________
 
eautiful girl
quite out of place in the rugged streets, and i thought there were
more funerals passing along the dismal pavements than i had ever seen
before.

we had first to find out symond's inn. we were going to inquire in a
shop when ada said she thought it was near chancery lane. "we are not
likely to be far out, my love, if we go in that direction," said i.
so to chancery lane we went, and there, sure enough, we saw it
written up. symond's inn.

we had next to find out the number. "or mr. vholes's office will do,"
i recollected, "for mr. vholes's office is next door." upon which ada
said, perhaps that was mr. vholes's office in the corner there. and
it really was.

then came the question, which of the two next doors? i was going for
the one, and my darling was going for the other; and my darling was
right again. so up we went to the second story, when we came to
richard's name in great white letters on a hearse-like panel.

i should have knocked, but ada said perhaps we had better turn
 
 ___________________________
 
r was such a good fellow as woodcourt is. he finds time to
look in between-whiles, when anybody else with half his work to do
would be thinking about not being able to come. and he is so cheery,
so fresh, so sensible, so earnest, so--everything that i am not, that
the place brightens whenever he comes, and darkens whenever he goes
again."

"god bless him," i thought, "for his truth to me!"

"he is not so sanguine, ada," continued richard, casting his dejected
look over the bundles of papers, "as vholes and i are usually, but he
is only an outsider and is not in the mysteries. we have gone into
them, and he has not. he can't be expected to know much of such a
labyrinth."

as his look wandered over the papers again and he passed his two
hands over his head, i noticed how sunken and how large his eyes
appeared, how dry his lips were, and how his finger-nails were all
bitten away.

"is this a healthy place to live in, richard, do you think?" said i.

"why, my dear minerva," answered richard with 
 
 ___________________________
 
his old gay laugh, "it
is neither a rural nor a cheerful place; and when the sun shines
here, you may lay a pretty heavy wager that it is shining brightly in
an open spot. but it's well enough for the time. it's near the
offices and near vholes."

"perhaps," i hinted, "a change from both--"

"might do me good?" said richard, forcing a laugh as he finished the
sentence. "i shouldn't wonder! but it can only come in one way
now--in one of two ways, i should rather say. either the suit must be
ended, esther, or the suitor. but it shall be the suit, my dear girl,
the suit, my dear girl!"

these latter words were addressed to ada, who was sitting nearest to
him. her face being turned away from me and towards him, i could not
see it.

"we ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e doing very well," pursued richard. "vholes will tell you so.
we are really spinning along. ask vholes. we are giving them no rest.
vholes knows all their windings and turnings, and we are upon them
everywhere. we have astonished them already. we shall rouse up that
nest of sleepers, mark my words!"

his hopefulness had long been more painful to me than his
despondency; it was so unlike hopefulness, had something so fierce in
its determination to be it, was so hungry and eager, and yet so
conscious of being forced and unsustainable that it had long touched
me to the heart. but the commentary upo
 
 ___________________________
 
ar her and taking some
sort of care of her, that i determined to go back in the evening only
to look up at her windows.

it was foolish, i dare say, but it did not then seem at all so to me,
and it does not seem quite so even now. i took charley into my
confidence, and we went out at dusk. it was dark when we came to the
new strange home of my dear girl, and there was a light behind the
yellow blinds. we walked past cautiously three or four times, looking
up, and narrowly missed encountering mr. vholes, who came out of his
office while we were there and turned his head to look up too before
going home. the sight of his lank black figure and the lonesome air
of that nook in the dark were favourable to the state of my mind. i
thought of the youth and love and beauty of my dear girl, shut up in
such an ill-assorted refuge, almost as if it were a cruel place.

it was very solitary and very dull, and i did not doubt that i might
safely steal upstairs. i left charley below and went up with a light

 
 ___________________________
 
ustled off to
chancery lane. they were both so glad to see me at all hours, and
used to brighten up so when they heard me opening the door and coming
in (being quite at home, i never knocked), that i had no fear of
becoming troublesome just yet.

on these occasions i frequently found richard absent. at other times
he would be writing or reading papers in the cause at that table of
his, so covered with papers, which was never disturbed. sometimes i
would come upon him lingering at the door of mr. vholes's office.
sometimes i would meet him in the neighbourhood lounging about and
biting his nails. i often met him wandering in lincoln's inn, near
the place where i had first seen him, oh how different, how
different!

that the money ada brought him was melting away with the candles i
used to see burning after dark in mr. vholes's office i knew very
well. it was not a large amount in the beginning, he had married in
debt, and i could not fail to understand, by this time, what was
meant by mr. vhol
 
 ___________________________
 
red there at any other time, and with her largest reticule
of documents on her arm.

"my dear!" she began. "so delighted! how do you do! so glad to see
you. and you are going to visit our interesting jarndyce wards? to be
sure! our beauty is at home, my dear, and will be charmed to see
you."

"then richard is not come in yet?" said i. "i am glad of that, for i
was afraid of being a little late."

"no, he is not come in," returned miss flite. "he has had a long day
in court. i left him there with vholes. you don't like vholes, i
hope? don't like vholes. dan-gerous man!"

"i am afraid you see richard oftener than ever now," said i.

"my dearest," returned miss flite, "daily and hourly. you know what i
told you of the attraction on the chancellor's table? my dear, next
to myself he is the most constant suitor in court. he begins quite to
amuse our little party. ve-ry friendly little party, are we not?"

it was miserable to hear this from her poor mad lips, though it was
no surprise.

"in short, 
 
 ___________________________
 
, peace, rest, life, dust,
ashes, waste, want, ruin, despair, madness, death, cunning, folly,
words, wigs, rags, sheepskin, plunder, precedent, jargon, gammon, and
spinach!"

the poor soul kissed me with the most troubled look i had ever seen
in her and went her way. her manner of running over the names of her
birds, as if she were afraid of hearing them even from her own lips,
quite chilled me.

this was not a cheering preparation for my visit, and i could have
dispensed with the company of mr. vholes, when richard (who arrived
within a minute or two after me) brought him to share our dinner.
although it was a very plain one, ada and richard were for some
minutes both out of the room together helping to get ready what we
were to eat and drink. mr. vholes took that opportunity of holding a
little conversation in a low voice with me. he came to the window
where i was sitting and began upon symond's inn.

"a dull place, miss summerson, for a life that is not an official
one," said mr. vholes, s
 
 ___________________________
 
mearing the glass with his black glove to
make it clearer for me.

"there is not much to see here," said i.

"nor to hear, miss," returned mr. vholes. "a little music does
occasionally stray in, but we are not musical in the law and soon
eject it. i hope mr. jarndyce is as well as his friends could wish
him?"

i thanked mr. vholes and said he was quite well.

"i have not the pleasure to be admitted among the number of his
friends myself," said mr. vholes, "and i am aware that the gentlemen
of our profession are sometimes regarded in such quarters with an
unfavourable eye. our plain course, however, under good report and
evil report, and all kinds of prejudice (we are the victims of
prejudice), is to have everything openly carried on. how do you find
mr. c. looking, miss summerson?"

"he looks very ill. dreadfully anxious."

"just so," said mr. vholes.

he stood behind me with his long black figure reaching nearly to the
ceiling of those low roo
 
 ___________________________
 
ms, feeling the pimples on his face as if
they were ornaments and speaking inwardly and evenly as though there
were not a human passion or emotion in his nature.

"mr. woodcourt is in attendance upon mr. c., i believe?" he resumed.

"mr. woodcourt is his disinterested friend," i answered.

"but i mean in professional attendance, medical attendance."

"that can do little for an unhappy mind," said i.

"just so," said mr. vholes.

so slow, so eager, so bloodless and gaunt, i felt as if richard were
wasting away beneath the eyes of this adviser and there were
something of the vampire in him.

"miss summerson," said mr. vholes, very slowly rubbing his gloved
hands, as if, to his cold sense of touch, they were much the same in
black kid or out of it, "this was an ill-advised marriage of mr.
c.'s."

i begged he would excuse me from discussing it. they had been engaged
when they were both very young, i told him (a little in
 
 ___________________________
 
dignantly) and
when the prospect before them was much fairer and brighter. when
richard had not yielded himself to the unhappy influence which now
darkened his life.

"just so," assented mr. vholes again. "still, with a view to
everything being openly carried on, i will, with your permission,
miss summerson, observe to you that i consider this a very
ill-advised marriage indeed. i owe the opinion not only to mr. c.'s
connexions, against whom i should naturally wish to protect myself,
but also to my own reputation--dear to myself as a professional man
aiming to keep respectable; dear to my three girls at home, for whom
i am striving to realize some little independence; dear, i will even
sa
 
 ___________________________
 
y, to my aged father, whom it is my privilege to support."

"it would become a very different marriage, a much happier and better
marriage, another marriage altogether, mr. vholes," said i, "if
richard were persuaded to turn his back on the fatal pursuit in which
you are engaged with him."

mr. vholes, with a noiseless cough--or rather gasp--into one of his
black gloves, inclined his head as if he did not wholly dispute even
that.

"miss summerson," he said, "it may be so; and i freely admit that the
young lady who has taken mr. c.'s name upon herself in so ill-advised
a manner--you will i am sure not quarrel with me for throwing out
that remark again, as a duty i owe to mr. c.'s connexions--is a
highly genteel young lady. business has prevented me from mixing much
with general society in an
 
 ___________________________
 
y but a professional character; still i
trust i am competent to perceive that she is a highly genteel young
lady. as to beauty, i am not a judge of that myself, and i never did
give much attention to it from a boy, but i dare say the young lady
is equally eligible in that point of view. she is considered so (i
have heard) among the clerks in the inn, and it is a point more in
their way than in mine. in reference to mr. c.'s pursuit of his
interests--"

"oh! his interests, mr. vholes!"

"pardon me," returned mr. vholes, going on in exactly the same inward
and dispassionate manner. "mr. c. takes certain interests under
certain wills disputed in the suit. it is a term we use. in reference
to mr. c,'s pursuit of his interests, i mentioned to you, miss
summerson, the first time i had the pleasure of seeing you, in my
desire that everything should be openly carried on--i used those
words, for i happened afterwards to note them in my diary, which is
producible at any time--i ment
 
 ___________________________
 
ly say,
unpalatable as it may be, that i consider mr. c.'s affairs in a very
bad way, that i consider mr. c. himself in a very bad way, and that i
regard this as an exceedingly ill-advised marriage. am i here, sir?
yes, i thank you; i am here, mr. c., and enjoying the pleasure of
some agreeable conversation with miss summerson, for which i have to
thank you very much, sir!"

he broke off thus in answer to richard, who addressed him as he came
into the room. by this time i too well understood mr. vholes's
scrupulous way of saving himself and his respectability not to feel
that our worst fears did but keep pace with his client's progress.

we sat down to dinner, and i had an opportunity of observing richard,
anxiously. i was not disturbed by mr. vholes (who took off his gloves
to dine), though he sat opposite to me at the small table, for i
doubt if, looking up at all, he once removed his eyes from his host's
face. i found richard thin and languid, slovenly in his dress,
abstracted in his manne
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
ada. i thought at first that his old light-hearted manner was all
gone, but it shone out of him sometimes as i had occasionally known
little momentary glimpses of my own old face to look out upon me from
the glass. his laugh had not quite left him either, but it was like
the echo of a joyful sound, and that is always sorrowful.

yet he was as glad as ever, in his old affectionate way, to have me
there, and we talked of the old times pleasantly. these did not
appear to be interesting to mr. vholes, though he occasionally made a
gasp which i believe was his smile. he rose shortly after dinner and
said that with the permission of the ladies he would retire to his
office.

"always devoted to business, vholes!" cried richard.

"yes, mr. c.," he returned, "the interests of clients are never to be
neglected, sir. they are paramount in the thoughts of a professional
man like myself, who wishes to preserve a good name among his
fellow-practitioners and society at large. my denying myself the
ple
 
 ___________________________
 
asure of the present agreeable conversation may not be wholly
irrespective of your own interests, mr. c."

richard expressed himself quite sure of that and lighted mr. vholes
out. on his return he told us, more than once, that vholes was a good
fellow, a safe fellow, a man who did what he pretended to do, a very
good fellow indeed! he was so defiant about it that it struck me he
had begun to doubt mr. vholes.

then he threw himself on the sofa, tired out; and ada and i put
things to rights, for they had no other servant than the woman who
attended to the chambers. my dear girl had a cottage piano there and
quietly sat down to sing some of richard's favourites, the lamp being
first removed into the next room, as he complained of its hurting his
eyes.

i sat between them, at my dear girl's side, and felt very melancholy
listening to her sweet voice. i think richard did too; i think he
darkened the ro
 
 ___________________________
 
rned my guardian.

"but, my dear sir," said mr. kenge, "it is a will of later date than
any in the suit. it appears to be all in the testator's handwriting.
it is duly executed and attested. and even if intended to be
cancelled, as might possibly be supposed to be denoted by these marks
of fire, it is not cancelled. here it is, a perfect instrument!"

"well!" said my guardian. "what is that to me?"

"mr. guppy!" cried mr. kenge, raising his voice. "i beg your pardon,
mr. jarndyce."

"sir."

"mr. vholes of symond's inn. my compliments. jarndyce and jarndyce.
glad to speak with him."

mr. guppy disappeared.

"you ask me what is this to you, mr. jarndyce. if you had perused
this document, you would have seen that it reduces your interest
considerably, though still leaving it a very handsome one, still
leaving it a very handsome one," said mr. kenge, waving his hand
persuasively and blandly. "you would further have seen that the
interests of mr. richard carstone and of miss ada clare, now mrs.
ri
 
 ___________________________
 
 by it."

"kenge," said my guardian, "if all the flourishing wealth that the
suit brought into this vile court of chancery could fall to my two
young cousins, i should be well contented. but do you ask me to
believe that any good is to come of jarndyce and jarndyce?"

"oh, really, mr. jarndyce! prejudice, prejudice. my dear sir, this is
a very great country, a very great country. its system of equity is a
very great system, a very great system. really, really!"

my guardian said no more, and mr. vholes arrived. he was modestly
impressed by mr. kenge's professional eminence.

"how do you do, mr. vholes? will you be so good as to take a chair
here by me and look over this paper?"

mr. vholes did as he was asked and seemed to read it every word. he
was not excited by it, but he was not excited by anything. when he
had well examined it, he retired with mr. kenge into a window, and
shading his mouth with his black glove, spoke to him at some length.
i was not surprised to observe mr. kenge incline
 
 ___________________________
 
d to dispute what
he said before he had said much, for i knew that no two people ever
did agree about anything in jarndyce and jarndyce. but he seemed
to get the better of mr. kenge too in a conversation that sounded
as if it were almost composed of the words "receiver-general,"
"accountant-general," "report," "estate," and "costs." when they had
finished, they came back to mr. kenge's table and spoke aloud.

"well! but this is a very remarkable document, mr. vholes," said mr.
kenge.

mr. vholes said, "very much so."

"and a very important document, mr. vholes," said mr. kenge.

again mr. vholes said, "very much so."

"and as you say, mr. vholes, when the cause is in the paper next
term, this document will be an unexpected and interesting feature in
it," said mr. kenge, looking loftily at my guardian.

mr. vholes was gratified, as a smaller practitioner striving to keep
respectable, to be confirmed in any opinion of his own by such an
authority.

"and when," asked my guardian, rising a
 
 ___________________________
 
fter a pause, during which mr.
kenge had rattled his money and mr. vholes had picked his pimples,
"when is next term?"

"next term, mr. jarndyce, will be next month," said mr. kenge. "of
course we shall at once proceed to do what is necessary with this
document and to collect the necessary evidence concerning it; and of
course you will receive our usual notification of the cause being in
the paper."

"to which i shall pay, of course, my usual attention."

"still bent, my dear sir," said mr. kenge, showing us through the
outer office to the door, "still bent, even wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 under, and threw down for the time being,
anyhow, on the hall pavement, while they went back to bring out more.
even these clerks were laughing. we glanced at the papers, and seeing
jarndyce and jarndyce everywhere, asked an official-looking person
who was standing in the midst of them whether the cause was over.
yes, he said, it was all up with it at last, and burst out laughing
too.

at this juncture we perceived mr. kenge coming out of court with an
affable dignity upon him, listening to mr. vholes, who was
deferential and carried his own bag. mr. vholes was the first to see
us. "here is miss summerson, sir," he said. "and mr. woodcourt."

"oh, indeed! yes. truly!" said mr. kenge, raising his hat to me with
polished politeness. "how do you do? glad to see you. mr. jarndyce is
not here?"

no. he never came there, i reminded him.

"really," returned mr. kenge, "it is as well that he is not here
to-day, for his--shall i say, in my good friend's absence, his
indomitable singularity of opinion
 
 ___________________________
 
d mr. kenge with excessive urbanity.

"what has been done to-day?"

"what has been done," repeated mr. kenge. "quite so. yes. why, not
much has been done; not much. we have been checked--brought up
suddenly, i would say--upon the--shall i term it threshold?"

"is this will considered a genuine document, sir?" said allan. "will
you tell us that?"

"most certainly, if i could," said mr. kenge; "but we have not gone
into that, we have not gone into that."

"we have not gone into that," repeated mr. vholes as if his low
inward voice were an echo.

"you are to reflect, mr. woodcourt," observed mr. kenge, using his
silver trowel persuasively and smoothingly, "that this has been a
great cause, that this has been a protracted cause, that this has
been a complex cause. jarndyce and jarndyce has been termed, not
inaptly, a monument of chancery practice."

"and patience has sat upon it a long time," said allan.

"very well indeed, sir," returned mr. kenge with a certain
condescending laugh he had. "very
 
 ___________________________
 
 bar,
and the--a--i would presume to add, the matured autumnal fruits of
the woolsack--have been lavished upon jarndyce and jarndyce. if the
public have the benefit, and if the country have the adornment, of
this great grasp, it must be paid for in money or money's worth,
sir."

"mr. kenge," said allan, appearing enlightened all in a moment.
"excuse me, our time presses. do i understand that the whole estate
is found to have been absorbed in costs?"

"hem! i believe so," returned mr. kenge. "mr. vholes, what do you
say?"

"i believe so," said mr. vholes.

"and that thus the suit lapses and melts away?"

"probably," returned mr. kenge. "mr. vholes?"

"probably," said mr. vholes.

"my dearest life," whispered allan, "this will break richard's
heart!"

there was such a shock of apprehension in his face, and he knew
richard so perfectly, and i too had seen so much of his gradual
decay, that what my dear girl had said to me in the fullness of her
foreboding love sounded like a knell in my ears.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
in case you should be wanting mr. c., sir," said mr. vholes, coming
after us, "you'll find him in court. i left him there resting himself
a little. good day, sir; good day, miss summerson." as he gave me
that slowly devouring look of his, while twisting up the strings of
his bag before he hastened with it after mr. kenge, the benignant
shadow of whose conversational presence he seemed afraid to leave, he
gave one gasp as if he had swallowed the last morsel of his client,
and his black buttoned-up unwholesome figure glided away to the low
door at the end