gain for the returning steps. a quantity
of straw has been tumbled down in the street to deaden the noises
there, and she might be driven to the door perhaps without his
hearing wheels.

he is lying thus, apparently forgetful of his newer and minor
surprise, when the housekeeper returns, accompanied by her trooper
son. mr. george approaches softly to the bedside, makes his bow,
squares his chest, and stands, with his face flushed, very heartily
ashamed of himself.

"good heaven, and it is really george rouncewell!" exclaims sir
leicester. "do you remember me, george?"

the trooper needs to look at him and to separate this sound from that
sound before he knows what he has said, but doing this and being a
little helped by his mother, he replies, "i must have a very bad
memory, indeed, sir leicester, if i failed to remember you."

"when i look at you, george rouncewell," sir leicester observes with
difficulty, "i see something of a boy at chesney wold--i remember
well--very well."

he looks at the trooper 
 
 ___________________________
 
until tears come into his eyes, and then he
looks at the sleet and snow again.

"i ask your pardon, sir leicester," says the trooper, "but would you
accept of my arms to raise you up? you would lie easier, sir
leicester, if you would allow me to move you."

"if you please, george rouncewell; if you will be so good."

the trooper takes him in his arms like a child, lightly raises him,
and turns him with his face more towards the window. "thank you. you
have your mother's gentleness," returns sir leicester, "and your own
strength. thank you."

he signs to him with his hand not to go away. george quietly remains
at the bedside, waiting to be spoken to.

"why did you wish for secrecy?" it takes sir leicester some time to
ask this.

"truly i am not much to boast of, sir leicester, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 here, and not very
creditable to myself. however opinions may differ on a variety of
subjects, i should think it would be universally agreed, sir
leicester, that i am not much to boast of."

"you have been a soldier," observes sir leicester, "and a faithful
one."

george makes his military bow. "as far as that goes, sir leicester, i
have done my duty under discipline, and it was the least i could do."

"you find me," says sir leicester, whose eyes are much attracted
towards him, "far from well, george rouncewell."

"i am very sorry both to hear it and to see it, sir leicester."

"i am sure you are. no. in addition to my older malady, i have had a
sudden and bad attack. something that deadens," making an endeavour
to pass one hand down one side, "and confuses," touching his lips.

george, with a look of assent and sympathy, makes another bow. the
different times when they were both young men (the trooper much the
younger of the two) and looked at one another down at chesney wold
arise before them both a
 
 ___________________________
 
ed from these very rooms and
the tokens of whose recent presence are all here; thinking of the
master of the house upstairs and of the foreboding, "who will tell
him!" he looks here and looks there, and reflects how he might see
something now, which it would tax his boldness to walk up to, lay his
hand upon, and prove to be a fancy. but it is all blank, blank as the
darkness above and below, while he goes up the great staircase again,
blank as the oppressive silence.

"all is still in readiness, george rouncewell?"

"quite orderly and right, sir leicester."

"no word of any kind?"

the trooper shakes his head.

"no letter that can possibly have been overlooked?"

but he knows there is no such hope as that and lays his head down
without looking for an answer.

very familiar to him, as he said himself some hours ago, george
rouncewell lifts him into easier positions through the long remainder
of the blank wintry night, and equally familiar with his unexpressed
wish, extinguishes the light and undraws the 