 what she
founded her supposition.

"my dear miss summerson," she replied, "on mr. carstone's character
and conduct. he is of such a very easy disposition that probably he
would never think it worth-while to mention how he really feels, but
he feels languid about the profession. he has not that positive
interest in it which makes it his vocation. if he has any decided
impression in reference to it, i should say it was that it is a
tiresome pursuit. now, this is not promising. young men like mr.
allan woodcourt who take it from a strong interest in all that it can
do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work for a
very little money and through years of considerable endurance and
disappointment. but i am quite convinced that this would never be the
case with mr. carstone."

"does mr. badger think so too?" asked ada timidly.

"why," said mr. badger, "to tell the truth, miss clare, this view of
the matter had not occurred to me until mrs. badger mentioned it. but
when mrs. badger put it in
 
 ___________________________
 
 could readily understand!" no,
it was true. i did not understand it. not for many and many a day.

"take a fatherly good night, my dear," said he, kissing me on the
forehead, "and so to rest. these are late hours for working and
thinking. you do that for all of us, all day long, little
housekeeper!"

i neither worked nor thought any more that night. i opened my
grateful heart to heaven in thankfulness for its providence to me and
its care of me, and fell asleep.

we had a visitor next day. mr. allan woodcourt came. he came to take
leave of us; he had settled to do so beforehand. he was going to
china and to india as a surgeon on board ship. he was to be away a
long, long time.

i believe--at least i know--that he was not rich. all his widowed
mother could spare had been spent in qualifying him for his
profession. it was not lucrative to a young practitioner, with very
little influence in london; and although he was, night and day, at
the service of numbers of poor people and did wonders of gentlenes
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, and we stopped to look.

the gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking
good-humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing
about them as if they were glad to be in england again. "charley,
charley," said i, "come away!" and i hurried on so swiftly that my
little maid was surprised.

it was not until we were shut up in our cabin-room and i had had time
to take breath that i began to think why i had made such haste. in
one of the sunburnt faces i had recognized mr. allan woodcourt, and i
had been afraid of his recognizing me. i had been unwilling that he
should see my altered looks. i had been taken by surprise, and my
courage had quite failed me.

but i knew this would not do, and i now said to myself, "my dear,
there is no reason--there is and there can be no reason at all--why
it should be worse for you now than it ever has been. what you were
last month, you are to-day; you are no worse, you are no better. this
is not your resolution; call it up, esther, call it up!"
 
 ___________________________
 

direction, where he sees the solitary figure of a woman sitting on a
door-step. he walks that way. approaching, he observes that she has
journeyed a long distance and is footsore and travel-stained. she
sits on the door-step in the manner of one who is waiting, with her
elbow on her knee and her head upon her hand. beside her is a canvas
bag, or bundle, she has carried. she is dozing probably, for she
gives no heed to his steps as he comes toward her.

the broken footway is so narrow that when allan woodcourt comes to
where the woman sits, he has to turn into the road to pass her.
looking down at her face, his eye meets hers, and he stops.

"what is the matter?"

"nothing, sir."

"can't you make them hear? do you want to be let in?"

"i'm waiting till they get up at another house--a lodging-house--not
here," the woman patiently returns. "i'm waiting here because there
will be sun here presently to warm me."

"i am afraid you are tired. i am sorry to see you sitting in the
street."

"thank you, sir. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 getting along unseen that even the apparition of a stranger
in whole garments does not tempt him to look back. he shades his face
with his ragged elbow as he passes on the other side of the way, and
goes shrinking and creeping on with his anxious hand before him and
his shapeless clothes hanging in shreds. clothes made for what
purpose, or of what material, it would be impossible to say. they
look, in colour and in substance, like a bundle of rank leaves of
swampy growth that rotted long ago.

allan woodcourt pauses to look after him and note all this, with a
shadowy belief that he has seen the boy before. he cannot recall how
or where, but there is some association in his mind with such a form.
he imagines that he must have seen it in some hospital or refuge,
still, cannot make out why it comes with any special force on his
remembrance.

he is gradually emerging from tom-all-alone's in the morning light,
thinking about it, when he hears running feet behind him, and looking
round, sees the boy scour
 
 ___________________________
 
ink. he wos wery good to me, he wos; he
wos the only one i knowed to speak to, as ever come across my
crossing. it ain't wery likely i should want him to be inkwhiched. i
only wish i wos, myself. i don't know why i don't go and make a hole
in the water, i'm sure i don't."

he says it with such a pitiable air, and his grimy tears appear so
real, and he lies in the corner up against the hoarding so like a
growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produced there in
neglect and impurity, that allan woodcourt is softened towards him.
he says to the woman, "miserable creature, what has he done?"

to which she only replies, shaking her head at the prostrate figure
more amazedly than angrily, "oh, you jo, you jo. i have found you at
last!"

"what has he done?" says allan. "has he robbed you?"

"no, sir, no. robbed me? he did nothing but what was kind-hearted by
me, and that's the wonder of it."

allan looks from jo to the woman, and from the woman to jo, waiting
for one of them to unravel the riddle.


 
 ___________________________
 
ou home."

jo suddenly comes out of his resignation and excitedly declares,
addressing the woman, that he never known about the young lady, that
he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, that he
would sooner have hurt his own self, that he'd sooner have had his
unfortnet ed chopped off than ever gone a-nigh her, and that she wos
wery good to him, she wos. conducting himself throughout as if in his
poor fashion he really meant it, and winding up with some very
miserable sobs.

allan woodcourt sees that this is not a sham. he constrains himself
to touch him. "come, jo. tell me."

"no. i dustn't," says jo, relapsing into the profile state. "i
dustn't, or i would."

"but i must know," returns the other, "all the same. come, jo."

after two or three such adjurations, jo lifts up his head again,
looks round the court again, and says in a low voice, "well, i'll
tell you something. i was took away. there!"

"took away? in the night?"

"ah!" very apprehensive of being overheard, jo looks ab
 
 ___________________________
 
entive, and now rises and
takes it up. jo, repeating, "ony you tell the young lady as i never
went fur to hurt her and wot the genlmn ses!" nods and shambles and
shivers, and smears and blinks, and half laughs and half cries, a
farewell to her, and takes his creeping way along after allan
woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of the street. in
this order, the two come up out of tom-all-alone's into the broad
rays of the sunlight and the purer air.




chapter xlvii

jo's will


as allan woodcourt and jo proceed along the streets where the high
church spires and the distances are so near and clear in the morning
light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, allan revolves in
his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. "it surely is a
strange fact," he considers, "that in the heart of a civilized world
this creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of
than an unowned dog." but it is none the less a fact because of its
strangeness, and the difficulty remains.
 
 ___________________________
 

is then set before him, and he begins to gulp the coffee and to gnaw
the bread and butter, looking anxiously about him in all directions
as he eats and drinks, like a scared animal.

but he is so sick and miserable that even hunger has abandoned him.
"i thought i was amost a-starvin, sir," says jo, soon putting down
his food, "but i don't know nothink--not even that. i don't care for
eating wittles nor yet for drinking on 'em." and jo stands shivering
and looking at the breakfast wonderingly.

allan woodcourt lays his hand upon his pulse and on his chest. "draw
breath, jo!" "it draws," says jo, "as heavy as a cart." he might add,
"and rattles like it," but he only mutters, "i'm a-moving on, sir."

allan looks about for an apothecary's shop. there is none at hand,
but a tavern does as well or better. he obtains a little measure of
wine and gives the lad a portion of it very carefully. he begins to
revive almost as soon as it passes his lips. "we may repeat that
dose, jo," observes allan after watchin
 
 ___________________________
 
g him with his attentive face.
"so! now we will take five minutes' rest, and then go on again."

leaving the boy sitting on the bench of the breakfast-stall, with his
back against an iron railing, allan woodcourt paces up and down in
the early sunshine, casting an occasional look towards him without
appearing to watch him. it requires no discernment to perceive that
he is warmed and refreshed. if a face so shaded can brighten, his
face brightens somewhat; and by little and little he eats the slice
of bread he had so hopelessly laid down. observant of these signs of
improvement, allan engages him in conversation and elicits to his no
small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil, with all its
conseq
 
 ___________________________
 
n in her
disjointed manner on coming down in full array that general george,
whom she often calls upon, knows her dear fitz jarndyce and takes a
great interest in all connected with her, allan is induced to think
that they may be in the right way. so he tells jo, for his
encouragement, that this walking about will soon be over now; and
they repair to the general's. fortunately it is not far.

from the exterior of george's shooting gallery, and the long entry,
and the bare perspective beyond it, allan woodcourt augurs well. he
also descries promise in the figure of mr. george himself, striding
towards them in his morning exercise with his pipe in his mouth, no
stock on, and his muscular arms, developed by broadsword and
dumbbell, weightily asserting themselves through his light
shirt-sleeves.

"your servant, sir," says mr. george with a military salute.
good-humouredly smiling all over his broad forehead up into his crisp
hair, he then defers to miss flite, as, with great stateliness, and
at some leng
 
 ___________________________
 
ne of the humours he drives me into--he'd go down, sir!"

mr. george has been so excited that he finds it necessary to wipe his
forehead on his shirt-sleeve. even while he whistles his impetuosity
away with the national anthem, some involuntary shakings of his head
and heavings of his chest still linger behind, not to mention an
occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of his open shirt-collar,
as if it were scarcely open enough to prevent his being troubled by a
choking sensation. in short, allan woodcourt has not much doubt about
the going down of mr. tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

jo and his conductor presently return, and jo is assisted to his
mattress by the careful phil, to whom, after due administration of
medicine by his own hands, allan confides all needful means and
instructions. the morning is by this time getting on apace. he
repairs to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without
seeking rest, goes away to mr. jarndyce to communicate his discovery.

with him mr. jarn
 
 ___________________________
 
eak the awful monotony and save the
traveller from despair. mr snagsby puts up at one of these inky wells
and greets the stranger with his cough of general preparation for
business.

"you don't remember me, mr. snagsby?"

the stationer's heart begins to thump heavily, for his old
apprehensions have never abated. it is as much as he can do to
answer, "no, sir, i can't say i do. i should have considered--not to
put too fine a point upon it--that i never saw you before, sir."

"twice before," says allan woodcourt. "once at a poor bedside, and
once--"

"it's come at last!" thinks the afflicted stationer, as recollection
breaks upon him. "it's got to a head now and is going to burst!" but
he has sufficient presence of mind to conduct his visitor into the
little counting-house and to shut the door.

"are you a married man, sir?"

"no, i am not."

"would you make the attempt, though single," says mr. snagsby in a
melancholy whisper, "to speak as low as you can? for my little woman
is a-listening somewheres,
 
 ___________________________
 
s journey's end and drags over
stony ground. all round the clock it labours up the broken steps,
shattered and worn. not many times can the sun rise and behold it
still upon its weary road.

phil squod, with his smoky gunpowder visage, at once acts as nurse
and works as armourer at his little table in a corner, often looking
round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an encouraging
elevation of his one eyebrow, "hold up, my boy! hold up!" there, too,
is mr. jarndyce many a time, and allan woodcourt almost always, both
thinking, much, how strangely fate has entangled this rough outcast
in the web of very different lives. there, too, the trooper is a
frequent visitor, filling the doorway with his athletic figure and,
from his superfluity of life and strength, seeming to shed down
temporary vigour upon jo, who never fails to speak more robustly in
answer to his cheerful words.

jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and allan woodcourt, newly
arrived, stands by him, looking down upon his wa
 
 ___________________________
 


soothingly, like the gentle rustling of the leaves; and genially,
like the ripening weather; and radiantly and beneficently, like the
sunshine, he went on.

"understand me, my dear girl. i had no doubt of your being contented
and happy with me, being so dutiful and so devoted; but i saw with
whom you would be happier. that i penetrated his secret when dame
durden was blind to it is no wonder, for i knew the good that could
never change in her better far than she did. well! i have long been
in allan woodcourt's confidence, although he was not, until
yesterday, a few hours before you came here, in mine. but i would not
have my esther's bright example lost; i would not have a jot of my
dear girl's virtues unobserved and unhonoured; i would not have her
admitted on sufferance into the line of morgan ap-kerrig, no, not for
the weight in gold of all the mountains in wales!"

he stopped to kiss me on the forehead, and i sobbed and wept afresh.
for i felt as if i could not bear the painful delight of his p
 
 ___________________________
 
ell me what is the true legitimacy when
you shall have quite made up your mind on that subject.' why, honour
to her old welsh blood, my dear," cried my guardian with enthusiasm,
"i believe the heart it animates beats no less warmly, no less
admiringly, no less lovingly, towards dame durden than my own!"

he tenderly raised my head, and as i clung to him, kissed me in his
old fatherly way again and again. what a light, now, on the
protecting manner i had thought about!

"one more last word. when allan woodcourt spoke to you, my dear, he
spoke with my knowledge and consent--but i gave him no encouragement,
not i, for these surprises were my great reward, and i was too
miserly to part with a scrap of it. he was to come and tell me all
that passed, and he did. i have no more to say. my dearest, allan
woodcourt stood beside your father when he lay dead--stood beside
your mother. this is bleak house. this day i give this house its
little mistress; and before god, it is the brightest day in all my
life!"

h