 me now
that i can't help writing it; and there, plainly dressed in black and
sitting in an arm-chair at a table near the fire, was his lordship,
whose robe, trimmed with beautiful gold lace, was thrown upon another
chair. he gave us a searching look as we entered, but his manner was
both courtly and kind.

the gentleman in the bag wig laid bundles of papers on his lordship's
table, and his lordship silently selected one and turned over the
leaves.

"miss clare," said the lord chancellor. "miss ada clare?"

mr. kenge presented her, and his lordship begged her to sit down near
him. that he admired her and was interested by her even i could see
in a moment. it touched me that the home of such a beautiful young
creature should be represented by that dry, official place. the lord
high chancellor, at his best, appeared so poor a substitute for the
love and pride of parents.

"the jarndyce in question," said the lord chancellor, still turning
over leaves, "is jarndyce of bleak house."

"jarndyce of b
 
 ___________________________
 
nge.

a pause.

"young mr. richard carstone is present?" said the lord chancellor,
glancing towards him.

richard bowed and stepped forward.

"hum!" said the lord chancellor, turning over more leaves.

"mr. jarndyce of bleak house, my lord," mr. kenge observed in a low
voice, "if i may venture to remind your lordship, provides a suitable
companion for--"

"for mr. richard carstone?" i thought (but i am not quite sure) i
heard his lordship say in an equally low voice and with a smile.

"for miss ada clare. this is the young lady. miss summerson."

his lordship gave me an indulgent look and acknowledged my curtsy
very graciously.

"miss summerson is not related to any party in the cause, i think?"

"no, my lord."

mr. kenge leant over before it was quite said and whispered. his
lordship, with his eyes upon his papers, listened, nodded twice or
thrice, turned over more leaves, and did not look towards me again
until we were going away.

mr. kenge now retired, and richard with him, to where i was, 
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"sir."

"mr. vholes of symond's inn. my compliments. jarndyce and jarndyce.
glad to speak with him."

mr. guppy disappeared.

"you ask me what is this to you, mr. jarndyce. if you had perused
this document, you would have seen that it reduces your interest
considerably, though still leaving it a very handsome one, still
leaving it a very handsome one," said mr. kenge, waving his hand
persuasively and blandly. "you would further have seen that the
interests of mr. richard carstone and of miss ada clare, now mrs.
richard carstone, are very materially advanced by it."

"kenge," said my guardian, "if all the flourishing wealth that the
suit brought into this vile court of chancery could fall to my two
young cousins, i should be well contented. but do you ask me to
believe that any good is to come of jarndyce and jarndyce?"

"oh, really, mr. jarndyce! prejudice, prejudice. my dear sir, this is
a very great country, a very great country. its system of equity is a
very great system, a very great sy