 even have time to sweat or close your eyes.

he managed to laugh at his language, but it wasn't a real laugh and
nothing was destroyed by it.

if she would only let him, he would be glad to throw himself, no matter
what the cost. but she wouldn't have him. she didn't love him and he
couldn't further her career. she wasn't sentimental and she had no need
for tenderness, even if he were capable of it.

when he had finished dressing, he hurried out of the room. he had
promised to go to a party at claude estee's.


4


claude was a successful screen writer who lived in a big house that was
an exact reproduction of the old dupuy mansion near biloxi, mississippi.
when tod came up the walk between the boxwood hedges, he greeted him from
the enormous, two-story porch by doing the impersonation that went with
the southern colonial architecture. he teetered back and forth on his
heels like a civil war colonel and made believe he had a large belly.

he had no belly at all. he was a dried-up little man with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ad ever seen a cock fight and invited him to the garage for the next
night. a man from san diego was coming north with his birds to pit them
against miguel's.

when she turned to homer again, he leaned away as though she were going
to hit him. she flushed with shame at this and looked at tod to see if he
had noticed. the rest of the evening, she tried to be nice to homer. she
even touched him a little, straightening his collar and patting his hair
smooth. he beamed happily.


21


when tod told claude estee about the cock fight, he wanted to go with
him. they drove to homer's place together.

it was one of those blue and lavender nights when the luminous color
seems to have been blown over the scene with an air brush. even the
darkest shadows held some purple.

a car stood in the driveway of the garage with its headlights on. they
could see several men in the corner of the building and could hear their
voices. someone laughed, using only two notes, ha-ha and ha-ha, over and
over again.

tod steppe