strous.


2


the house he lived in was a nondescript affair called the san bernardino
arms. it was an oblong three stories high, the back and sides of which
were of plain, unpainted stucco, broken by even rows of unadorned
windows. the faï¿½ade was the color of diluted mustard and its windows, all
double, were framed by pink moorish columns which supported turnip-shaped
lintels.

his room was on the third floor, but he paused for a moment on the
landing of the second. it was on that floor that faye greener lived, in
208. when someone laughed in one of the apartments he started guiltily
and continued upstairs.

as he opened his door a card fluttered to the floor. "honest abe kusich,"
it said in large type, then underneath in smaller italics were several
endorsements, printed to look like press notices.

"...the lloyds of hollywood"--stanley rose.

"abe's word is better than morgan's bonds"--gail brenshaw.

on the other side was a penciled message:

"kingpin fourth, solitair sixth. you can make som
 
 ___________________________
 
took off his jacket and lay down on the bed.
through the window he could see a square of enameled sky and a spray of
eucalyptus. a light breeze stirred its long, narrow leaves, making them
show first their green side, then their silver one.

he began to think of "honest abe kusich" in order not to think of faye
greener. he felt comfortable and wanted to remain that way.

abe was an important figure in a set of lithographs called "the dancers"
on which tod was working. he was one of the dancers. faye greener was
another and her father, harry, still another. they changed with each
plate, but the group of uneasy people who formed their audience remained
the same. they stood staring at the performers in just the way that they
stared at the masqueraders on vine street. it was their stare that drove
abe and the others to spin crazily and leap into the air with twisted
backs like hooked trout.

despite the sincere indignation that abe's grotesque depravity aroused in
him, he welcomed his company. the lit
 
 ___________________________
 
, the san berdoo. i live there, so i ought to
know. the owner's strictly from hunger. come on, i'll get you fixed up
swell."

"i don't know, i..." tod began.

the dwarf bridled instantly, and appeared to be mortally offended.

"i suppose it ain't good enough for you. well, let me tell you something,
you..."

tod allowed himself to be bullied and went with the dwarf to pinyon
canyon. the rooms in the san berdoo were small and not very clean. he
rented one without hesitation, however, when he saw faye greener in the
hall.


3


tod had fallen asleep. when he woke again, it was after eight o'clock. he
took a bath and shaved, then dressed in front of the bureau mirror. he
tried to watch his fingers as he fixed his collar and tie, but his eyes
kept straying to the photograph that was pushed into the upper corner of
the frame.

it was a picture of faye greener, a still from a two-reel farce in which
she had worked as an extra. she had given him the photograph willingly
enough, had even autographed it in
 
 ___________________________
 
 a large, wild hand, "affectionately
yours, faye greener," but she refused his friendship, or, rather,
insisted on keeping it impersonal. she had told him why. he had nothing
to offer her, neither money nor looks, and she could only love a handsome
man and would only let a wealthy man love her. tod was a "good-hearted
man," and she liked "good-hearted men," but only as friends. she wasn't
hard-boiled. it was just that she put love on a special plane, where a
man without money or looks couldn't move.

tod grunted with annoyance as he turned to the pho
 
 ___________________________
 
erent rooms. in one of them he
found a large number of miniature dogs in a curio cabinet. there were
glass pointers, silver beagles, porcelain schnauzers, stone dachshunds,
aluminum bulldogs, onyx whippets, china bassets, wooden spaniels. every
recognized breed was represented and almost every material that could be
sculptured, cast or carved.

while he was admiring the little figures, he heard a girl singing. he
thought he recognized her voice and peeked into the hall. it was mary
dove, one of faye greener's best friends.

perhaps faye also worked for mrs. jenning. if so, for thirty dollars...

he went back to see the rest of the film.


6


tod's hope that he could end his trouble by paying a small fee didn't
last long. when he got claude to ask mrs. jenning about faye, that lady
said she had never heard of the girl. claude then asked her to inquire
through mary dove. a few days later she phoned him to say there was
nothing doing. the girl wasn't available.

tod wasn't really disappointed. he di
 
 ___________________________
 
e grocer had sent homer a bottle of port wine on approval and he went
to get it. he filled a tumbler half full and handed it to harry, who
drank it in small sips, making the faces that usually go with medicine.

speaking slowly, as though in great pain, he then asked homer to bring in
his sample case.

"it's on the doorstep. somebody might steal it. the greater part of my
small capital is invested in those cans of polish?"

when homer stepped outside to obey, he saw a girl near the curb. it was
faye greener. she was looking at the house.

"is my father in there?" she called out

"mr. greener?"

she stamped her foot.

"tell him to get a move on, damn it. i don't want to stay here all day."

"he's sick."

the girl turned away without giving any sign that she either heard or
cared.

homer took the sample case back into the house with him. he found harry
pouring himself another drink.

"pretty fair stuff," he said, smacking his lips over it. "pretty fair,
all right, all right. might i be so bold as to