 eyes closed and a
strange half-smile on her lips. despite the dreamy repose of her face,
her body is straining to hurl her along at top speed. the only
explanation for this contrast is that she is enjoying the release that
wild flight gives in much the same way that a game bird must when, after
hiding for several tense minutes, it bursts from cover in complete,
unthinking panic.


14


tod had other and more successful rivals than homer simpson. one of the
most important was a young man called earle shoop.

earle was a cowboy from a small town in arizona. he worked occasionally
in horse-operas and spent the rest of his time in front of a saddlery
store on sunset boulevard. in the window of this store was an enormous
mexican saddle covered with carved silver, and around it was arranged a
large collection of torture instruments. among other things there were
fancy, braided quirts, spurs with great spiked wheels, and double bits
that looked as though they could break a horse's jaw without trouble.

 
 ___________________________
 
 got a date. but you can come along."

"with earle?"

"yes, with earle," she repeated, mimicking his annoyance.

"no, thanks."

she misunderstood, perhaps on purpose, and said, "he'll treat this time."

earle was always broke and whenever tod went with them he was the one who
paid.

"that isn't it, and you damn well know it."

"oh, isn't it?" she asked archly, then, absolutely sure of herself,
added, "meet us at hodge's around five."

hodge's was the saddlery store. when tod got there, he found earle shoop
at his usual post, just standing and just looking at the sign across the
street. he had on his ten-gallon hat and his high-heeled boots. neatly
folded over his left arm was a dark gray jacket. his shirt was navy-blue
cotton with large polka dots, each the size of a dime. the sleeves of his
shirt were not rolled, but pulled to the middle of his forearm and held
there by a pair of fancy, rose armbands. his hands were the same clean
reddish tan as his face.

"lo, thar," was the way he returned tod
 
 ___________________________
 
ly and signaled the waiter to bring another round of
drinks.

the orchestra began to play and a man came over to ask faye to dance.
without saying a word to homer, she followed him to the floor.

"who's that?" homer asked, chasing them with his eyes.

tod made believe he knew and said that he had often seen him around the
san berdoo. his explanation satisfied homer, but at the same time set him
to thinking of something else. tod could almost see him shaping a
question in his head.

"do you know earle shoop?" homer finally asked. "yes."

homer then poured out a long, confused story about a dirty black hen. he
kept referring to the hen again and again, as though it were the one
thing he couldn't stand about earle and the mexican. for a man who was
incapable of hatred, he managed to draw a pretty horrible picture of the
bird.

"you never saw such a disgusting thing, the way it squats and turns its
head. the roosters have torn all the feathers off its neck and made its
comb all bloody and it has scab