 little figures, he heard a girl singing. he
thought he recognized her voice and peeked into the hall. it was mary
dove, one of faye greener's best friends.

perhaps faye also worked for mrs. jenning. if so, for thirty dollars...

he went back to see the rest of the film.


6


tod's hope that he could end his trouble by paying a small fee didn't
last long. when he got claude to ask mrs. jenning about faye, that lady
said she had never heard of the girl. claude then asked her to inquire
through mary dove. a few days later she phoned him to say there was
nothing doing. the girl wasn't available.

tod wasn't really disappointed. he didn't want faye that way, not at
least while he still had a. chance some other way. lately, he had begun
to think he had a good one. harry, her father, was sick and that gave him
an excuse for hanging around their apartment. he ran errands and kept the
old man company. to repay his kindness, she permitted him the intimacies
of a family friend. he hoped to deepen her g
 
 ___________________________
 
 and stumbled to
her bed. she was sobbing into a face towel.

he stood in the doorway, without knowing what to do or say. finally, he
went over to the bed and tried to comfort her. he patted her shoulder.

"you poor kid."

she was wearing a tattered, black lace negligee that had large rents in
it. when he leaned over her, he noticed that her skin gave off a warm,
sweet odor, like that of buck-wheat in flower.

he turned away and lit a cigarette. there was a knock on the door. when
he opened it, mary dove rushed past him to take faye in her arms.

mary also told faye to be brave. she phrased it differently than he had
done, however, and made it sound a lot more convincing.

"show some guts, kid. come on now, show some guts."

faye shoved her away and stood up. she took a few wild steps, then sat
down on the bed again.

"i killed him," she groaned.

mary and he both denied this emphatically.

"i killed him, i tell you! i did! i did!"

she began to call herself names. mary wanted to stop her, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he understood their sudden change to slang. it made them feel
worldly and realistic, and so more able to cope with serious things.

he knocked on the bathroom door.

"what do you want?" faye called out.

"listen, kid," he said, trying to imitate them. "why go on the turf? i
can get the dough."

"oh, yeah! no, thanks," faye said.

"but listen..." he began again.

"go peddle your tripe!" mary shouted.


17


on the day of harry's funeral tod was drunk: he hadn't seen faye since
she went off with mary dove, but he knew that he was certain to find her
at the undertaking parlor and he wanted to have the courage to quarrel
with her. he started drinking at lunch. when he got to holsepp's in the
late afternoon, he had passed the brave state and was well into the ugly
one.

he found harry in his box, waiting to be wheeled out for exhibition in
the adjoining chapel. the casket was open and the old man looked quite
snug. drawn up to a little below his shoulders and folded back to show
its fancy lining wa
 
 ___________________________
 
th. tod watched him
go around the showroom wiping off the samples.

"services have probably started," the man repeated with a wave at the
door.

tod understood this time and left. the only exit he could find led
through the chapel. the moment he entered it, mrs. johnson caught him and
directed him to a seat. he wanted badly to get away, but it was
impossible to do so without making a scene.

faye was sitting in the front row of benches, facing the pulpit. she had
the lee sisters on one side and mary dove and abe kusich on the other.
behind them sat the tenants of the san berdoo, occupying about six rows.
tod was alone in the seventh. after him were several empty rows and then
a scattering of men and women who looked very much out of place.

he turned in order not to see faye's jerking shoulders and examined the
people in the last rows. he knew their kind. while not torch-bearers
themselves, they would run behind the fire and do a great deal of the
shouting. they had come to see harry buried, ho
 
 ___________________________
 
 no sign. the attendants heard,
for it was their cue to trundle on harry in his box. mrs. johnson
followed close behind and saw to it that the casket was properly placed.
she raised her hand and bach was silenced in the middle of a phrase.

"will those of you who wish to view the deceased before the sermon please
step forward?" she called out.

only the gingos stood up immediately. they made for the coffin in a
group. mrs. johnson held them back and motioned for faye to look first.
supported by mary dove and the lee girls, she took a quick peek,
increased the tempo of her sobs for a moment, then hurried back to the
bench.

the gingos had their chance next. they leaned over the coffin and told
each other something in a series of thick, explosive gutturals. when they
tried to take another look, mrs. johnson herded them firmly to their
seats.

the dwarf sidled up to the box, made a play with his handkerchief and
retreated. when no one followed him, mrs. johnson lost patience, seeming
to take what 