 them except
that they had come to california to die.

he was determined to learn much more. they were the people he felt he
must paint. he would never again do a fat red barn, old stone wall or
sturdy nantucket fisherman. from the moment he had seen them, he had
known that, despite his race, training and heritage, neither winslow
homer nor thomas ryder could be his masters and he turned to goya and
daumier.

he had learned this just in time. during his last year in art school, he
had begun to think that he might give up painting completely. the
pleasures he received from the problems of composition and color had
decreased as his facility had increased and he had realized that he was
going the way of all his classmates, toward illustration or mere
handsomeness. when the hollywood job had come along, he had grabbed it
despite the arguments of his mends who were certain that he was selling
out and would never paint again.

he reached the end of vine street and began the climb into pinyon can
 
 ___________________________
 
yds of hollywood"--stanley rose.

"abe's word is better than morgan's bonds"--gail brenshaw.

on the other side was a penciled message:

"kingpin fourth, solitair sixth. you can make some real dough on those
nags."

after opening the window, he took off his jacket and lay down on the bed.
through the window he could see a square of enameled sky and a spray of
eucalyptus. a light breeze stirred its long, narrow leaves, making them
show first their green side, then their silver one.

he began to think of "honest abe kusich" in order not to think of faye
greener. he felt comfortable and wanted to remain that way.

abe was an important figure in a set of lithographs called "the dancers"
on which tod was working. he was one of the dancers. faye greener was
another and her father, harry, still another. they changed with each
plate, but the group of uneasy people who formed their audience remained
the same. they stood staring at the performers in just the way that they
stared at the masqueraders 
 
 ___________________________
 
oreover, the rent was high because it included police protection, a
service for which he had no need. he wanted to move, but inertia and the
fact that he didn't know where to go kept him in the chateau until he met
abe. the meeting was accidental.

he was on the way to his room late one night when he saw what he supposed
was a pile of soiled laundry lying in front of the door across the hall
from his own. just as he was passing it, the bundle moved and made a
peculiar noise. he struck a match, thinking it might be a dog wrapped in
a blanket. when the light flared up, he saw it was a tiny man.

the match went out and he hastily lit another. it was a male dwarf rolled
up in a woman's flannel bathrobe. the round thing at the end was his
slightly hydrocephalic head. a slow, choked snore bubbled from it.

the hall was cold and draughty. tod decided to wake the man and stirred
him with his toe. he groaned and opened his eyes.

"you oughtn't to sleep there."

"the hell you say," said the dwarf, c
 
 ___________________________
 
 instead of a crooked thorn stick, he
carried a rolled copy of the daily running horse.

"that's what i get for fooling with four-bit broads," he said by way of
greeting.

tod nodded and tried to concentrate on the green hat. his ready
acquiescence seemed to irritate the little man.

"no quiff can give abe kusich the fingeroo and get away with it," he said
bitterly. "not when i can get her leg broke for twenty bucks and i got
twenty."

he took out a thick billfold and shook it at tod.

"so she thinks she can give me the fingeroo, hah? well, let me tell..."

tod broke in hastily.

"you're right, mr. kusich."

the dwarf came over to where tod was sitting and for a moment tod thought
he was going to climb into his lap, but he only asked his name and shook
hands. the little man had a powerful grip.

"let me tell you something, hackett, if you hadn't come along, i'da broke
in the door. that dame thinks she can give me the fingeroo, but she's got
another thinkola coming. but thanks anyway."

"fo
 
 ___________________________
 
se tragopan is a greek word that means
pheasant."

the dwarf was far from satisfied.

"how do you know what it means? you ain't a greek?"

"no, but i know a few greek words."

"so you're a wise guy, hah, a know-it-all."

he took a short step forward, moving on his toes, an tod got set to block
a punch.

"a college man, hah? well, let me tell..."

his foot caught in the wrapper and he fell forward on his hands. he
forgot tod and cursed the bathrobe, then got started on the woman again.

"so she thinks she can give me the fingeroo."

he kept poking himself in the chest with his thumbs.

"who gave her forty bucks for an abortion? who? and another ten to go to
the country for a rest that time. to a ranch i sent her. and who got her
fiddle out of hock that time in santa monica? who?"

"that's right," tod said, getting ready to give him a quick shove through
the door.

but he didn't have to shove him. the little man suddenly darted out of
the room and ran down the hall, dragging the bathrobe aft
 
 ___________________________
 
gh the rack, he felt a tug at the
bottom of his jacket. it was abe kusich, the dwarf, again.

"how's things?" he demanded.

tod was surprised to find that he was just as truculentas as he had he
had been the other night. later, when he got to know him better, he
discovered that abe's pugnacity was often a joke. when he used it on his
friends, they played with him like one does with a growling puppy,
staving off his mad rushes and then baiting him to rush again.

"fair enough," tod said, "but i think i'll move."

he had spent most of sunday looking for a place to live and was full of
the subject. the moment he mentioned it, however, he knew that he had
made a mistake. he tried to end the matter by turning away, but the
little man blocked him. he evidently considered himself an expert on the
housing situation. after naming and discarding a dozen possibilities
without a word from tod, he finally hit on the san bernardino arms.

"that's the place for you, the san berdoo. i live there, so i oug
 
 ___________________________
 
g too startling.

"well, i wish we were going to a brothel this minute," she said. "i adore
them."

she turned to tod and fluttered her eyelids.

"don't you, mr. hackett?"

"that's right, joan darling," alice answered for him. "nothing like a
bagnio to set a fellow up. hair of the dog that bit you."

"how dare you insult me!"

she stood up and took tod's arm.

"convoy me over there."

she pointed to the group of men with whom claude was standing.

"for god's sake, convoy her," alice said. "she thinks they're telling
dirty stories."

mrs. schwartzen pushed right among them, dragging tod after her.

"are you talking smut?" she asked. "i adore smut." they all laughed
politely.

"no, shop," said someone.

"i don't believe it. i can tell from the beast in your voices. go ahead,
do say something obscene."

this time no one laughed.

tod tried to disengage her arm, but she kept a firm grip on it. there was
a moment of awkward silence, then the man she had interrupted tried to
make a fresh start.

 
 ___________________________
 
nd straight and it had an enormous, distended belly. its
hammerhead lay twisted to one side and from its mouth, which was set in
an agonized grin, hung a heavy, black tongue.

"isn't it marvelous!" exclaimed mrs. schwartzen, clapping her hands and
jumping up and down excitedly like a little girl.

"what's it made of?"

"then you weren't fooled? how impolite! it's rubber, of course. it cost
lots of money."

"but why?"

"'to amuse. we were looking at the pool one day and somebody, jerry
appis, i think, said that it needed a dead horse on the bottom, so alice
got one. don't you think it looks cute?"

"very."

"you're just an old meanie. think how happy the estees must feel, showing
it to people and listening to their merriment and their oh's and ah's of
unconfined delight."

she stood on the edge of the pool and "ohed and ahed" rapidly several
times in succession.

"is it still there?" someone called.

tod turned and saw two women and a man coming down the path.

"i think its belly's going to
 
 ___________________________
 
d made it impossible for her to get work. instead of
becoming an extra or a bit player like many other old stars, she had
shown excellent business sense and had opened a callhouse. she wasn't
vicious. far from it. she ran her business just as other women run
lending libraries, shrewdly and with taste.

none of the girls lived on the premises. you telephoned and she sent a
girl over. the charge was thirty dollars for a single night of sport and
mrs. jenning kept fifteen of it. some people might think that fifty per
cent is a high brokerage fee, but she really earned every cent of it.
there was a big overhead. she maintained a beautiful house for the girls
 to wait in and a car and a chauffeur to deliver them to the clients.

then, too, she had to move in the kind of society where she could make
the right contacts. after all, not every man can afford thirty dollars.
she permitted her girls to service only men of wealth and position, not
to say taste and discretion. she was so particular that
 
 ___________________________
 
ee the rest of the film.


6


tod's hope that he could end his trouble by paying a small fee didn't
last long. when he got claude to ask mrs. jenning about faye, that lady
said she had never heard of the girl. claude then asked her to inquire
through mary dove. a few days later she phoned him to say there was
nothing doing. the girl wasn't available.

tod wasn't really disappointed. he didn't want faye that way, not at
least while he still had a. chance some other way. lately, he had begun
to think he had a good one. harry, her father, was sick and that gave him
an excuse for hanging around their apartment. he ran errands and kept the
old man company. to repay his kindness, she permitted him the intimacies
of a family friend. he hoped to deepen her gratitude and make it serious.

apart from this purpose, he was interested in harry and enjoyed visiting
him. the old man was a clown and tod had all the painter's usual love of
clowns. but what was more important, he felt that his clownship wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ine, the orchestra blares loudly and
drowns him out. he is very patient and very brave. he begins again, but
the orchestra will not let him finish. the pain that almost, not quite,
thank god, crumples his stiff little figure would be unbearable if it
were not obviously make-believe. it is gloriously funny.

"the finale is superb. while the ling family flies through the air, mr.
greener, held to the ground by his sense of reality and his knowledge of
gravitation, tries hard to make the audience think that he is neither
surprised nor worried by the rocketing orientals. it's familiar stuff,
his hands signal, but his face denies this. as time goes on and no one is
hurt, he regains his assurance. the acrobats ignore him, so he ignores
the acrobats. his is the final victory; the applause is for him.

"my first thought was that some producer should put mr. greener into a
big revue against a background of beautiful girls and glittering
curtains. but my second was that this would be a mistake. i am
 
 ___________________________
 
 afraid
that mr. greener, like certain humble field plants which die when
transferred to richer soil, had better be left to bloom in vaudeville
against a background of ventriloquists and lady bicycle riders."

harry had more than a dozen copies of this article, several on rag paper.
after trying to get a job by inserting a small advertisement in variety
("...'some producer should put mr. greener into a big revue...' the
times"), he had come to hollywood, thinking to earn a living playing
comedy bits in films. there proved to be little demand for his talents,
however. as he himself put it, he "stank from hunger." to supplement his
meager income from the studios, he peddled silver polish which he made in
the bathroom of the apartment out of chalk, soap and yellow axle grease.
when faye wasn't at central casting, she took him around on his peddling
trips in her model t ford. it was on their last expedition together that
he had fallen sick.

it was on th
 
 ___________________________
 

eyes moved in a slow circle. on the floor was a litter of clothing,
newspapers, magazines, and bottles. miss martin was huddled up on a
corner of the bed. she was wearing a man's black silk dressing gown with
light blue cuffs and lapel facings. her close-cropped hair was the color
and texture of straw and she looked like a little boy. her youthfulness
was heightened by her blue button eyes, pink button nose and red button
mouth.

homer was too busy with his growing excitement to speak or even think. he
closed his eyes to tend it better, nursing carefully what he felt. he had
to be careful, for if he went too fast, it might wither and then he would
be cold again. it continued to grow.

"go away, please, i'm drunk," miss martin said.

homer neither moved nor spoke.

she suddenly began to sob. the coarse, broken sounds she made seemed to
come from her stomach. she buried her face in her hands and pounded the
floor with her feet.

homer's feelings were so intense that his head bobbed stiffly 
 
 ___________________________
 
he had finished it,
she went back to the living room and homer followed her.

harry still lay as they had left him, stretched out on the sofa. the
heavy noon-day sun hit directly on his face, beating down on him like a
club. he hardly felt its blows, however. he was busy with the stabbing
pain in his chest. he was so busy with himself that he had even stopped
trying to plan how to get money out of the big dope.

homer drew the window curtain to shade his face.

harry didn't even notice. he was thinking about death. faye bent over
him. he saw, from under his partially closed eyelids, that she expected
him to make a reassuring gesture. he refused. he examined the tragic
expression that she had assumed and didn't like it. in a serious moment
like this, her ham sorrow was insulting.

"speak to me, daddy," she begged.

she was baiting him without being aware of it.

"what the hell is this," he snarled, "a tom show?"

his sudden fury scared her and she straightened up with a jerk. he didn't
want
 
 ___________________________
 
 statement as though there were merit in being crazy.

"he's pretty sick," homer said, apologizing for her. "maybe he had a
sunstroke."

"no, he's crazy."

he put a plate of gingersnaps on the table and she ate them with her
second cup of coffee. the dainty crunching sound she made chewing
fascinated him.

when she remained quiet for several minutes, he turned from the sink to
see if anything was wrong. she was smoking a cigarette and seemed lost in
thought.

he tried to be gay.

"what are you thinking?" he said awkwardly, then felt foolish.

she sighed to show how dark and foreboding her thoughts were, but didn't
reply.

"i'll bet you would like some candy," homer said. "there isn't any in the
house, but i could call the drugstore and they'd send it right over. or
some ice cream?"

"no, thanks, please."

"it's no trouble."

"my father isn't really a peddler," she said, abruptly. "he's an actor.
i'm an actress. my mother was also an actress, a dancer. the theatre is
in our blood."

"i have
 
 ___________________________
 
it's my life. it's the only thing in the whole world that i want."

"it's good to know what you want. i used to be a bookkeeper in a hotel,
but..."

"if i'm not, i'll commit suicide."

she stood up and put her hands to her hair, opened her eyes wide and
frowned.

"i don't go to shows very often," he apologized, pushing the gingersnaps
toward her. "the lights hurt my eyes." she laughed and took a cracker.

"i'll get fat."

"oh, no."

"they say fat women are going to be popular next year. do you think so? i
don't. it's just publicity for mae west." he agreed with her.

she talked on and on, endlessly, about herself and about the picture
business. he watched her, but didn't listen, and whenever she repeated a
question in order to get a reply, he nodded his head without saying
anything.

his hands began to bother him. he rubbed them against the edge of the
table to relieve their itch, but it only stimulated them. when he clasped
them behind his back, the strain became intolerable. they were ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ittoon and made believe he was shifting a cud of tobacco from
cheek to cheek.

homer thought his mimicry funny.

"i'd be lonesome and scared living alone in a big house like this," harry
went on. "don't you ever get lonesome?"

homer looked at faye for his answer. she was frowning with annoyance.

"no," he said, to prevent harry from repeating the uncomfortable
question.

"no? well, that's fine."

he blew several smoke rings at the ceiling and watched their behavior
judiciously.

"did you ever think of taking boarders?" he asked.

"some nice, sociable folks, i mean. it'll bring in a little extra money
and make things more homey."

homer was indignant, but underneath his indignation lurked another idea,
a very exciting one. he didn't know what to say.

faye misunderstood his agitation.

"cut it out, dad," she exclaimed before homer could reply. "you've been a
big enough nuisance already."

"just chinning," he protested innocently. "just chewin' the fat."

"well, then, let's get going," she 
 
 ___________________________
 
d. but in
homer's case it would be like dropping a spark into a barn full of hay.
he had escaped in the romola martin incident, but he wouldn't escape
again. then, for one thing, he had had his job in the hotel, a daily
all-day task that protected him by tiring him, but now he had nothing.

his thoughts frightened him and he bolted into the house, hoping to leave
them behind like a hat. he ran into his bedroom and threw himself down on
the bed. he was simple enough to believe that people don't think while
asleep.

in his troubled state, even this delusion was denied him and he was
unable to fall asleep. he closed his eyes and tried to make himself
drowsy. the approach to sleep which had once been automatic had somehow
become a long, shining tunnel. sleep was at the far end of it, a soft bit
of shadow in the hard glare. he couldn't run, only crawl toward the black
patch. just as he was about to give up, habit came to his rescue. it
collapsed the shining tunnel and hurled him into the shadow
 
 ___________________________
 
.

when he awoke it was without a struggle. he tried to fall asleep once
more, but this time couldn't even find the tunnel. he was thoroughly
awake. he tried to think of how very tired he was, but he wasn't tired.
he felt more alive than he had at any time since romola martin.

outside a few birds still sang intermittently, starting and breaking off,
as though sorry to acknowledge the end of another day. he thought that he
heard the lisp of silk against silk, but it was only the wind playing in
the trees. how empty the house was! he tried to fill it by singing.

"oh, say can you see,
by the dawn's early light..."

it was the only song he knew. he thought of 
 
 ___________________________
 
how falls sick. it was a familiar version of the cinderella
theme, but her technique was much different from the one she had used for
the south sea tale. although the events she described were miraculous,
her description of them was realistic. the effect was similar to that
obtained by the artists of the middle ages, who, when doing a subject
like the raising of lazarus from the dead or christ walking on water,
were careful to keep all the details intensely realistic. she, like them,
seemed to think that fantasy could be made plausible by a humdrum
technique.

"i like that one, too," he said when she had finished.

"think them over and do the one that has the best chance."

she was dismissing him and if he didn't act at once the opportunity would
be gone. he started to lean toward her, but she caught his meaning and
stood up. she took his arm with affectionate brusqueness--they were now
business partners--and guided him to the door.

in the hall, when she thanked him for coming down and ap
 
 ___________________________
 
ologized for
having disturbed him, he tried again. she seemed to melt a little and he
reached for her. she kissed him willingly enough, but when he tried to
extend the caress, she tore free.

"whoa there, palsy-walsy," she laughed. "mamma spank." he started for the
stairs.

"good-bye now," she called after him, then laughed again.

he barely heard her. he was thinking of the drawings he had made of her
and of the new one he would do as soon as he got to his room.

in "the burning of los angeles" faye is the naked girl in the left
foreground being chased by the group of men and women who have separated
from the main body of the mob. one of the women is about to hurl a rock
at her to bring her down. she is running with her eyes closed and a
strange half-smile on her lips. despite the dreamy repose of her face,
her body is straining to hurl her along at top 
 
 ___________________________
 
speed. the only
explanation for this contrast is that she is enjoying the release that
wild flight gives in much the same way that a game bird must when, after
hiding for several tense minutes, it bursts from cover in complete,
unthinking panic.


14


tod had other and more successful rivals than homer simpson. one of the
most important was a young man called earle shoop.

earle was a cowboy from a small town in arizona. he worked occasionally
in horse-operas and spent the rest of his time in front of a saddlery
store on sunset boulevard. in the window of this store was an enormous
mexican saddle covered with carved silver, and around it was arranged a
large collection of torture instruments. among other things there were
fa
 
 ___________________________
 
after tod arrived a third man came along. he made a thorough
examination of the merchandise in the window, then turned and began to
stare across the street like the other two.

he was middle-aged and looked like an exercise boy from a racing stable.
his face was completely covered with a fine mesh of wrinkles, as though
he had been sleeping with it pressed against a roll of rabbit wire. he
was very shabby and had probably sold his big hat, but he still had his
boots.

"lo, boys," he said.

"lo, hink," said the man with the paper valise.

tod didn't know whether he was included in the greeting, but took a
chance and replied.

"howdy."

hink prodded the valise with his toe.

"coin' some place, calvin?" he asked.

"azusa, there's a rodeo."

"who's running it?"

"a fellow calls himself 'badlands jack.'"

"that grifter!...you goin', earle?"

"nope."

"i gotta eat," said calvin.

hink carefully considered all the information he had received before
speaking again.

"mono's makin' a new buck steve
 
 ___________________________
 
ns," he said. "will ferris told me they'd
use more than forty riders."

calvin turned and looked up at earle.

"still got the piebald vest?" he asked slyly.

"why?"

"it'll cinch you a job as a road agent."

tod understood that this was a joke of some sort because calvin and hink
chuckled and slapped their thighs loudly while earle frowned.

there was another long silence, then calvin spoke again. "ain't your old
man still got some cows?" he asked earle. but earle was wary this time
and refused to answer. calvin winked at tod, slowly and elaborately,
contorting one whole side of his face.

"that's right, earle," hink said. "your old man's still got some stock.
why don't you go home?"

they couldn't get a rise out of earle, so calvin answered the question.

"he dassint. 
 
 ___________________________
 
he got caught in a sheep car with a pair of rubber boots on."

it was another joke. calvin and hink slapped their thighs and laughed,
but tod could see that they were waiting for something else. earle,
suddenly, without even shifting his weight, shot his foot out and kicked
calvin solidly in the rump. this was the real point of the joke. they
were delighted by earle's fury. tod also laughed. the way earle had gone
from apathy to action without the usual transition was funny. the
seriousness of his violence was even funnier.

a little while later, faye drove by in her battered ford touring car
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
pulled into the curb some twenty feet away. calvin and hink waved, but
earle didn't budge. he took his time, as befitted his dignity. not until
she tooted her horn did he move. tod followed a short distance behind
him.

"hi, cowboy," said faye gaily.

"lo, honey," he drawled, removing his hat carefully and replacing it with
even greater care. faye smiled at tod and motioned for them both to climb
in. tod got in the back. earle unfolded the jacket he was carrying,
slapped it a few times to remove the wrinkles, then put it on and
adjusted its collar and s
 
 ___________________________
 
 turned from ivory to
rose. she kept reaching for his cigarettes.

earle's features were hidden in the shadow of his big hat, but the
mexican sat full in the light of the fire. his skin glowed and the oil in
his black curls sparkled. he kept smiling at faye in a manner that tod
didn't like. the more he drank, the less he liked it.

faye kept crowding tod, so he left the box to sit on the ground where he
could watch her better. she was smiling back at the mexican. she seemed
to know what he was thinking and to be thinking the same thing. earle,
too, became aware of what was passing between them. tod heard him curse
softly and saw him lean forward into the light and pick up a thick piece
of firewood.

mig laughed guiltily and began to sing.

"las palmeras lloran por to ausencia,
las laguna se seco--ay!
la cerca de alambre que estaba en
el patio tambien se cayo!"

his voice was a plaintive tenor and it turned revolutionary song into a
sentimental lament, sweet cloying. faye joined in when he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ercise had driven most of the heat
out of his blood, but enough remained to make him tingle pleasantly. he
felt comfortably relaxed, even happy.

somewhere farther up the hill a bird began to sing. he listened. at first
the low rich music sounded like water dripping on something hollow, the
bottom of a silver pot perhaps, then like a stick dragged slowly over the
strings of a harp. he lay quietly, listening.

when the bird grew silent, he made an effort to put faye out of his mind
and began to think about the series of cartoons he was making for his
canvas of los angeles on fire. he was going to show the city burning at
high noon, so that the flames would have to compete with the desert sun
and thereby appear less fearful, more like bright flags flying from roofs
and windows than a terrible holocaust. he wanted the city to have quite a
gala air as it burned, to appear almost gay. and the people who set it on
fire would be a holiday crowd.

the bird began to sing again. when it stopped, fay
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. johnson said, counting one with the thumb of her
right hand on the index finger of her left, "first, i want you to
understand that my sole desire in this matter is to help you."

she looked hard at mary, then at tod.

"i don't get anything out of it, and it's just a lot of trouble."

"yes," faye said.

"all right. there are several things i have to know, if i'm to help you.
did the deceased leave any money or insurance?"

"no."

"have you any money?"

"no."

"can you borrow any?"

"i don't think so."

mrs. johnson sighed.

"then the city will have to bury him."

faye didn't comment.

"don't you understand, child, the city will have to bury him in a
pauper's grave?"

she put so much contempt into "city" and horror into "pauper" that faye
flushed and began to sob again.

mrs. johnson made as though to walk out, even took several steps in the
direction of the door, then changed her mind and came back.

"how much does a funeral cost?" faye asked.

"two hundred dollars. but you can pay on t
 
 ___________________________
 
expenses. i'll go ahead and take care of everything. mr.
holsepp will bury your father. he'll do it right."

she shook hands with faye, as though she were congratulating her, and
hurried out of the room.

mrs. johnson's little business talk had apparently done faye some good.
her lips were set and her eyes dry. "don't worry," tod said. "i can raise
the money."

"no, thanks," she said.

mary opened her purse and took out a roll of bills. "here's some."

"no," she said, pushing it away.

she sat thinking for a while, then went to the dressing table and began
to fix her tear-stained face. she wore a hard smile as she worked.
suddenly she turned, lipstick in air, and spoke to mary.

"can you get me into mrs. jenning's?"

"what for?" tod demanded. "i'll get the money." both girls ignored him.

"sure," said mary, "you ought to done that long ago. it's a soft touch."

faye laughed.

"i was saving it."

the change that had come over both of them startled tod. they had
suddenly become very tough.


 
 ___________________________
 
o answer. he had seen faye pass the
door on the arm of one of the lee sisters. when he caught up with her, he
didn't know what to say. she misunderstood his agitation and was touched.
she sobbed a little for him.

she had never looked more beautiful. she was wearing a new, very tight
black dress and her platinum hair was tucked up in a shining bun under a
black straw sailor. ever so often, she carried a tiny lace handkerchief
to her eyes and made it flutter there for a moment. but all he could
think of was that she had earned the money for her outfit on her back.

she grew uneasy under his stare and started to edge away. he caught her
arm.

"may i speak with you for a minute, alone?"

miss lee took the hint and left.

"what is it?" faye asked.

"not here," he whispered, making mystery out of his uncertainty,

he led her along the hall until he found an empty showroom. on the walls
were framed photographs of important funerals and on little stands and
tables were samples of coffin materials
 
 ___________________________
 
flight of baroque palace stairs
that started in a bed of weeds and ended against the branches of an oak,
part of the fourteenth street elevated station, a dutch windmill, the
bones of a dinosaur, the upper half of the merrimac, a corner of a mayan
temple, until he finally reached the road.

he was out of breath. he sat down under one of the poplars on a rock made
of brown plaster and took off his jacket. there was a cool breeze blowing
and he soon felt more comfortable.

he had lately begun to think not only of goya and daumier but also of
certain italian artists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, of
salvator rosa, francesco guardi and monsu desiderio, the painters of
decay and mystery. looking downhill now, he could see compositions that
might have actually been arranged from the calabrian work of rosa. there
were partially demolished buildings and broken monuments, half-hidden by
great, tortured trees, whose exposed roots writhed dramatically in the
arid ground, and by shrubs t
 
 ___________________________
 
lothes. they didn't eat lunch on account of her figure, but usually had
dinner out and went to the movies. "then, ice cream sodas," homer
finished for her, as he came out of the kitchen.

faye laughed and excused herself. they were going to a picture and she
wanted to change her dress. when she had left, homer suggested that they
get some air in the patio. he made tod take the deck chair while he sat
on an upturned orange crate.

if he had been careful and had acted decently, tod couldn't help
thinking, she might be living with him. he was at least better looking
than homer. but then there was her other prerequisite. homer had an
income and lived in a house, while he earned thirty dollars a week and
lived in a furnished room.

the happy grin on homer's face made him feel ashamed of himself. he was
being unfair. homer was a humble, grateful man who would never laugh at
her, who was incapable of laughing at anything. because of this great
quality, she could live with him on what she consider
 
 ___________________________
 
ed a much higher
plane.

"what's the matter?" homer asked softly, laying one of his heavy hands on
tod's knee.

"nothing. why?"

tod moved so that the hand slipped off.

"you were making faces."

"i was thinking of something."

"oh," homer said sympathetically.

tod couldn't resist asking an ugly question.

"when are you two getting married?"

homer looked hurt.

"didn't faye tell about us?"

"yes, sort of."

"it's a business arrangement."

"yes?"

to make tod believe it, he poured out a long, disjointed argument, the
one he must have used on himself. he even went further than the business
part and claimed that they were doing it for poor harry's sake. faye had
nothing left in the world except her c
 
 ___________________________
 
tod, and the
child repeated his bow and heel-click. "well, we've got to go," she said.

tod watched the child, who was standing a little to one side of his
mother and making faces at homer. he rolled his eyes back in his head so
that only the whites showed and twisted his lips in a snarl.

mrs. loomis noticed tod's glance and turned sharply. when she saw what
adore was doing, she yanked him by the arm, jerking him clear off the
ground.

"adore!" she yelled.

to tod she said apologetically, "he thinks he's the frankenstein
monster."

she picked the boy up, hugging and kissing him ardently. then she set him
down again and fixed his rumpled clothing.

"won't adore sing something for us?" tod asked. "no," the little boy said
sharply.

"adore," his mother scolded, "sing at once."

"that's all right, if he doesn't feel like it," homer said. but mrs.
loomis was determined to have him sing. she could never permit him to
refuse an audience.

"sing, adore," she repeated with quiet menace. "sing 'mam
 
 ___________________________
 
possible not to
relent, so she patted his shoulder.

"what a hick," she said.

he grinned gratefully and signaled the waiter to bring another round of
drinks.

the orchestra began to play and a man came over to ask faye to dance.
without saying a word to homer, she followed him to the floor.

"who's that?" homer asked, chasing them with his eyes.

tod made believe he knew and said that he had often seen him around the
san berdoo. his explanation satisfied homer, but at the same time set him
to thinking of something else. tod could almost see him shaping a
question in his head.

"do you know earle shoop?" homer finally asked. "yes."

homer then poured out a long, confused story about a dirty black hen. he
kept referring to the hen again and again, as though it were the one
thing he couldn't stand about earle and the mexican. for a man who was
incapable of hatred, he managed to draw a pretty horrible picture of the
bird.

"you never saw such a disgusting thing, the way it squats and turns it
 
 ___________________________
 
ad wearily, as though he could smell and taste her.

faye was coming back. homer saw that tod was going to speak to her about
earle and the mexican and signaled desperately for him not to do it. she,
however, caught him at it and was curious.

"what have you guys been chinning about?"

"you, darling," tod said. "homer has a t.l. for you."

"tell me, homer."

"no, first you tell me one."

"well, the man i just danced with asked me if you were a movie big shot."

tod saw that homer was unable to think of a return compliment so he spoke
for him.

"i said you were the most beautiful girl in the place."

"yes," homer agreed. "that's what tod said."

"i don't believe it. tod hates me. and anyway, i caught you telling him
to keep quiet. you were shushing him." she laughed.

"i bet i know what you were talking about." she mimicked homer's excited
disgust. "'that dirty black hen, she's all over scabs and almost naked.'"

homer laughed apologetically, but tod was angry. "what's the idea of
keeping t
 
 ___________________________
 
t the end of every stanza,
she shifted to an added minor.

"i'm the queen of everything,
gotta be high before i can swing,
light a tea and let it be,
if you're a viper--a vi-paah."

"she sings very pretty," homer said.

"she's drunk."

"i don't know what to do, tod," homer complained. "she's drinking an
awful lot lately. it's that earle. we used to have a lot of fun before be
came, but now we don't have any fun any more since he started to hang
around."

"why don't you get rid of him?"

"i was thinking about what you said about the license to keep chickens."

tod understood what he wanted.

"i'll report them to the board of health tomorrow."

homer thanked him, then insisted on explaining in detail why he couldn't
do it himself.391

"but that'll only get rid of the mexican," tod said. "you'll have to
throw earle out yourself."

"maybe he'll go with his friend?"

tod knew that homer was begging him to agree so that he could go on
hoping, but he refused.

"not a chance. you'll have to throw 
 
 ___________________________
 
 before the alarm clock rang.
he knew that something had happened, but he didn't know what until he
heard a noise in faye's room. it was a moan and he thought he was
dreaming, but he heard it again. sure enough, faye was moaning all right.
he thought she must be sick. she moaned again like in pain. he got out of
bed and went to her door and knocked and asked if she was sick. she
didn't answer and the moaning stopped so he went back to bed. a little
later, she moaned again so he got out of bed, thinking she might want the
hot water bottle or some aspirin and a drink of water or something and
knocked on her door again, only meaning to help her. she heard him and
said something. he didn't understand what but he thought she meant for
him to go in. lots of times when she had a headache he brought her an
aspirin and a glass of water in the middle of the night the door wasn't
locked. you'd have thought she would have locked the door because the
mexican was in bed with her, both of them naked and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ught so desperately against being
evicted when the nine months' lease was up.

tod crushed his cigarette. he was hungry and wanted his dinner, also a
double scotch and soda. after he had eaten, he would come back and see
how homer was. if he was still asleep, he would try to wake him. if he
couldn't, he might call a doctor.

he took another look at him, then tiptoed out of the cottage, shutting
the door carefully.


26


tod didn't go directly to dinner. he went first to hodge's saddlery store
thinking he might be able to find out something about earle and through
him about faye. calvin was standing there with a wrinkled indian who had
long hair held by a bead strap around his forehead. hanging over the
indian's chest was a sandwich board that read--

tuttle's trading post
for
genuine relics of the old west
beads, silver, jewelry, moccasins,
dolls, toys, rare books, postcards.
take back a souvenir
from
tuttle's trading post

calvin was always friendly.

"'lo, char," he called out, when tod
 
 ___________________________
 
hough
he were enjoying himself, tod finally managed to break into the open.
after rearranging his clothes, he went over to a parking lot and sat down
on the retaining wall that ran along the front of it.

new groups, whole families, kept arriving. he could see a change come
over them as soon as they had become part of the crowd. until they
reached the line, they looked difficult, almost furtive, but the moment
they had become part of it, they turned arrogant and pugnacious. it was a
mistake to think them harmless curiosity seekers. they were savage and
bitter, especially the middle-aged and the old, and had been made so by
boredom and disappointment.

all their lives they had slaved at some kind of dull, heavy labor, behind
desks and counters, in the fields and at tedious machines of all sorts,
saving their pennies and dreaming of the leisure that would be theirs
when they had enough. finally that day came. they could draw a weekly
income of ten or fifteen dollars. where else should they g
 
 ___________________________
 
efore homer could repeat the shout, he jumped away. it would be
extremely embarrassing if homer shouted thief in front of a cop. he
thought of phoning for an ambulance. but then, after all, how could he be
sure that homer was crazy? he was sitting quietly on the bench, minding
his own business.

tod decided to wait, then try again to get him into a cab. the crowd was
growing in size all the time, but it would be at least half an hour
before it over-ran the bench. before that happened, he would think of
some plan. he moved a short distance away and stood with his back to a
store window so that he could watch homer without attracting attention.

about ten feet from where homer was sitting grew a large eucalyptus tree
and behind the trunk of 'the tree was a little boy. tod saw him peer
around it with great caution, then suddenly jerk his head back. a minute
later he repeated the maneuver. at first tod thought he was playing hide
and seek, then noticed that he had a string in his hand which wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s
attached to an old purse that lay in front of homer's bench. every once
in a while the child would jerk the string, making the purse hop like a
sluggish toad. its torn lining hung from its iron mouth like a furry
tongue and a few uncertain flies hovered over it.

tod knew the game the child was playing. he used to play it himself when
he was small. if homer reached to pick up the purse, thinking there was
money in it, he would yank it away and scream with laughter.

when tod went over to the tree, he was surprised to discover that it was
adore loomis, the kid who lived across the street from homer. tod tried
to chase him, but he dodged around the tree, thumbing his nose. he gave
up and went back to his original position. the moment he left, adore got
busy with his purse again. homer wasn't paying any attention to the
child, so tod decided to let him alone.

mrs. loomis must be somew
 
 ___________________________
 
until he was slammed against the
base of an iron rail which fenced the driveway of the theatre from the
street. he had the wind knocked out of him by the impact, but managed to
cling to the rail. he held on desperately, fighting to keep from being
sucked back. a woman caught him around the waist and tried to hang on.
she was sobbing rhythmically. tod felt his fingers slipping from the rail
and kicked backwards as hard as he could. the woman let go.

despite the agony in his leg, he was able to think clearly about his
picture, "the burning of los angeles." after his quarrel with faye, he
had worked on it continually to escape tormenting himself, and the way to
it in his mind had become almost automatic.

as he stood on his good leg, clinging desperately to the iron rail, he
could see all the rough charcoal strokes with which he had blocked it out
on the big canvas. across the top, parallel with the frame, he had drawn
the burning city, a great bonfire of architectural styles, ranging from
e