 tod met homer for
the first time. he was keeping the old man company when their
conversation was interrupted by a light knock on the apartment door. tod
answered it and found a man standing in the hall with flowers for faye
and a bottle of port wine for her father.

tod examined him eagerly. he didn't mean to be rude but at first glance
this man seemed an exact model for the kind of person who comes to
california to die, perfect in every detail down to fever eyes and unruly
hands.

"my name is homer simpson," the man gasped, then shifted uneasily and
patted his perfectly dry forehead with a folded handkerchief.

"won't you come in?" tod asked.

he shook his head heavily and thrust the wine and flowers at tod. before
tod could say anything, he had lumbered off.

tod saw that he was mistaken. homer simpson was only physically the type.
the men he meant were not shy.

he took the gifts in to harry, who didn't seem at all surprised. he said
homer was one of his grateful customers.

"that miracle polis
 
 ___________________________
 
to hurl a rock
at her to bring her down. she is running with her eyes closed and a
strange half-smile on her lips. despite the dreamy repose of her face,
her body is straining to hurl her along at top speed. the only
explanation for this contrast is that she is enjoying the release that
wild flight gives in much the same way that a game bird must when, after
hiding for several tense minutes, it bursts from cover in complete,
unthinking panic.


14


tod had other and more successful rivals than homer simpson. one of the
most important was a young man called earle shoop.

earle was a cowboy from a small town in arizona. he worked occasionally
in horse-operas and spent the rest of his time in front of a saddlery
store on sunset boulevard. in the window of this store was an enormous
mexican saddle covered with carved silver, and around it was arranged a
large collection of torture instruments. among other things there were
fancy, braided quirts, spurs with great spiked wheels, and double bits
that loo
 
 ___________________________
 
at his office, he found faye waiting to see him. she
hadn't been in the battle. at the last moment, the director bad decided
not to use any vivandiï¿½res.

to his surprise, she greeted him with warm friendliness. nevertheless, he
tried to apologize for his behavior in the funeral parlor. he had hardly
started before she interrupted him. she wasn't angry, but grateful for
his lecture on venereal disease. it had brought her to her senses.

she had still another surprise for him. she was living in homer simpson's
house. the arrangement was a business one. homer had agreed to board and
dress her until she became a star. they were keeping a record of every
cent he spent and as soon as she clicked in pictures, she would pay him
back with six per cent interest. to make it absolutely legal, they were
going to have a lawyer draw up a contract.

she pressed tod for an opinion and he said it was a splendid idea. she
thanked him and invited him to dinner for the next night.

after she had gone, he wondered wha
 
 ___________________________
 
ner," homer said.

the woman came into the yard from around the corner of the garage.
she was eager and plump and very american.

"have you seen my little boy?" she asked, making a gesture of
helplessness. "adore's such a wanderer."

homer surprised tod by standing up and smiling at the woman. faye had
certainly helped his timidity.

"is your son lost?" homer said.

"oh, no--just hiding to tease me."

she held out her hand.

"we're neighbors. i'm maybelle loomis."

"glad to know you, ma'am. i'm homer simpson and this is mr. hackett."

tod also shook hands with her.

"have you been living here long?" she asked. "no. i've just come from the
east," homer said.

"oh, have you? i've been here ever since mr. loomis passed on six years
ago. i'm an old settler."

"you like it then?" tod asked.

"like california?" she laughed at the idea that anyone might not like it.
"why, it's a paradise on earth!"

"yes," homer agreed gravely.

"and anyway," she went on, "i have to live here on account of adore."

"is he