ooled no one, but then he didn't intend it to fool anyone.
his slyness was of a different sort.

on the stage he was a complete failure and knew it. yet he claimed to
have once come very close to success. to prove how close, he made tod
read an old clipping from the theatrical section of the sunday times.

"bedraggled harlequin," it was headed.

"the commedia del arte is not dead, but lives on in brooklyn, or was
living there last week on the stage of the oglethorpe theatre in the
person of one harry greener. mr. greener is of a troupe called 'the
flying lings,' who, by the time this reaches you, have probably moved on
to mystic, connecticut, or some other place more fitting than the borough
of large families. if you have the time and really love the theatre, by
all means seek out the lings wherever they may be.

"mr. greener, the bedraggled harlequin of our caption, is not bedraggled
but clean, neat and sweet when he first comes on. by the time the lings,
four muscular orientals, finish with him, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 rang. he opened it and
found a man standing on the step with a sample case in one hand and a
derby hat in the other. homer hurriedly shut the door again.

the bell continued to ring. he put his head out of the window nearest the
door to order the fellow away, but the man bowed very politely and begged
for a drink of water. homer saw that he was old and tired and thought
that he looked harmless. he got a bottle of water from the icebox, then
opened the door and asked him in.

"the name, sir, is harry greener," the man announced in sing-song,
stressing every other syllable.

homer handed him a glass of water. he swallowed it quickly, then poured
himself another.

"much obliged," he said with an elaborate bow. "that was indeed
refreshing."

homer was astonished when he bowed again, did several quick jig steps,
then let his derby hat roll down his arm. it fell to the floor. he
stooped to retrieve it, straightening up with a jerk as though he had
been kicked, then rubbed the seat of his trousers rueful
 
 ___________________________
 
o cans."

harry had his man where he wanted him. he began to practice a variety of
laughs, all of them theatrical, like a musician tuning up before a
concert. he finally found the right one and let himself go. it was a
victim's laugh.

"please stop," homer said.

but harry couldn't stop. he was really sick. the last block that held him
poised over the runway of self-pity had been knocked away and he was
sliding down the chute, gaining momentum all the time. he jumped to his
feet and began doing harry greener, poor harry, honest harry,
well-meaning, humble, deserving, a good husband, a model father, a
faithful christian, a loyal friend.

homer didn't appreciate the performance in the least. he was terrified
and wondered whether to phone the police. but he did nothing. he just
held up his hand for harry to stop.

at the end of his pantomime, harry stood with his head thrown back,
clutching his throat, as though waiting for the curtain to fall. homer
poured him still another glass of water. but harry 
 
 ___________________________
 
uppermost in his mind. he
bathed, ate breakfast and sat in his deck chair. in the afternoon, he
decided to go for a walk. there was only one way for him to go and that
led past the san bernardino apartments.

some time during his long sleep he had given up the battle. when he came
to the apartment house, he peered into the amber-lit hallway and read the
greener card on the letter box, then turned and went home. on the next
night, he repeated the trip, carrying a gift of flowers and wine.


13


harry greener's condition didn't improve. he remained' in bed, staring at
the ceiling with his hands folded on his chest.

tod went to see him almost every night. there were usually other guests.
sometimes abe kusich, sometimes anna and annabelle lee, a sister act of
the nineteen-tens, more often the four gingos, a family of performing
eskimos from point barrow, alaska.

if harry were asleep or there were visitors, faye usually invited tod
into her room for a talk. his interest in her grew despite the things