ob in a lower
key, almost a coo, and rocked herself back and forth.

"poor papa...poor darling..."

the fun they used to have together when she was little. no matter how
hard up he was, he always bought her dolls and candy, and no matter how
tired, he always played with her. she used to ride piggy-back and they
would roll on the floor and laugh and laugh.

mary's sobs made faye speed up her own and they both began to get out of
hand.

there was a knock on the door. tod answered it and found mrs. johnson,
the janitress. faye shook her head for him not to let her in.

"come back later," tod said.

he shut the door in her face. a minute later it opened again and mrs.
johnson entered boldly. she had used a pass-key.

"get out," he said.

she tried to push past him, but he held her until faye told him to let
her go.

he disliked mrs. johnson intensely. she was an officious, bustling woman
with a face like a baked apple, soft and blotched. later he found out
that her hobby was funerals. her preoccup
 
 ___________________________
 
ation with them wasn't morbid;
it was formal. she was interested in the arrangement of the flowers, the
order of the procession, the clothing and deportment of the mourners.

she went straight to faye and stopped her sobs with a firm, "now, miss
greener."

there was so much authority in her voice and manner that she succeeded
where mary and tod had failed. faye looked up at her respectfully.

"first, my dear," mrs. johnson said, counting one with the thumb of her
right hand on the index finger of her left, "first, i want you to
understand that my sole desire in this matter is to help you."

she looked hard at mary, then at tod.

"i don't get anything out of it, and it's just a lot of trouble."

"yes," faye said.

"all right. there are several things i have to know, if i'm to help you.
did the deceased leave any money or insurance?"

"no."

"have you any money?"

"no."

"can you borrow any?"

"i don't think so."


 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. johnson sighed.

"then the city will have to bury him."

faye didn't comment.

"don't you understand, child, the city will have to bury him in a
pauper's grave?"

she put so much contempt into "city" and horror into "pauper" that faye
flushed and began to sob again.

mrs. johnson made as though to walk out, even took several steps in the
direction of the door, then changed her mind and came back.

"how much does a funeral cost?" faye asked.

"two hundred dollars. but you can pay on the installment plan--fifty
dollars down and twenty-five a month."

mary and tod both spoke together.

"i'll get the money."

"i've got some."

"that's fine," mrs. johnson said. "you'll need at least fifty more for
incidental expenses. i'll go ahead and take care of everything. mr.
holsepp wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll bury your father. he'll do it right."

she shook hands with faye, as though she were congratulating her, and
hurried out of the room.

mrs. johnson's little business talk had apparently done faye some good.
her lips were set and her eyes dry. "don't worry," tod said. "i can raise
the money."

"no, thanks," she said.

mary opened her purse and took out a roll of bills. "here's some."

"no," she said, pushing it away.

she sat thinking for a while, then went to the dressing table and began
to fix her tear-stained face. she wore a hard smile as she worked.
suddenly she turned, lipstick in air, and spoke to mary.

"can you get me into mrs. jen
 
 ___________________________
 

snug. drawn up to a little below his shoulders and folded back to show
its fancy lining was an ivory satin coverlet. under his head was a tiny
lace cushion. he was wearing a tuxedo, or at least had on a black bow-tie
with his stiff shirt and wing collar. his face had been newly shaved, his
eyebrows shaped and plucked and his lips and cheeks rouged. he looked
like the interlocutor in a minstrel show.

tod bowed his head as though in silent prayer when he heard someone come
in. he recognized mrs. johnson's voice and turned carefully to face her.
he caught her eye and nodded, but she ignored him. she was busy with a
man in a badly fitting frock coat.

"it's the principle of the thing," she scolded. "your estimate said
bronze. those handles ain't bronze and you know it."

"but i asked miss greener," whined the man. "she okayed them."

"i don't care. i'm surprised at you, trying to save a few dollars by
fobbing off a set of cheap gun-metal handles on the poor child."

tod didn't wait for the under
 
 ___________________________
 
et and gray
striped trousers came in.

"are you here for the greener funeral?"

tod stood up and nodded vaguely.

"the services are beginning," the man said, then opened a little casket
covered with grosgrain satin and took out a dust cloth. tod watched him
go around the showroom wiping off the samples.

"services have probably started," the man repeated with a wave at the
door.

tod understood this time and left. the only exit he could find led
through the chapel. the moment he entered it, mrs. johnson caught him and
directed him to a seat. he wanted badly to get away, but it was
impossible to do so without making a scene.

faye was sitting in the front row of benches, facing the pulpit. she had
the lee sisters on one side and mary dove and abe kusich on the other.
behind them sat the tenants of the san berdoo, occupying about six rows.
tod was alone in the seventh. after him were several empty rows and then
a scattering of men and women who looked very much out of place.

he turned in order 
 
 ___________________________
 
d eaten with them quite
regularly, sharing the smoked salmon, white fish, marinated and maatjes
herrings they bought at jewish delicatessen stores. he also shared the
great quantities of cheap brandy they mixed with hot water and salt
butter and drank out of tin cups.

mama and papa gingo, trailed by their son, moved down the center aisle of
the chapel, bowing and waving to everyone, until they reached the front
row. here they gathered around faye and shook hands with her, each one in
turn. mrs. johnson tried to make them go to one of the back rows, but
they ignored her orders and sat down in front.

the overhead lights of the chapel were suddenly dimmed. simultaneously
other lights went on behind imitation stained-glass windows which hung on
the fake oak-paneled walls. there was a moment of hushed silence, broken
only by faye's sobs, then an electric organ started to play a recording
of one of bach's chorales, "come redeemer, our saviour."

tod recognized the music. his mother often played a 
 
 ___________________________
 
spective guest.

so far as tod could tell, no one was listening to the music. faye was
sobbing and the others seemed busy inside themselves. bach politely
serenading christ was not for them.

the music would soon change its tone and grow exciting. he wondered if
that would make any difference. already the bass was beginning to throb.
he noticed that it made the eskimos uneasy. as the bass gained in. power
and began to dominate the treble, he heard papa gingo grunt with
pleasure. mama caught mrs. johnson eyeing him, and put her fat hand on
the back of his head to keep him quiet.

"now come, 0 our saviour," the music begged. gone was its diffidence and
no longer was it polite. its struggle with the bass had changed it. even
a hint of a threat crept in and a little impatience. of doubt, however,
he could not detect the slightest trace.

if there was a hint of a threat, he thought, just a hint, and a tiny bit
of impatience, could bach be blamed? after all, when he wrote this music,
the world had a
 
 ___________________________
 
e music changed again and both threat and impatience
disappeared. the treble soared free and triumphant and the bass no longer
struggled to keep it down. it had become a rich accompaniment. "come or
don't come," the music seemed to say, "i love you and my love is enough."
it was a simple statement of fact, neither cry nor serenade, made without
arrogance or humility.

perhaps christ heard. if he did, he gave no sign. the attendants heard,
for it was their cue to trundle on harry in his box. mrs. johnson
followed close behind and saw to it that the casket was properly placed.
she raised her hand and bach was silenced in the middle of a phrase.

"will those of you who wish to view the deceased before the sermon please
step forward?" she called out.

only the gingos stood up immediately. they made for the coffin in a
group. mrs. johnson held them back and motioned for faye to look first.
supported by mary dove and the lee girls, she took a quick peek,
increased the tempo of her sobs for a moment,
 
 ___________________________
 
 then hurried back to the
bench.

the gingos had their chance next. they leaned over the coffin and told
each other something in a series of thick, explosive gutturals. when they
tried to take another look, mrs. johnson herded them firmly to their
seats.

the dwarf sidled up to the box, made a play with his handkerchief and
retreated. when no one followed him, mrs. johnson lost patience, seeming
to take what she understood as a lack of interest for a personal insult.

"those who wish to view the remains of the late mr. greener must do so at
once," she barked.

there was a little stir, but no one stood up.

"you, mrs. gail," she finally said, looking directly at the person named.
"how about you? don't you want a last look? soon all that remains of your
neighbor will be buried forever."

there was no getting out of it. mrs. gail moved down the aisle, trailed
by sev
 
 ___________________________
 
ought of how well alessandro magnasco would dramatize the contrast
between their drained-out, feeble bodies and their wild, disordered,
minds. he would not satirize them as hogarth or daumier might, nor would
he pity them. he would paint their fury with respect, appreciating its
awful, anarchic power and aware that they had it in them to destroy
civilization.

one friday night in the "tabernacle of the third coming," a man near tod
stood up to speak. although his name most likely was thompson or johnson
and his home town sioux city, he had the same countersunk eyes, like the
heads of burnished spikes, that a monk by magnasco might have. he was
probably just in from one of the colonies in the desert near soboba hot
springs where he had been conning over his soul on a diet of raw fruit
and nuts. he was very angry. the message he had brought to the city was
one that an illiterate anchorite might have given decadent rome. it was a
crazy jumble of dietary rules, economics and biblical threats. he c