as you like it

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae.


  duke, living in exile
  frederick, his brother, and usurper of his dominions
  amiens, lord attending on the banished duke
  jaques,   "      "       "  "     "      "
  le beau, a courtier attending upon frederick
  charles, wrestler to frederick
  oliver, son of sir rowland de boys
  jaques,   "   "  "    "     "  "
  orlando,  "   "  "    "     "  "
  adam,   servant to oliver
  dennis,     "     "   "
  touchstone, the court jester
  
 
 ___________________________
 
sir oliver martext, a vicar
  corin,    shepherd
  silvius,     "
  william, a country fellow, in love with audrey
  a person representing hymen
  rosalind, daughter to the banished duke
  celia, daughter to frederick
  phebe, a shepherdes
  audrey, a country wench
  lords, pages, foresters, and attendants


<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>


scene:

oliver's house; frederick's court; and
 
 ___________________________
 
ore than he. yet he's gentle; never school'd and
    yet learned; full of noble device; of all sorts enchantingly
    beloved; and, indeed, so much in the heart of the world, and
    especially of my own people, who best know him, that i am
    altogether misprised. but it shall not be so long; this wrestler
    shall clear all. nothing remains but that i kindle the boy
    thither, which now i'll go about.                       exit


<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>


scene ii.

a lawn before the duke's palace


 
 ___________________________
 
   the clownish fool out of your father's court?
    would he not be a comfort to our travel?

  celia. he'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
    leave me alone to woo him. let's away,
    and get our jewels and our wealth together;
    devise the fittest time and safest way
    to hide us from pursuit that will be made
    after my flight. now go we in content
    to liberty, and not to banishment.                    exeunt


<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act ii. scene i.

the forest of arden

e
 
 ___________________________
 
d, scorn'd at me.
    i marvel why i answer'd not again;
    but that's all one: omittance is no quittance.
    i'll write to him a very taunting letter,
    and thou shalt bear it; wilt thou, silvius?

  silvius. phebe, with all my heart.

  phebe. i'll write it straight;
    the matter's in my head and in my heart;
    i will be bitter with him and passing short.
    go with me, silvius.                                  exeunt


<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act iv. scene i.

the forest

enter rosa
 
 ___________________________
 
 heart and counterfeit to be a man.

  rosalind. so i do; but, i' faith, i should have been a woman by
    right.

  celia. come, you look paler and paler; pray you draw homewards.
    good sir, go with us.

  oliver. that will i, for i must bear answer back
    how you excuse my brother, rosalind.

  rosalind. i shall devise something; but, i pray you, commend my
    counterfeiting to him. will you go?                   exeunt


<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act v. scene i.

the forest

enter touch
 
 ___________________________
 
stone and audrey


  touchstone. we shall find a time, audrey; patience, gentle audrey.

  audrey. faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
    gentleman's saying.

  touchstone. a most wicked sir oliver, audrey, a most vile martext.
    but, audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to
    you.

  audrey. ay, i know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in the
    world; here comes the man you mean.

                         enter william


  touchstone. it is meat and drink to me to see a clown. by my troth,
    we that have good wits have much to answer for: we shall be
    flouting; we cannot hold.

  william. good ev'n, audrey.

  audrey. god ye good ev'n, william.

  william. and good ev'n to you, sir.

  touchstone. good ev'n, gentle friend. cover thy head, cover thy
    head; nay, prithee be cover'd. how old are you, friend?

  william. five and twenty, sir.

  touchstone. a ripe age. is thy name william
 
 ___________________________
 
?

  william. william, sir.

  touchstone. a fair name. wast born i' th' forest here?

  william. ay, sir, i thank god.

  touchstone. 'thank god.' a good answer.
    art rich?

  william. faith, sir, so so.

  touchstone. 'so so' is good, very good, very excellent good; and
    yet it is not; it is but so so. art thou wise?

  william. ay, sir, i have a pretty wit.

  touchstone. why, thou say'st well. i do now remember a saying:
'the
    fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be
    a fool.' the heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a
    grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth; meaning
    thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. you do
    love this maid?

  william. i do, sir.

  touchstone. give me your hand. art thou learned?

  william. no,
 
 ___________________________
 
 sir.

  touchstone. then learn this of me: to have is to have; for it is a
    figure in rhetoric that drink, being pour'd out of cup into a
    glass, by filling the one doth empty the other; for all your
    writers do consent that ipse is he; now, you are not ipse, for i
    am he.

  william. which he, sir?

  touchstone. he, sir, that must marry this woman. therefore, you
    clown, abandon- which is in the vulgar leave- the society-which
    in the boorish is company- of this female- which in the common is
    woman- which together is: abandon the society of this female; or,
    clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest;
    or, to wit, i kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into
    death, thy liberty into bondage. i will deal in poison with 
 
 ___________________________
 
thee,
    or in bastinado, or in steel; i will bandy with thee in faction;
    will o'er-run thee with policy; i will kill thee a hundred and
    fifty ways; therefore tremble and depart.

  audrey. do, good william.

  william. god rest you merry, sir.                         exit


                          enter corin


  corin. our master and mistress seeks you; come away, away.

  touchstone. trip, audrey, trip, audrey. i attend, i attend.
                                                          exeunt


scene ii.

the forest

enter orlando and oliver


  orlando. is't possible that on so little acquaintance you should
    like her? that but seeing you should love her? and loving woo?
    an