ng heroically to make
some impression upon the hubbub; also the babies, similarly occupied,
and an open window whence the populace imbibes the sights and sounds and
odors.

suddenly some of the steam begins to advance, and, peering through it,
you discern aunt elizabeth, ona’s stepmother--teta elzbieta, as they
call her--bearing aloft a great platter of stewed duck. behind her is
kotrina, making her way cautiously, staggering beneath a similar burden;
and half a minute later there appears old grandmother majauszkiene, with
a big yellow bowl of smoking potatoes, nearly as big as herself. so, bit
by bit, the feast takes form--there is a ham and a dish of sauerkraut,
boiled rice, macaroni, bologna sausages, great piles of penny buns,
bowls of milk, and foaming pitchers of beer. there is also, not six feet
from your back, the bar, where you may order all you please and do not
have to pay for it. “eiksz! graicziau!” screams marija berczynskas, and
falls to work herself--for there is more upon the stove insid
 
 ___________________________
 
 necessity, when out of the clear sky there fell a
thunderbolt upon them--a calamity that scattered all their hopes to the
four winds.

about a block away from them there lived another lithuanian family,
consisting of an elderly widow and one grown son; their name was
majauszkis, and our friends struck up an acquaintance with them before
long. one evening they came over for a visit, and naturally the first
subject upon which the conversation turned was the neighborhood and its
history; and then grandmother majauszkiene, as the old lady was called,
proceeded to recite to them a string of horrors that fairly froze their
blood. she was a wrinkled-up and wizened personage--she must have been
eighty--and as she mumbled the grim story through her toothless gums,
she seemed a very old witch to them. grandmother majauszkiene had lived
in the midst of misfortune so long that it had come to be her element,
and she talked about starvation, sickness, and death as other people
might about weddings and holidays.

the thing
 
 ___________________________
 
 came gradually. in the first place as to the house they
had bought, it was not new at all, as they had supposed; it was about
fifteen years old, and there was nothing new upon it but the paint,
which was so bad that it needed to be put on new every year or two. the
house was one of a whole row that was built by a company which existed
to make money by swindling poor people. the family had paid fifteen
hundred dollars for it, and it had not cost the builders five hundred,
when it was new. grandmother majauszkiene knew that because her son
belonged to a political organization with a contractor who put up
exactly such houses. they used the very flimsiest and cheapest material;
they built the houses a dozen at a time, and they cared about nothing at
all except the outside shine. the family could take her word as to the
trouble they would have, for she had been through it all--she and her
son had bought their house in exactly the same way. they had fooled the
company, however, for her son was a skilled man,
 
 ___________________________
 
 who made as high as a
hundred dollars a month, and as he had had sense enough not to marry,
they had been able to pay for the house.

grandmother majauszkiene saw that her friends were puzzled at this
remark; they did not quite see how paying for the house was “fooling the
company.” evidently they were very inexperienced. cheap as the houses
were, they were sold with the idea that the people who bought them would
not be able to pay for them. when they failed--if it were only by a
single month--they would lose the house and all that they had paid on
it, and then the company would sell it over again. and did they often
get a chance to do that? diev
 
 ___________________________
 
e! (grandmother majauszkiene raised her
hands.) they did it--how often no one could say, but certainly more than
half of the time. they might ask any one who knew anything at all about
packingtown as to that; she had been living here ever since this house
was built, and she could tell them all about it. and had it ever been
sold before? susimilkie! why, since it had been built, no less than four
families that their informant could name had tried to buy it and failed.
she would tell them a little about it.

the first family
 
 ___________________________
 
e had sent his agents into every city and village in
europe to spread the tale of the chances of work and high wages at the
stockyards. the people had come in hordes; and old durham had squeezed
them tighter and tighter, speeding them up and grinding them to pieces
and sending for new ones. the poles, who had come by tens of thousands,
had been driven to the wall by the lithuanians, and now the lithuanians
were giving way to the slovaks. who there was poorer and more miserable
than the slovaks, grandmother majauszkiene had no idea, but the packers
would find them, never fear. it was easy to bring them, for wages were
really much higher, and it was only when it was too late that the poor
people found out that everything else was higher too. they were like
rats in a trap, that was the truth; and more of them were piling in
every day. by and by they would have their revenge, though, for the
thing was getting beyond human endurance, and the people would rise and
murder the packers. grandmother majauszkiene was a 
 
 ___________________________
 
a common failing in packingtown; but they had worked hard, and the
father had been a steady man, and they had a good deal more than half
paid for the house. but he had been killed in an elevator accident in
durham’s.

then there had come the irish, and there had been lots of them, too;
the husband drank and beat the children--the neighbors could hear them
shrieking any night. they were behind with their rent all the time,
but the company was good to them; there was some politics back of that,
grandmother majauszkiene could not say just what, but the laffertys had
belonged to the “war whoop league,” which was a sort of political club
of all the thugs and rowdies in the district; and if you belonged to
that, you could never be arrested for anything. once upon a time old
lafferty had been caught with a gang that had stolen cows from several
of the poor people of the neighborhood and butchered them in an old
shanty back of the yards and sold them. he had been in jail only three
days for it, and had come out
 
 ___________________________
 
 laughing, and had not even lost his place
in the packing house. he had gone all to ruin with the drink, however,
and lost his power; one of his sons, who was a good man, had kept him
and the family up for a year or two, but then he had got sick with
consumption.

that was another thing, grandmother majauszkiene interrupted
herself--this house was unlucky. every family that lived in it, some one
was sure to get consumption. nobody could tell why that was; there must
be something about the house, or the way it was built--some folks said
it was because the building had been begun in the dark of the moon.
there were dozens of houses that way in packingtown. sometimes there
would be a particular room that you could point out--if anybody slept in
that room he was just as good as dead. with this house it had
 
 ___________________________
 
as hard to tell what was the
matter with children who worked in the yards. in those days there had
been no law about the age of children--the packers had worked all but
the babies. at this remark the family looked puzzled, and grandmother
majauszkiene again had to make an explanation--that it was against the
law for children to work before they were sixteen. what was the sense of
that? they asked. they had been thinking of letting little stanislovas
go to work. well, there was no need to worry, grandmother majauszkiene
said--the law made no difference except that it forced people to lie
about the ages of their children. one would like to know what the
lawmakers expected them to do; there were families that had no possible
means of support except the children, and the law provided them no
other way of getting a living. very often a man could get no work in
packingtown for months, while a child could go and get a place easily;
there was always some new machine, by which the packers could get as
much work out of
 
 ___________________________
 
hey knew nothing about
consumption whatever, except that it made people cough; and for two
weeks they had been worrying about a coughing-spell of antanas. it
seemed to shake him all over, and it never stopped; you could see a red
stain wherever he had spit upon the floor.

and yet all these things were as nothing to what came a little later.
they had begun to question the old lady as to why one family had been
unable to pay, trying to show her by figures that it ought to have been
possible; and grandmother majauszkiene had disputed their figures--“you
say twelve dollars a month; but that does not include the interest.”

then they stared at her. “interest!” they cried.

“interest on the money you still owe,” she answered.

“but we don’t have to pay any interest!” they exclaimed, three or four
at once. “we only have to pay twelve dollars each month.”

and for this she laughed at them. “you are like all the rest,” she said;
“they trick you and eat you alive. they never sell the houses
 
 ___________________________
 
ll new. do you really mean you had ever rented it?”

“rented it!” panted jurgis. “i bought it! i paid for it! i own it! and
they--my god, can’t you tell me where my people went?”

she made him understand at last that she knew nothing. jurgis’ brain
was so confused that he could not grasp the situation. it was as if his
family had been wiped out of existence; as if they were proving to be
dream people, who never had existed at all. he was quite lost--but then
suddenly he thought of grandmother majauszkiene, who lived in the next
block. she would know! he turned and started at a run.

grandmother majauszkiene came to the door herself. she cried out when
she saw jurgis, wild-eyed and shaking. yes, yes, she could tell him. the
family had moved; they had not been able to pay the rent and they had
been turned out into the snow, and the house had been repainted and sold
again the next week. no, she had not heard how they were, but she could
tell him that they had gone back to aniele jukniene, with whom