eaway along the
river where sammy the shark kept a speedboat, and that the workers had
hung tarps to conceal the digging. then, a few months after the rumors
began, paul baldino began emerging in people's basements, through the
storm sewers. he came up in chase buell's house, covered with a gray
dust that smelled like friendly shit; he squeezed up into danny zinn's
cellar, this time with a flashlight, baseball bat, and a bag containing
two dead rats; and finally he ended up on the other side of tom faheem's

boiler, which he clanged three times.

he always explained to us that he had been exploring the storm sewer
underneath his own house and had gotten lost, but we began to suspect he
was playing in his father's escape tunnel. when he boasted that he would
see the lisbon girls taking their showers, we all believed he was going
to enter the lisbon house the same way he had entered the others. we
never learned exactly what happened, though the police interrogated paul
baldino for over an hour. h
 
 ___________________________
 
truck appeared at the end of the block, moving at about
fifteen miles an hour, without flashing lights or siren, as though the
paramedics already knew it was hopeless. the skinny one with the
mustache climbed out first, then the fat one. they got the stretcher
immediately, instead of first checking on the victim, a lapse which we
later learned from medical professionals violated procedure. we didn't
know who had called the paramedics or how they knew they were no more
than undertakers that day. tom faheem said therese had gone inside and
called, but the rest of us remember the remaining four lisbon girls
immobile on the porch until after the ems truck arrived. no one else on
our street was aware of what had happened. the identical lawns down the
block  were  empty.  someone  was  barbecuing  somewhere.  behind  joe
larson's
house we could hear a birdie being batted back and forth, endlessly, by
the two greatest badminton players in the world.

the paramedics moved mr. lisbon aside so they could 
 
 ___________________________
 
ater on separate occasions and in
separate states, mr. and mrs. lisbon didn't find cecilia's behavior
strange during the party. "she was always quiet with company," mrs.
lisbon said. and perhaps because of their lack of socializing, mr. and
mrs. lisbon remembered the party as a successful event. mrs. lisbon, in
fact, was surprised when cecilia asked to be excused. "i thought she was
having a nice time." even at this point, the other girls didn't act as
though they knew what was about to happen. tom faheem recalls mary
telling him about a jumper she wanted to buy at penney's. therese and
tim winer discussed their anxiety over getting into an ivy league
college.

from clues later discovered, it appears cecilia's ascent to her bedroom

was not as quick as we remember it. she took time, for instance, between
leaving us and reaching the upstairs to drink juice from a can of pears
(she left the can on the counter, punctured with only one hole in
disregard of mrs. lisbon's prescribed method). either b
 
 ___________________________
 
ses? rubbing spy holes in
grimy windows, hadn't they been looking out to see us? we forgot
ourselves and held hands, smiling with closed eyes. on the stereo
garfunkel began hitting his high notes, and we didn't think of cecilia.

we thought only of mary, bonnie, lux, and therese, stranded in life,
unable to speak to us until now, in this inexact, shy fashion. we went
over their last months in school, coming up with new recollections. lux
had forgotten her math book one day and had to share with tom faheem. in
the margin, she had written, "i want to get out of here." how far did
that wish extend? thinking back, we decided the girls had been trying to
talk to us all along, to elicit our help, but we'd been too infatuated
to listen. our surveillance had been so focused we missed nothing but a
simple returned gaze. who else did they have to turn to? not their
parents. nor the neighborhood. inside their house they were prisoners;
outside, lepers. and so they hid from the world, waiting for someone-fo
 
 ___________________________
 
the ground. we froze, but no lights
came on.

after a minute, we inched in closer. mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, but we paid no attention. we were too busy gazing up into the
darkness for a ladder of knotted bed sheets and a descending nightgown.
we saw nothing. the house rose above us, its windows reflecting dark
masses of leaves. in a whisper, chase buell reminded us that he had just
gotten his driver's license, and held up the keys to his mother's
cougar. "we can use my car," he said. tom faheem searched the overgrown
flower beds for pebbles to ping against the girls' windows. any second
an upstairs window might open, breaking its seal of fish flies, and a
face would look down at us for the rest of our lives.

at the back window, we grew brave enough to look in. through a scrub of
dead windowsill plants, we made out the interior of the house: a
seascape of confused objects, advancing and retreating as our eyes
adjusted to the light. mr. lisbon's la-z-boy rolled forward, its
footrest ra
 
 ___________________________
 
n her hand through her hair. she was only
examining her reflection. the light inside the house made us invisible
outside, and we stood inches from the window but unseen, as though
looking in at lux from another plane of existence. the faint glow of the
window flickered against our faces. our trunks and legs descended into
darkness. on the lake a freighter sounded its horn, on a fogless night.
another freighter responded at a deeper pitch. that halter could have
come undone with one quick yank.

tom faheem went first, disproving his shy reputation. he climbed onto
the back porch, quietly opened the door, and let us, at last, back into
the lisbon house. "we're here" was all he said.

lux looked up, but didn't rise from the chair. her sleepy eyes showed no
surprise that we were there, but at the base of her white neck a
lobstery blush spread. "about time," she said. "we've been waiting for
you guys." she took another drag. "we've got a car," tom faheem
continued. "full tank. we'll take you wherever
 
 ___________________________
 
d boatyards. at
some gas station we would ask for the ladies' room key because the girls
would be too shy. we would play the radio with the windows open.

sometime during this reverie, the house went silent. we assumed the
girls had finished packing. peter sissen took out his penlight and made
a shallow foray into the dining room, coming back to say, "one of them
is still downstairs. there's a light on in the stairway." we stood, we
waved the penlight, we waited for the girls, but no one came. tom faheem
tried the first stair, but it creaked so loudly he came back down again.
the silence of the house rang in our ears. a car passed, sending a
shadow sweeping across the dining room, momentarily lighting up the
painting of the pilgrims. the dining table was heaped with winter coats
wrapped in plastic. other hulking bundles loomed. the house had the feel
of an attic where junk collects, establishing revolutionary
relationships: the toaster in the birdcage; ballet slippers protruding
from a wicker c
 
 ___________________________
 
 were serving small silver bowls of green ice cream. a tear-gas
canister was set off on the dance floor, propelling a harmless mist. mr.
o'connor danced with alice. everyone toasted her future.

we stayed until daybreak. as we came out into the first alcoholic dawn
of our lives (a bleachy fade-in, overused through the years now by the
one-note director), our lips were swollen from kissing and our mouths
throbbing with the taste of girls. already we had been married and
divorced, in a sense, and tom faheem found a love letter left in his
pants pocket by the last person to rent the tux. the fish flies that had
hatched during the night were still quivering on trees and streetlights,
and made the sidewalk squishy under our feet, like walking through yams.
the day threatened to be muggy. we took off our jackets and shuffled
along, up the o'connors' street, around the corner, and down our own. in
the distance, at the lisbon house, the ems truck sat, flashing its
lights. they hadn't bothered to use the