 shoulder
skiing, and could only be convinced to get is an x ray, nothing more.
from that time on he winced when we tried to tackle him, and raked
leaves one-handed, and no longer flipped daredevil pancakes on sunday
mornings. otherwise he persevered, and always gently corrected us when
we took the lord's name in vain. in his bedroom, the shoulder had fused
into a graceful humpback. "it's sad to think about those girls," he
said. "what a waste of life."

the most popular theory at the time held dominic palazzolo to blame.
dominic was the immigrant kid staying with relatives until his family
got settled in new mexico. he was the first boy in our neighborhood to
wear sunglasses, and within a week of arriving, he had fallen in love.
the object of his desire wasn't cecilia but diana porter, a girl with
chestnut hair and a horsey though pretty face who lived in an
ivy-covered house on the lake. unfortunately, she didn't notice dominic
peering through the fence as she played fierce tennis on the clay court,

 
 ___________________________
 
nor as she lay, sweating nectar, on the poolside recliner. on our
corner, in our group, dominic palazzolo didn't join in conversations
about baseball or busing, because he could speak only a few words of

english, but every now and then he would tilt his head back so that his
sunglasses reflected sky, and would say, "i love her." every time he
said it he seemed delivered of a profundity that amazed him, as though
he had coughed up a pearl. at the beginning of june, when diana porter
left on vacation to switzerland, dominic was stricken. "fuck the holy
mother," he said, despondent. "fuck god." and 
 
 ___________________________
 
to show his desperation
and the validity of his love, he climbed onto the roof of his relatives'
house and jumped off.

we watched him. we watched cecilia lisbon watching from her front yard.
dominic palazzolo, with his tight pants, his dingo boots, his pompadour,
went into the house, we saw him passing the plate-glass picture windows
downstairs; and then he appeared at an upstairs window, with a silk
handkerchief around his neck. climbing onto the ledge, he swung himself
up to the flat roof. aloft, he looked frail, diseased, and
temperamental, as we expected a european to look. he toed the roof's
edge like a high diver, and whispered, "i love her," to himself as he
dropped past the windows and into 
 
 ___________________________
 
said that dominic had been
all she could talk about for the final week before commencement. instead
of studying for exams, she spent study halls looking up italy in the
encyclopedia. she started saying "ciao," and began slipping into st.
paul's catholic church on the lake to sprinkle her forehead with holy
water. in the cafeteria, even on hot days when the place was thick with
the fumes of institutional food, cecilia always chose the spaghetti and
meatballs, as though by eating the same food as dominic palazzolo she
could be closer to him. at the height of her crush she purchased the
crucifix peter sissen had seen decorated with the brassiere.

the supporters of this theory always pointed to one central fact: the
week before cecilia's suicide attempt, dominic palazzolo's family had

called him to new mexico. he went telling god to fuck himself all over
again because new mexico was even farther from switzerland, where, right
that minute, diana porter strolled under summer trees, moving
unstoppably away
 
 ___________________________
 
en in our ignorance we knew it was
hopeless and that despite cecilia's open eyes and the way her mouth kept
contracting like that of a fish on a stringer it was just nerves and she
had succeeded, on the second try, in hurling herself out of the world.

we didn't understand why cecilia had killed herself the first time and
we understood even less when she did it twice. her diary, which the
police inspected as part of the customary investigation, didn't confirm
the supposition of unrequited love. dominic palazzolo was mentioned only
once in that tiny rice-paper journal illuminated with colored magic
markers to look like a book of hours or a medieval bible. miniature
designs crowded the pages. bubblegum angels swooped from top margins, or
scraped their wings between teeming paragraphs. maidens with golden hair
dripped sea-blue tears into the book's spine. grape-colored whales
spouted blood around a newspaper item (pasted in) listing arrivals to
the endangered species list. six hatchlings cried from shatte