his head back so that his
sunglasses reflected sky, and would say, "i love her." every time he
said it he seemed delivered of a profundity that amazed him, as though
he had coughed up a pearl. at the beginning of june, when diana porter
left on vacation to switzerland, dominic was stricken. "fuck the holy
mother," he said, despondent. "fuck god." and to show his desperation
and the validity of his love, he climbed onto the roof of his relatives'
house and jumped off.

we watched him. we watched cecilia lisbon watching from her front yard.
dominic palazzolo, with his tight pants, his dingo boots, his pompadour,
went into the house, we saw him passing the plate-glass picture windows
downstairs; and then he appeared at an upstairs window, with a silk
handkerchief around his neck. climbing onto the ledge, he swung himself
up to the flat roof. aloft, he looked frail, diseased, and
temperamental, as we expected a european to look. he toed the roof's
edge like a high diver, and whispered, "i love her," to 
 
 ___________________________
 
himself as he
dropped past the windows and into the yard's calculated shrubbery.

he didn't hurt himself. he stood up after the fall, having proved his
love, and down the block, some maintained, cecilia lisbon developed her
own. amy schraff, who knew cecilia in school, said that dominic had been
all she could talk about for the final week before commencement. instead
of studying for exams, she spent study halls looking up italy in the
encyclopedia. she started saying "ciao," and began slipping into st.
paul's catholic church on the lake to sprinkle her forehead with holy
water. in the cafeteria, even on hot days when the place was thick with
the fumes of institutional food, cecilia always chose the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ins rubbed hairless from years of wearing pants,
but they were still a long way from death. their own parents, who spoke
foreign languages and lived in converted attics like buzzards, had the
finest medical care available and were threatening to live on until the
next century. nobody's grandfather had died, nobody's grandmother,
nobody's parents, only a few dogs: tom burke's beagle, muffin, who
choked on bazooka joe bubble gum, and then that summer, a creature who
in dog years was still a puppy-cecilia lisbon.

the cemetery workers' strike hit its sixth week the day she died.

nobody had given much thought to the strike, nor to the cemetery
workers' grievances, because most of us had never been to a cemetery.
occasionally we heard gunshots coming from the ghetto, but our fathers
insisted it was only cars backfiring. therefore, when the newspapers
reported that burials in the city had completely stopped, we didn't
think it affected us. likewise, mr. and mrs. lisbon, only in their
forties, with a cro
 
 ___________________________
 
r. lisbon saw two miles of leveled land that
reminded him of photographs of hiroshima. "it was poletown," mr. alton
told us. "gm bought out like twenty-five thousand polacks to build this
huge automotive plant. they knocked down twenty-four city blocks, then
ran out of money. so the place was all rubble and weeds. it was
desolate, sure, but only if you were looking out the back fence."
finally they arrived at a public nondenominational cemetery located
between two freeways, and it was here that cecilia lisbon was given all
the final funerary rites of the catholic church except interment.
officially, cecilia's death was listed in church records as an
"accident," as were the other girls' a year later. when we asked father
moody about this, he said, "we didn't want to quibble. how do you know
she didn't slip?" when we brought up the sleeping pills, and the noose,
and the rest of it, he said, "suicide, as a mortal sin, is a matter of
intent. it's very difficult to know what was in those girls' hearts.
w