en (lux), and
fifteen (bonnie), and sixteen (mary), and seventeen (therese). they were
short, roundbuttocked in denim, with roundish cheeks that recalled that
same dorsal softness. whenever we got a glimpse, their faces looked
indecently revealed, as though we were used to seeing women in veils. no
one could understand how mr. and mrs. lisbon had produced such beautiful
children. mr. lisbon taught high-school math. he was thin, boyish,
stunned by his own gray hair. he had a high voice, and when joe larson
told us how mr. lisbon had cried when lux was later rushed to the
hospital during her own suicide scare, we could easily imagine the sound
of his girlish weeping.

whenever we saw mrs. lisbon we looked in vain for some sign of the
beauty that must have once been hers. but the plump arms, the brutally
cut steel-wool hair, and the librarian's glasses foiled us every time.
we saw her only rarely, in the morning, fully dressed though the sun
hadn't come up, stepping out to snatch up the dewy milk c
 
 ___________________________
 


was left-handed, but the gash in her left wrist didn't go as deep,
leaving the underside of the artery intact. she received twenty-four
stitches in each wrist.

she came back still wearing the wedding dress. mrs. patz, whose sister
was a nurse at bon secours, is said that cecilia had refused to put on a
hospital gown, demanding that her wedding dress be brought to her, and
dr. hornicker, the staff psychiatrist, thought it best to humor her. she
returned home during a thunderstorm. we were in joe larson's house,
right across the street, when the first clap of thunder hit. downstairs
joe's mother shouted to close all the windows, and we ran to ours.
outside a deep vacuum stilled the air. a gust of wind stirred a paper
bag, which lifted, rolling, into the lower branches of the trees. then
the vacuum broke with the downpour, the sky grew black, and the lisbons'
station wagon tried to sneak by in the darkness.

we called joe's mother to come see. in a few seconds we heard her quick
feet on the car
 
 ___________________________
 
er ankle, but then we saw
she was wearing high heels. she walked up and down, practicing, until
parkie denton's car appeared at the end of the block. then she turned,
rang her own doorbell to warn her sisters, and disappeared inside again.

left out, we watched the boys drive up. parkie denton's yellow cadillac
floated down the street, the boys suspended in the car's inner
atmosphere. though it was raining, and the windshield wipers were going,
the car's interior had a warm glow. as they passed joe larson's house,
the boys gave us a thumbs-up.

trip fontaine got out first. he'd pushed up his jacket sleeves as male
models did in his father's fashion magazines. he was wearing a thin tie.
parkie denton had on a blue blazer, as did kevin head, and then joe hill
conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and communist. at that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until trip fontaine finally hea
 
 ___________________________
 
unning gastrointestinal tests."
brent christopher stood up then, silently vowing to help lux escape
himself he heard her say, "how long will it take to find out?"

"about half an hour."

"do you really use a rabbit?"

the doctor laughed. upright, brent christopher felt his hand throb, his
eyes blurred, he became dizzy; but before he fell back into
unconsciousness, he saw dr. finch pass by, heading toward mrs. lisbon.
she heard about it first, and then the nurses heard about it, and then
we did. joe larson ran across the street to hide in the lisbons' bushes,
and it was then he heard mr. lisbon's girlish weeping, a sound quite
musical, he said. mr. lisbon was sitting in his la-z-boy, his feet up on

the footrest, his hands over his face. the phone rang. he looked at it.
he picked it up. "thank god," he said, "thank god." lux, it turned out,
had only a bad case of indigestion.

in addition to a pregnancy test, dr. finch gave lux a complete
gynecological exam. it was from ms. angelica turnette, a 
 
 ___________________________
 
me to write them off." but even as he
uttered these words, he rebelled against them, as we all did. and rather
than consign the girls to oblivion, we gathered their possessions once
more, everything we'd gotten hold of during our strange curatorship:
cecilia's high-tops; therese's microscope; a jewelry box in which a
strand of mary's dishwater-blond hair lay bedded on cotton; the
photocopy of cecilia's laminated picture of the virgin; one of lux's
tube tops. we piled everything in the middle of joe larson's garage,
opening the automatic door halfway to see out. the sun had set and the
sky was dark. with the parks department gone, the street was ours again.
for the first time in months, a light came on in the lisbon house, then
winked out. another light, in an adjoining room, flickered in answer.
around the aureolae of streetlights we noticed a dim swirling we didn't
recognize at first because we knew it so well, a senseless pattern of
ecstasy and madness: the massing of the first fish flies of t
 
 ___________________________
 
. 0. s. the overhead light showed us the shabby
state of the lisbon house, and showed us billy jack, who had avenged his
girlfriend's rape using forsworn karate. the girls' signals reached us
and no one else, like a radio station picked up by our braces. at night,
afterimages flashed on our inner eyelids, or hovered over our beds like
a swarm of fireflies. our inability to respond only made the signals
more important. we watched the show nightly, always on the verge, of
discovering the key, and joe larson even tried flashing his own bedroom
light in answer, but this made the lisbon house go dark, and we felt
reprimanded.

the first letter arrived on may 7. slipped into chase buell's mailbox
with the rest of the day's mail, the letter bore no stamp or return
address, but when we opened it, we recognized at once the purple flair
lux liked to write with.

dear whoever, tell trip i'm over him.

he's a creep.

guess who that was all it said. in the next few weeks, other letters
arrived, expressing va
 
 ___________________________
 
girl's. the lyrics might have been diary entries the girls whispered
into our ears. though it wasn't their voices we heard, the song conjured
their images more vividly than ever.

we could feel them, on the other end, blowing dust off the needle,
holding the telephone over the spinning black disk, playing the volume
low so as not to be overheard. when the song stopped, the needle skated
through the inner ring, sending out a repeating click (like the same
time lived over and over again). already joe larson had our response
ready, and after we played it, the lisbon girls played theirs, and the
evening went on like that. most of the songs we've forgotten, but a
portion of that contrapuntal exchange survives, in pencil, on the back
of demo karafilis's teafor the tillerman, where he jotted it. we provide
it here: the lisbon girls us the lisbon girls us the lisbon girls us the
lisbon girls "alone again, naturally," gilbert o'sullivan "you've got a
friend," james taylor "where do the children play?, ca