t me tell you," or, "you want to know what happened? smell
my fingers, man." that lux consented to meet them in the dells and
thickets of our school grounds only showed too well her disequilibrium.
we asked whether she spoke about cecilia, but the boys always said
they'd hadn't exactly been talking if you know what i mean.

the only reliable boy who got to know lux during that time was trip
fontaine, but his sense of honor kept us in the dark for years. only
eighteen months before the suicides, trip fontaine had emerged from baby
fat to the delight of girls and women alike. because we had known him as
a pudgy boy whose teeth slanted out of his open, trolling mouth like
those of a deep-sea fish, we had been slow to recognize his
transformation. in addition, our fathers and older brothers, our
decrepit uncles, had assured us that looks didn't matter if you were a
boy. we weren't on the lookout for handsomeness appearing in our midst,

and believed it counted for little until the girls we knew, along
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
their mothers, fell in love with trip fontaine. their desire was silent
yet magnificent, like a thousand daisies attuning their faces toward the
path of the sun. at first we hardly noticed the wadded notes dropped
through the grating of trip's locker, nor the equatorial breezes
pursuing him down the hall from so much heated blood; but finally,
confronted with clusters of clever girls blushing at trip's approach, or
yanking their braids to keep from smiling too much, we realized that our
fathers, brothers and uncles had been lying, and that 
 
 ___________________________
 
no one was ever
going to love us because of our good grades. years later, from the
onehorse detoxification ranch where trip fontaine had gone to dry out on
the last of his ex-wife's savings, he recalled the red-hot passions that
had erupted at a time when he was growing his first chest hair. it began
during a trip to acapulco, when his father and his father's boyfriend
went for a stroll on the beach, leaving trip to fend for himself on the
hotel grounds. (exhibit #7, a snapshot taken during that trip, shows a
bronzed mr. fontaine posing with donald, the two of them squeezed
thigh-to-thigh within the palmy montezuma throne of
 
 ___________________________
 
 a hotel patio
chair.) at the nodrinking-age bar, trip met gina desander, recently
divorced, who ordered him his first pifia colada. always a gentleman,
trip fontaine imparted to us upon his return only the most proper
details of gina desander's life, that she was a dealer in las vegas and
taught him to win at blackjack, that she wrote poetry and ate raw
coconut with a swiss army knife. only years later, looking over the
desert with ruined eyes, his chivalry no longer able to protect a woman
by that time in her fifties, did trip confess that gina desander had
been "my first lay."

it explained a lot. it explained why he never took off the puka-shell
necklace
 
 ___________________________
 
boat.
it explained why he changed his manner of dress the year before the
suicides, going from schoolboy shirts and pants to western outfits,
shirts with pearl buttons, decorative pocket flaps and shoulder

stitching, every item chosen in order to resemble the las vegas men who
stood arm in arm with gina desander in the wallet photographs she showed
trip during their seven-days-and-six-nights package tour together. at
thirty-seven, gina desander had envisioned the hunk of masculinity
latent in trip fontaine's chubby speedoed form, and during her week with
him in mexico, she chiseled him into the shape of a man. we could only
imagine what went on in her hotel room, with trip drunk on spiked
pineapple juice, watching gina desander deal rapid-fire in the middle of
her stripped bed. the sliding door to the small concrete balcony had
come off its track. trip, being the man, had tried to fix it. the
dressers and bedside tables were littered with the detritus of last
night's room party-empty glasses, tro
 
 ___________________________
 
s it did the girls who, one by one, and then
in groups, swooned.

he received letters emblazoned with ten different sets of lips (the
lines of each pucker distinct as a fingerprint). he stopped studying for
tests because of all the girls who came over to cram with him in bed. he
spent his time keeping up his tan, floating on an air mattress around
his bathtub-size swimming pool. the girls were right in choosing to love
trip, because he was the only boy who could keep his mouth shut. by

nature trip fontaine possessed the discretion of the world's great
lovers, seducers greater than casanova because they didn't leave behind
twelve volumes of memoirs and we don't even know who they were. on the
football field, or naked in the locker room, trip fontaine never spoke
of the pieces of pie, carefully wrapped in tinfoil, that showed up
inside his locker, nor of the hair ribbons gartered to his car antenna,
nor even of the tennis sneaker dangling by one seamy lace from his
rearview mirror, in the toe of wh
 
 ___________________________
 
e girls came bearing typed and footnoted term
papers, "chick notes" they'd compiled so that trip could read a single
page on each book. over time, from the bounty of their offerings he
compiled his museum display of "great reefers of the world," each sample
housed in an empty spice jar lined along his bookshelf, from "blue
hawaiian" to "panama red," with many stops in the brownish territories
between, one of which looked and smelled like carpet. we didn't know

much about the girls who went to trip fontaine's, only that they drove
their own cars and always took in something from the trunk. they were
the jangly-earring type, with hair bleached at the fringes and
cork-heeled shoes that tied around their ankles. carrying salad bowls
covered with printed dish towels, they walked bowleggedly over the lawn,
snapping gum and smiling. upstairs, in bed, they spoon-fed trip, wiping
his mouth with the bedsheet before tossing the bowls onto the floor and
melting in his arms. from time to time mr. fontaine pas
 
 ___________________________
 
ed and eighteen girls and women he had made love to during his
long career. he would only tell us, "i've never gotten over that girl,
man.

never." in the desert, with the shakes, he had sicklylooking wads of
yellow skin under his eyes, but the eyes themselves clearly looked back
to a verdant time. gradually, through incessant coaxing, and owing in
large part to the recovering substance abuser's need to talk nonstop, we
managed to cobble together the story of their love.

it began on a day when trip fontaine attended the wrong history class.
during fifth-period study hall, as was his custom, trip fontaine had
gone out to his car to smoke the marijuana he took as regularly as peter
petrovich, the diabetic kid, took insulin. three times a day petrovich
showed up at the nurse's office for his injections, always using the
hypodermic needle himself like the most craven of junkies, though after
shooting up he would play the concert piano in the auditorium with
astounding artistry, as though insulin were 
 
 ___________________________
 
the elixir of genius.
likewise, trip fontaine went to his car three times a day, at
ten-fifteen, twelvefifteen, and three-fifteen, as though he wore a
wristwatch like petrovich's that beeped at dose time. he always parked
his trans am at the lot's far end, facing the school to spot any
approaching teachers. the car's raked hood, sleek roof, and sloping rear
end gave it the look of an aerodynamic scarab. though signs of age had
begun to mar its golden finish, trip had repainted the black racing
stripes and shined the spiky hubcaps that look
 
 ___________________________
 
. fontaine had rested his head in traffic jams, the
chemicals in his hair spray turning the brown leather a light purple.
the faint aroma of his "boots and saddle" air freshener still clung to

the air, though by that time the car was permeated more with the smell
of trip's musk and reefer. the racing-car doors shut with a hermetic
seal, and trip used to say you could get higher in his car than anywhere
because you kept breathing in the captured smoke. every juice break,
lunch, and study hall, trip fontaine sauntered out to his car and
submerged himself in the steam bath. fifteen minutes later, when he
opened the door, the smoke would churn out as though from a chimney,
dispersing and curling to the music-usually pink floyd or yeswhich trip
kept playing as he went about checking his engine and polishing his hood
(the ostensible reasons for his trips to the parking lot). after
shutting up his car, trip walked behind the school to air out his
clothes. he kept a spare box of mints hidden in the knoth
 
 ___________________________
 
ole of one
memorial tree (planted for samuel 0. hastings, graduate of the class of
1918). from classroom windows girls watched him, out under the trees,
alone and irresistible, sitting cross-legged like an indian, and even
before he got up they could picture the light dirt stains on each
buttock. it was always the same: trip fontaine rose to full height,
adjusted the frames of his aviator sunglasses, flicked back his hair,
zipped the breast pocket of his brown leather jacket, and started
forward on the juggernaut of his boots. he came down the corridor of
memorial trees, across the back green, past the beds of ivy, and into
the school's rear door.

no boy was ever so cool and aloof. fontaine gave off the sense of having
graduated to the next stage of life, of having his hands thrust into the
heart of the real world, whereas
 
 ___________________________
 
 the rest of us were still memorizing
quotations and grade-grubbing. though he retrieved his books from his
locker, we knew they were only props and that he was destined for
capitalism and not scholarship, as his drug deals already augured. on
that day he would always remember, however, a september afternoon when
the leaves had just begun turning, trip fontaine came in to see mr.
woodhouse the headmaster approaching down the hall. trip was used to
running into figures of authority while stoned, and he told us he never
suffered from paranoia. he couldn't explain why the sight of our

headmaster, with his flood pants and canary yellow socks, caused his
pulse to rise and a light sweat to break out on the back of his neck
just then. nevertheless, in one nonchalant motion, trip entered the
nearest classroom to escape.

he didn't notice a single face as he
 
 ___________________________
 
 took a seat. he saw neither teacher
nor students, and was aware only of the heavenly light in the room, an
orange glow from the autumnal foliage outside. the room seemed full of a
sweet viscous liquid, a honey nearly light as air, which he breathed in.
time slowed down, and in his left ear the ringing of the cosmic om
started up clear as a telephone. when we suggested these details had
been laced with the same thc in his blood, trip fontaine thrust a finger
into the air, the only time his hands stopped shaking during the entire
interview. "i know what it's like to be high," he said. "this was
different." in the orange light the students' heads looked like sea
anemones, undulating quietly, and the silence of the room was that of
the ocean floor. "every second is eternal," trip told us, describing how
as he sat in his desk the girl in front of him, for no apparent reason,
had turned around and looked at him. he couldn't say she was b
 
 ___________________________
 
eautiful
because all he could see were her eyes. the rest of her face the pulpy
lips, the blond sideburn fuzz, the nose with its candy-pink translucent
nostrils-registered dimly as the two blue eyes lifted him on a sea wave
and held him suspended. "she was the still point of the turning world,"
he told us, quoting eliot, whose collected poems he had found on the
shelf of the detoxification center. for the eternity that lux lisbon
looked at him, trip fontaine looked back, and the love he felt at that
moment, truer than all subsequent loves because it never had to survive
real life, still plagued him, even now in the desert, with his looks and
health wasted. "you never know what'll set the memory off," he told us.
"a baby's face. a bell on a cat's collar. anything."

they didn't exchange a single word. but in the weeks that followed, trip
spent his days wandering the halls, hoping for lux to appear, the most
naked person with clothes on he had ever s
 
 ___________________________
 
he smiled, her mouth showed too many teeth, but at night trip
fontaine dreamed of being bitten by each one.

he didn't know the first step in pursuing her because he'd always been
the one pursued. little by little, from the girls who came up to his
bedroom, he learned where lux lived, though he had to be discreet in his
questions in order to avoid provoking their jealousy. he began driving
by the lisbon house in hopes of getting a glimpse of her, or the
consolation prize of a sister. unlike us, trip fontaine never mixed up
the lisbon girls, but from the outset saw lux as their shining pinnacle.
he opened the windows of his trans am as he drove by, turning up his
eight-track so that she might hear his favorite song in her bedroom.
other times, unable to control the riot in his gut, he floored the
accelerator, leaving behind as a love token only the smell of burning
rubber.

he didn't understand how she had bewitched him, nor why having done so
she promptly forgot his existence, and in desperate mood
 
 ___________________________
 
ave given. first of all, they told him on
no account to call lux on the telephone. "it's so all subtlety," donald
said. "it's all nuance." rather than making overt declarations, they
suggested that trip speak to lux only about the most mundane things, the
weather, school assignments, anything that gave him an opportunity to
communicate with the silent but unerring language of eye contact. they
made him get rid of his tinted lenses, and keep his hair out of his face
with hair spray. the next day trip fontaine took a seat in the science
wing and waited for lux to pass by on the way to her locker. the rising
sun turned the honeycomb panels the color of a blush. each time the ramp
doors opened, trip saw lux's face float forward, before her eyes, nose,
and mouth rearranged into the face of some other girl. he took this as a
bad omen, as though lux were continually disguising herself in order to
evade him. he feared she would never come, or, worse, that she would.

after a week without seeing her, he dec
 
 ___________________________
 
eferred to spend the time smoking the hookah
pipe running from his glove compartment. he had no idea where lux would
sit, and lingered at the drinking fountain, intending to follow her in.

against the advice of his father and donald, he put on sunglasses to
conceal his staring down the hall. three times his heart jumped at the
decoys of lux's sisters, but mr. woodhouse had already introduced the
day's speaker-a local television at meteorologist-by the time lux came
out of the girls' bathroom. trip fontaine saw her with a concentration
so focused he ceased to exist. the world at that moment contained only
lux. a fuzzy aura surrounded her, a shimmering as of atoms breaking
apart, brought on, we later decided, from so much blood draining out of
trip's head. she passed right by him without noticing, and in that
instant he smelled not cigarettes as he expected, but watermelon gum.

he followed her into the colonial clarity of the auditorium with its
monticello dome, doric pilasters, and imitation gas 
 
 ___________________________
 
lanterns we used to
fill with milk. he sat next to her in the last row, and though he
avoided looking at her, it was no use: with organs of sense he hadn't
realized he possessed, trip fontaine felt lux beside him, registered her
body temperature, heartbeat, respiration rate, all the pumping and flow
of her body. the auditorium lights dimmed as the weatherman began
showing slides, and soon they were in the dark together, alone despite
four hundred students and forty-five teachers. paralyzed by love, trip
didn't move once as tornadoes flashed on the screen, and it was fifteen
minutes before he got up the courage to place a sliver of forearm along
the armrest. once he did, an inch of sp
 
 ___________________________
 
ace still separated them, so over
the next twenty minutes, with infinitesimal advances that made his whole
body sweat, trip fontaine moved his arm toward hers. as all other eyes
watched hurricane zelda tear toward a coastal caribbean town, the hairs
on trip's arm brushed lux's, and electricity surged through the new
circuit. without turning, without breathing, lux responded with equal
pressure, then trip applied more, she responded, and so on and so on,
until they were joined at the elbow. right then, it happened: a
prankster in front, cupping his hands over his mouth, made a farting
noise, and the room rippled with laughter
 
 ___________________________
 
. lux blanched, pulling her arm
away, but trip fontaine took the opportunity to whisper the first words
he had ever spoken in her ear: "that must've been conley," he said. "his

ass is grass."

in response, she didn't so much as nod. but trip, still leaning toward
her, continued: "i'm going to ask your old man if i can take you out."

"fat chance," said lux, not looking at him. the lights came up, and all
around them students began clapping. trip waited for the applause to
peak before he spoke again. then he said, "first i'm going to come over
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
watch the tube at your house. this sunday. then i'm going to ask you
out."

again he waited for her to speak, but the only sign she'd heard came
from her hand which, turning palm up, suggested he could do what he
liked. trip stood up to go, but before doing so leaned over the back of
his vacated seat as the words he'd been keeping down for weeks came
pouring out. "you're a stone fox," he said, and took off.

trip fontaine became the first boy after peter sissen to enter the
lisbon house alone. he did so simply by telling lux when he would arrive
and leaving her to tell her parents. none of us could explain how we had
missed him, especially as he insisted during his interview that he had
taken no stealthy measures, driving up in plain sight and parking his
trans am in front of an elm stump so it wouldn't get covered with sap.
he'd had his hair cut for the occasion, and instead of a western getup
wore a white shir
 
 ___________________________
 
t and black pants like a caterer. lux met him at the
door and, without saying much (she was keeping track of her knitting),
led him to his assigned seat in the living room. he sat on the couch
beside mrs. lisbon, with lux on her other side. trip fontaine told us
the girls paid him little attention, certainly less than a school
heartthrob would expect. therese sat in the corner, holding a stuffed
iguana and explaining to bonnie what iguanas ate, how they reproduced,
and what their natural habitat was like. the only sister who spoke to
trip was mary, who kept offering to refill his coke. a walt disney
special was on, and the lisbons watched it with the acceptance of a

family accustomed to bland entertainment, laughing together at the same
lame 
 
 ___________________________
 
stunts, sitting up during the rigged climaxes. trip fontaine didn't
see any signs of twistedness in the girls, but later he did say, "you
would have killed yourself just to have something to do." mrs. lisbon
oversaw lux's knitting. before the channel could be changed, she
consulted tv guide to judge the program's suitability. the curtains were
thick as canvas. a few spindly plants sat on the windowsill, and this
differed so much from his own leafy living room (mr. fontaine was a
gardening buff) that trip would have felt he was on a dead planet had it
not
 
 ___________________________
 
d. at ten o'clock, taking a cue from his wife,
mr. lisbon slapped trip on the back and said, "well, son, we usually hit
the hay about now." trip shook his hand, then mrs. lisbon's colder one,
and lux stepped forward to escort him out. she must have seen the
situation was futile, because she hardly looked at him during the short
trip to the door. she walked with her head down, digging in her ear for
wax, and looked up as she opened the door to give him a sad smile that
promised only frustration. trip fontaine left crushed, knowing that all
he could hope for was another night on the sofa beside mrs. lisbon. he
walked across the lawn, uninown since cecilia died. he sat in his car,
gazing at the house, watching as downstairs lights traded places with
those upstairs, and then, one by one, went out. he thought about lux
getting ready for bed, and just the idea of her holding a toothbrush
excited him more than the fullfledged nudity he saw in his own bedroom
nearly every night. he laid his head back on th
 
 ___________________________
 

get back before bed check," lux left him, more dead than alive.

even though that lightning attack lasted only three minutes, it left its
mark on him. he spoke of it as one might of a religious experience, a
visitation or vision, any rupture into this life from beyond that cannot
be described in words. "sometimes i think i dreamed it," he told us,
recalling the voracity of those hundred mouths that had sucked out his
juice in the dark, and even though he went on to enjoy an enviable love
life, trip fontaine confessed it was all anticlimactic. never again were
his intestines yanked with such delectable force, nor did he ever again
feel the sensation of being entirely wetted by another's saliva.

"i felt like a stamp," he said. years later he was still amazed by lux's
singleness of purpose, her total lack of inhibitions, her mythic
mutability that allowed her to possess three or four arms at once. "most
people never taste that kind of love," he said, taking courage amid the
disaster of his life. "at
 
 ___________________________
 
 or presiding

tearfully at his deathbed. they were warm, loving, hot-water-bottle
women. even the screamers of his adult years always hit false notes, and
no erotic intensity ever matched the silence in which lux flayed him
alive.

we never learned whether mrs. lisbon caught lux as she tried to sneak
back inside, but for whatever reason, when trip tried to make another
date to come sit on the couch, lux told him she was grounded, and that
her mother had forbidden any future visits. at school, trip fontaine was
cagey about what had passed between them, and though stories circulated
about their sneaking off into various enclosures, he insisted the only
time they ever touched was in the car. "at school, we could never find a
place to go. her old man kept a close eye on her. it was agony, man.
fucking agony."

in dr. hornicker's opinion, lux's promiscuity was a commonplace reaction
to emotional need. "adolescents tend to seek love where they can find
it," he wrote in one of the many articles he hoped
 
 ___________________________
 
ublish. "lux
confused the sexual act with love. for her, sex became a substitute for
the comfort she needed as a result of her sister's suicide." a few of
the boys did provide details that supported this theory. willard said
that once, while they lay together in the field house, lux asked him if
he thought what they had done was dirty. "i knew what to say. i said no.
then she grabs my hand and goes, "you like me, don't yout i didn't say
anything. it's best to keep chicks guessing." years later, trip fontaine
was irritated by our suggestion that lux's passion might have come from
a misplaced need. "what are you saying, that i was just a vehicle?

you can't fake that, man. it was real." we even managed to bring up the
subject with mrs. lisbon during our single interview with her in a bus
station cafeteria, but she grew rigid. "none of my daughters lacked for
any love. we had plenty of love in our house."

it was hard to tell. as october came, the lisbon house began to look

less cheerful. the blue s
 
 ___________________________
 
 for the mother," mrs. eugene
said. "you would always wonder if there was something you could have
done." as for the suffering, surviving girls, they grew in stature like
the kennedys. kids once again sat next to them on the bus. leslie
tompkins borrowed mary's brush to tame her long red hair. julie winthrop
smoked with lux atop the lockers, and said the shaking episode was not

repeated. day by day, the girls appeared to be getting over their loss.

it was during this convalescent period that trip fontaine made his move.
without consulting anyone or confessing his feelings for lux, trip
fontaine walked into mr. lisbon's classroom and stood at attention
before his desk. he found mr. lisbon alone, in his swivel chair, staring
vacantly at the planets hanging above his head. a youthful cowlick
sprang from his gray hair. "it's fourth period, trip," he said wearily.
"i don't have you until fifth."

"i'm not here for math today, sir."

"you're not?"

"i'm here to tell you that my intentions toward your 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
wanted to his wife wouldn't let him, ha ha, and while it was fine if
trip wanted to come over to watch television again, he could not, repeat
not, take lux out, especially in a car. mr. lisbon spoke, trip told us,
with surprising sympathy, as though he, too, recalled the below-thebelt
pain of adolescence. he could also tell how starved mr. lisbon was for a
son, because as he spoke he got up and gave trip's shoulders three
sporting shakes. "i'm afraid it's just our policy," he said, finally.

trip fontaine saw the doors closing. then he saw the family photograph
on mr. lisbon's desk. before a ferris wheel, lux held in one red fist a
candy apple whose polished surface reflected the baby fat under her
chin. one side of her sugarcoated lips had come unstuck, showing a
tooth. "what if it was a bunch of us guys?" trip fontaine said. "and we
took out your other daughters, too, like in a group? and we had them
back by whatever time you say."

trip fontaine made this new offer in a controlled voice, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ked at him a long time.
"you on the football squad, son?"

"yes, sir."

"what position?"

"offensive tackle."

"i played safety in my day."

"crucial position, sir. nothing between you and the goal line."

"exactly."

"thing is, sir, we've got the big homecoming game against country day,
and then the dance and everything, and all the guys on the team are
going with dates. "

"you're a good-looking young fella. lots of girls would go with you, i
bet."

"i'm not interested in lots of girls, sir," trip fontaine said. mr.
lisbon sat back down in his chair. he drew a long breath. he looked at

the photograph of his family, one face of which, smiling dreamily, no
longer existed. "i'll take it up with their mother," he said, finally.
"i'll do what i can." that was how a few of us came to take the girls on
the only unchaperoned date they ever had. as soon as he left mr.
lisbon's classroom, trip fontaine began assembling his team. at football
practice that afternoon, during wind sprints, he said, "i'm taki
 
 ___________________________
 
ng lux
lisbon to homecoming. all i need is three guys for the other chicks.
who's it going to be?" running twentyyard intervals, gasping for breath,
in clumsy pads and unclean athletic socks, we each tried to convince
trip fontaine to pick us. jerry burden offered three free joints. parkie
denton said they could take his father's cadillac. we all said
something. buzz romano, nicknamed "rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "i'm dying! i'm dying! you
got to pick me, tripster!"

in the end, parkie denton won because of the cadillac, kevin head
because he'd helped trip fontaine tune up his car, and joe hill conley
b
 
 ___________________________
 
ts, making a living. the lisbon girls received free tuition
because of their father's position, but mary had once told julie ford
this made her feel "like a charity case." now he would be patrolling the
dance along with other teachers who had volunteered or been forced to
chaperon, usually the most uncoordinated teachers who didn't coach a
sport, or the most socially inept for whom the dance was a way of
filling another lonely night. lux didn't seem to mind because her
thoughts were filled with trip fontaine. she had gone back to writing
names on her underthings, using water-soluble ink so that she could wash

the "trips" off before her mother saw them. (all day, however, his name
had been continuously announcing itself against her skin.) presumably
she confessed her feelings about trip to her sisters, but no girl at
school ever heard her mention his name. trip and lux sat together at
lunch, and sometimes we saw them walking the halls, searching for a
closet or bin or heating duct to lie down insi
 
 ___________________________
 
s. she walked up and down, practicing, until
parkie denton's car appeared at the end of the block. then she turned,
rang her own doorbell to warn her sisters, and disappeared inside again.

left out, we watched the boys drive up. parkie denton's yellow cadillac
floated down the street, the boys suspended in the car's inner
atmosphere. though it was raining, and the windshield wipers were going,
the car's interior had a warm glow. as they passed joe larson's house,
the boys gave us a thumbs-up.

trip fontaine got out first. he'd pushed up his jacket sleeves as male
models did in his father's fashion magazines. he was wearing a thin tie.
parkie denton had on a blue blazer, as did kevin head, and then joe hill
conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and communist. at that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until trip fontaine finally headed up the front path. we lost sight of
them at the do
 
 ___________________________
 
the stairs. it was dim up there
(three of twelve chandelier bulbs had burned out), and they held the
banister lightly as they descended. their loose dresses reminded kevin
head of choir robes. "they didn't seem to notice, though. personally, i
think they liked the dresses. or else they were just so happy to be
going out they didn't care what they wore. i didn't care, either. they
looked great."

only when the girls reached the bottom did the boys realize they hadn't
decided who was taking whom. trip fontaine, of course, had dibs on lux,
but the other three girls were up for grabs. fortunately, their dresses
and hairdos homogenized them. once again the boys weren't even sure
which girl was which. instead of asking, they did the only thing they
could think of doing: they presented the corsages. "we got white," trip
fontaine said. "we didn't know what color you were wearing. the flower
guy said white would go with everything."

"i'm glad you got white," said lux. she reached out and took the
corsage, 
 
 ___________________________
 
s. in the car, however, beside the actual living girls, the boys
realized the paltriness of these images. inverse properties were also
discarded: notions of the girls as damaged or demented. (the crazy old
lady in the elevator every day turns out to be, when you finally speak
to her, perfectly lucid.) something like this revelation came over the
boys. "they weren't all that different from my sister," kevin head said.
lux, complaining she never got to, wanted to sit up front. she slid in
between trip fontaine and parkie denton. mary, bonnie, and therese
crowded into the back seat, with bonnie getting the hump. joe hill
conley and kevin head sat on either side against the back doors.

even up close, the girls didn't look depressed. they settled into the

seats, not minding the tight fit. mary half sat in kevin head's lap.
they began chattering immediately. as houses passed, they had something
to say about the families in each one, which meant that they had been
looking out at us as intensely as we h
 
 ___________________________
 
 bus. they drove on,
past the glittering lake, and finally under the ragged cover of elms
near the school. "hold on a sec," lux said. "i want a cig before we go
in."

"dad'll smell it on you," bonnie said from the back seat.

"nah, i've got mints." she shook them. "he'll smell it on our clothes."

"just tell him some kids were smoking in the bathroom. " parkie denton
lowered the front window while lux smoked. she took her time, exhaling
through her nose.

at one point she jutted out her chin at trip fontaine, rounded her lips,
and, with a chimpanzee profile, sent forth three perfect smoke rings.
"don't let it die a virgin," joe hill conley said. he leaned into the
front seat and poked one.

"that's gross," said therese. "yeah, conley," trip fontaine said. "grow
up."

on the way into the dance, the couples separated.

one of bonnie's high heels got stuck in the gravel and she leaned on joe
hill conley while she detached it. trip fontaine and lux moved on
together, already an item. kevin head walked 
 
 ___________________________
 
 followed. "so i
followed her," joe hill conley said. "she pretended she was just walking
around, but she kept track of lux from the corner of her eye." they went
in one side of the dance mob and out the other. they hugged the far wall
of the gym, passing beneath the decorated basketball net, and ended up
by the bleachers. between songs, mr. durid . dean of students. opened

the voting for homecoming king and queen, and while everyone was looking
toward the glass ballot jar on the cider table, trip fontaine and lux
lisbon slipped underneath the bleachers.

bonnie pursued them. "it was like she was afraid of being left alone,"
joe hill conley said. though she hadn't asked him to, he followed her.
underneath, in the stripes of light coming through the slats, he saw
trip fontaine holding a bottle up to lux's face so she could read the
label. "did anybody see you come in?" lux asked her sister. "no."

"what about you?"

"no," joe hill conley said.

then no one spoke. everyone's attention returned to t
 
 ___________________________
 
he bottle trip
fontaine held in his hand. reflections from the disco ball glittered on
the bottle's surface, illuminating the inflamed fruit on the label.
"peach schnapps," trip fontaine explained years later, in the desert,
drying out from that and everything else. "babes love it."

he had purchased the liqueur with a fake 1. d. that afternoon, and had
carried it in the lining of his jacket all evening. now, as the other
three watched, he unscrewed the bottle cap and sipped the syrup that was
like nectar or honey. "you have to taste it with a kiss," he said. he
held the bottle to lux's lips, saying, "don't swallow." then, taking
another swig, he brought his mouth to lux's in a
 
 ___________________________
 
or of her last meal, and past that the dust of lost
afternoons and the salt of tear ducts. the peach schnapps faded away as
he sampled the juices of her inner organs, all slightly acidic with woe.
sometimes her lips grew strangely cold, and, peeking, he saw she kissed
with her frightened eyes wide open. after that, the schnapps went back
and forth. we asked the boys if they had talked intimately with the
girls, or asked them about cecilia, but they said no. "i didn't want to
ruin a good thing," trip fontaine said. and joe hill conley: "there's a
time for talk and a time for silence." even though he tasted mysterious
depths in bonnie's mouth, he didn't search them out because he didn't
want her to stop kissing him.

we saw the girls come out from underneath the bleachers, dragging their
dresses and wiping their mouths. lux moved sassily to the music. it was
then trip fontaine finally got to dance with her, and years later he
told us the baggy dress had only increased his desire. "you could feel
how 
 
 ___________________________
 
ned to

move in them. lux found a way of arching her back that made her dress
tight in front. we walked past them whenever we could, going to the
bathroom twenty times and drinking twenty glasses of cider. we tried to
grill the boys in order to participate vicariously in the date, but they
wouldn't leave the girls alone for a minute. when the balloting for king
and queen was finished, mr. durid mounted the portable stage and
announced the winners. everyone knew the king and queen could only be
trip fontaine and lux lisbon, and even girls in hundred-dollar dresses
applauded as they made their way forward. then they danced, and we all
danced, cutting in on head and conley and denton to dance with the
lisbon girls ourselves. they were flushed by the time they got to us,
damp under the arms and giving off heat from their high necklines. we
held their sweaty palms, turning them under the mirrored ball. we lost
them in the vastness of their dresses and found them again, squeezed the
pulp of their bodies
 
 ___________________________
 
treet, as though
a hundred eyes and not only uncle tucker's two were watching. mr. lisbon
also turned. as did lux. the three of them stared into the largely
lightless neighborhood, where trees continued to drip, and cars slept in
garages and carports, engines pinging all night as they cooled. they
stayed very still, and then mrs. lisbon's hand fell limply to her side,
and lux saw her chance. she shot by her, up the stairs, into her room.

we learned only years later what had happened to lux and trip fontaine.
even then trip fontaine told us with extreme reluctance, insisting, as
the twelve steps mandated, that he was a changed man. after their dance
as homecoming king and queen, trip had ushered lux through the knot of
applauding subjects to the very door where therese and kevin head had
gone to get some air. "we were hot from dancing," he said. lux was still

wearing the miss america tiara mr. durid had placed on her head. they
both bore royal ribbons across their chests. "what do we do now?" lux
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"i thought it was for all year long."

"well, it is. but we don't do anything."

lux took this in. "i think it stopped raining," she said. "let's go
outside."

"i better not. we've got to go in a minute. "we can keep an eye on the
car. they won't leave without us."

"my dad," lux said. "just say you had to put your crown in your locker."

it had indeed stopped raining, but the air was misty when they crossed
the street and walked hand in hand over the soggy football field. "see
that divot," trip fontaine said. "that's where i reamed this guy today.
cross-body block." they walked past the fifty, the forty, and into the
end zone, where no one saw them. the white stripe uncle tucker later saw
on lux's coat came from the goal line she lay down upon. throughout the
act,. headlights came on across the field, sweeping over them, lighting
up the goalpost. lux said, in the middle, "i always screw things up. i
always do," and began to sob. trip fontaine told us little more.

we asked him if he put her in
 
 ___________________________
 
mned at that auto-da-f6, but apparently lux held up
album after album, appealing for mrs. lisbon's mercy. the smell quickly
grew overpowering, and the plastic melted over the andirons, so that
mrs. lisbon told lux to stop. (she threw out the rest of the albums with
that week's trash.) still, will timber, who was getting a grape pop,
said he could smell burning plastic all the way to mr. z's, the party
store on kercheval.

for the next few weeks we hardly saw the girls at all. lux never spoke
to trip fontaine again, nor did joe hill conley call bonnie, as he had

promised. mrs. lisbon took the girls to their grandmother's house to get
advice from an old woman who had lived through everything. when we
called her in roswell, new mexico, where she had moved after living
forty-three years in the same single-story house, the old lady (mrs.
lema crawford) did not respond to questions about her involvement in the
punishment, either out of stubbornness or because of the feedback her
hearing aid picked up o