egret to
say, no. at least ten percent of my students were born with modernist
tendencies. i ask you: is dullness a gift? intelligence a curse? i'm
forty-seven years old and live alone."

day by day, the girls ostracized themselves. because they stayed in a
group, other girls found it difficult to talk or walk with them, and
many assumed they wanted to be left alone. and the more the lisbon girls
were left alone, the more they retreated. sheila davis told of being in
an english study group with bonnie lisbon. "we were discussing this book
portrait of a lady. we had to do a character sketch on ralph. bonnie
didn't say much at first. but then she reminded us how ralph always
keeps his hands in his pockets. then, like a jerk, i go, "it's really
sad when he dies.' i wasn't even thinking. grace hilton elbowed me and i
turned purple. it got totally quiet."

it was mrs. woodhouse, the headmaster's wife, who came up with the idea
for the "day of grieving." she had majored in psychology in college and
now, 
 
 ___________________________
 
p joints
lacked lubrication. because he was so skinny himself from his liquid
beer diet, we believed uncle tucker's statements about bonnie's weight.
it wasn't as if mrs. amberson had said bonnie was wasting away. compared
to her, everyone was. but uncle tucker's turquoise-and-silver belt
buckle looked as big on him as the jeweled belt of a heavyweight champ.
he knew what he was talking about. and, peering from his garage, one
hand on the refrigerator, he watched as with uncoordinated movements
bonnie lisbon came down the two front steps, proceeded across the lawn
to the small dirt mound left from the digging months ago, and, at the
site of her sister's death, began to say the rosary. holding the pillow
in one hand, she told her beads with the other, making sure to finish
before the first house light came on down the block and the neighborhood
awoke.

we didn't know whether it was asceticism or starvation. she looked
peaceful, uncle tucker said, without the feverish appetite of lux, or
the tight-li