hing her good purse, she checked each
daughter for signs of makeup before allowing her to get in the car, and
it was not unusual for her to send lux back inside to put on a less
revealing top. none of us went to church, so we had a lot of time to
watch them, the two parents leached of color, like photographic
negatives, and then the five glittering daughters in their homemade

dresses, all lace and ruffle, bursting with their fructifying flesh.

only one boy had ever been allowed in the house. peter sissen had helped
mr. lisbon install a working model of the solar system in his classroom
at school, and in return mr. lisbon had invited him for dinner. he told
us the girls had kicked him continually under the table, from every
direction, so that he couldn't tell who was doing it. they gazed at him
with their blue febrile eyes and smiled, showing their crowded teeth,
the only feature of the lisbon girls we could ever find fault with.
bonnie was the only one who didn't give peter sissen a secret look
 
 ___________________________
 
 or
kick. she only said grace and ate her food silently, lost in the piety
of a fifteen-yearold. after the meal peter sissen asked to go to the
bathroom, and because therese and mary were both in the downstairs one,
giggling and whispering, he had to use the girls', upstairs. he came
back to us with stories of bedrooms filled with crumpled panties, of
stuffed animals hugged to death by the passion of the girls, of a
crucifix draped with a brassiere, of gauzy chambers of canopied beds,
and of the effluvia of so many young girls becoming women together in
the same cramped space. in the bathroom, running the faucet to c
 
 ___________________________
 
loak the
sounds of his search, peter sissen found mary lisbon's secret cache of
cosmetics tied up in a sock under the sink: tubes of red lipstick and
the second skin of blush and base, and the depilatory wax that informed
us she had a mustache we had never seen. in fact, we didn't know whose
makeup peter sissen had found until we saw mary lisbon two weeks later
on the pier with a crimson mouth that matched the shade of his
descriptions.

he inventoried deodorants and perfumes and scouring pads for rubbing
away dead skin, and we were surprised to learn that there were no
douches anywhere because we had thought girls douched every night like
brushing their teeth. but our disappointment was forgotten in the next
second when sissen told us of a discovery that went beyond our wildest
imaginings. in the tra
 
 ___________________________
 
xes of tampax in the cupboard. it was only then that
lux knocked on the door, asking if he had died in there, and he sprang
to open it. her hair, held up by a barrette at dinner, fell over her
shoulders now. she didn't move into the bathroom but stared into his
eyes. then, laughing her hyena's laugh, she pushed past him, saying,
"you done hogging the bathroom? i need something."

she walked to the cupboard, then stopped and folded her hands behind
her. "it's private. do you mind?" she said, and peter sissen sped down
the stairs, blushing, and after thanking mr. and mrs. lisbon, hurried
off to tell us that lux lisbon was bleeding between the legs that very
instant, while the fish flies made the sky filthy and the streetlamps
came on.

when paul baldino heard peter sissen's story, he swore that he would get
inside the lisbons' house and see things even more unthinkable than
sissen had. "i'm going to watch those girls taking their showers," he
vowed. already, at the age of fourteen, paul baldino had 
 
 ___________________________
 
of studying for exams, she spent study halls looking up italy in the
encyclopedia. she started saying "ciao," and began slipping into st.
paul's catholic church on the lake to sprinkle her forehead with holy
water. in the cafeteria, even on hot days when the place was thick with
the fumes of institutional food, cecilia always chose the spaghetti and
meatballs, as though by eating the same food as dominic palazzolo she
could be closer to him. at the height of her crush she purchased the
crucifix peter sissen had seen decorated with the brassiere.

the supporters of this theory always pointed to one central fact: the
week before cecilia's suicide attempt, dominic palazzolo's family had

called him to new mexico. he went telling god to fuck himself all over
again because new mexico was even farther from switzerland, where, right
that minute, diana porter strolled under summer trees, moving
unstoppably away from the world he was going to inherit as the owner of
a carpet cleaning service. cecilia had 
 
 ___________________________
 
w bricks
retained their look of a church-run orphanage and the silence of the
lawn was absolute. the curtains didn't rustle, nor did a van deliver
six-foot submarine sandwiches or drums of potato chips.

then the night arrived. in blue blazers, with khaki trousers and clip-on
neckties, we walked along the sidewalk in front of the lisbon house as
we had so many times before, but this time we turned up the walk, and
climbed the front steps between the pots of red geraniums, and rang the
doorbell. peter sissen acted as our leader, and even looked slightly
bored, saying again and again, "wait'll you see this." the door opened.

above us, the face of mrs. lisbon took form in the dimness. she told us
to come in, we bumped against each other getting through the doorway,
and as soon as we set foot on the hooked rug in the foyer we saw that
peter sissen's descriptions of the house had been all wrong. instead of
a heady atmosphere of feminine chaos, we found the house to be a tidy,
dry-looking place that s
 
 ___________________________
 
hen he said, "first i'm going to come over
and watch the tube at your house. this sunday. then i'm going to ask you
out."

again he waited for her to speak, but the only sign she'd heard came
from her hand which, turning palm up, suggested he could do what he
liked. trip stood up to go, but before doing so leaned over the back of
his vacated seat as the words he'd been keeping down for weeks came
pouring out. "you're a stone fox," he said, and took off.

trip fontaine became the first boy after peter sissen to enter the
lisbon house alone. he did so simply by telling lux when he would arrive
and leaving her to tell her parents. none of us could explain how we had
missed him, especially as he insisted during his interview that he had
taken no stealthy measures, driving up in plain sight and parking his
trans am in front of an elm stump so it wouldn't get covered with sap.
he'd had his hair cut for the occasion, and instead of a western getup
wore a white shirt and black pants like a caterer. lux me
 
 ___________________________
 
ts snapping closed? of jewelry rattling? of the hunchback
foot-dragging sound of the girls carrying suitcases down an anonymous
corridor? unknown roads took shape in our minds. we saw ourselves
cutting swaths through cattails, freshwater inlets, old boatyards. at
some gas station we would ask for the ladies' room key because the girls
would be too shy. we would play the radio with the windows open.

sometime during this reverie, the house went silent. we assumed the
girls had finished packing. peter sissen took out his penlight and made
a shallow foray into the dining room, coming back to say, "one of them
is still downstairs. there's a light on in the stairway." we stood, we
waved the penlight, we waited for the girls, but no one came. tom faheem
tried the first stair, but it creaked so loudly he came back down again.
the silence of the house rang in our ears. a car passed, sending a
shadow sweeping across the dining room, momentarily lighting up the
painting of the pilgrims. the dining table wa
 
 ___________________________
 
tograph of the deceased like a coptic headstone, and kept
in our refurbished tree house in one of our last trees: (#i) ms.
d'angelo's polaroid of the house, scummed by a greenish patina that
looks like moss; (#18) mary's old cosmetics drying out and turning to
beige dust; (#32) cecilia's canvas high-tops yellowing beyond remedy of
toothbrush and dish soap; (#57) bonnie's votive candles nibbled nightly
by mice; (#62) therese's specimen slides showing new invading bacteria;
(#81) lux's brassiere (peter sissen stole it from the crucifix, we might
as well admit it now) becoming as stiff and prosthetic as something a
grandmother might wear.

we haven't kept our tomb sufficiently airtight, and our sacred objects
are perishing.

in the end we had pieces of the puzzle, but no matter how we put them
together, gaps remained, oddly shaped emptinesses mapped by what
surrounded them, like countries we couldn't name. "all wisdom ends in
paradox," said mr. buell, just before we left him on our last interview,
an