r's mind an image of a mythical creature with ten
legs and five heads, lying in bed eating junk food, or suffering visits
from affectionate aunts. most of the diary told us more about how the
girls came to be than why they killed themselves. we got tired of
hearing about what they ate ("monday, february 13. today we had frozen
pizza .. ."), or what they wore, or which colors they favored. they all
detested creamed corn. mary had chipped her tooth on the monkey bars and
had a cap. ("i told you," kevin head said, reading that.) and so we
learned about their lives, came to hold collective memories of times we
hadn't experienced, harbored private images of lux leaning over the side

of a ship to stroke her first whale, and saying, "i didn't think they
would stink so much," while therese answered, "it's the kelp in their
baleens rotting." we became acquainted with starry skies the girls had
gazed at while camping years before, and the boredom of summers
traipsing from back yard to front to back agai
 
 ___________________________
 

in clumsy pads and unclean athletic socks, we each tried to convince
trip fontaine to pick us. jerry burden offered three free joints. parkie
denton said they could take his father's cadillac. we all said
something. buzz romano, nicknamed "rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "i'm dying! i'm dying! you
got to pick me, tripster!"

in the end, parkie denton won because of the cadillac, kevin head
because he'd helped trip fontaine tune up his car, and joe hill conley
because he won all the school prizes, which trip thought would impress
mr. and mrs. lisbon. the next day trip presented the slate to mr.
lisbon, and by the end of the week mr. lisbon announced his and his
wife's decision. the girls could go under the following conditions: (1)
they would go in a group; (2) they would go to the dance and nowhere
else; (3) they would be home by eleven. mr. lisbon told trip it would be
impossibl
 
 ___________________________
 
.

left out, we watched the boys drive up. parkie denton's yellow cadillac
floated down the street, the boys suspended in the car's inner
atmosphere. though it was raining, and the windshield wipers were going,
the car's interior had a warm glow. as they passed joe larson's house,
the boys gave us a thumbs-up.

trip fontaine got out first. he'd pushed up his jacket sleeves as male
models did in his father's fashion magazines. he was wearing a thin tie.
parkie denton had on a blue blazer, as did kevin head, and then joe hill
conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and communist. at that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until trip fontaine finally headed up the front path. we lost sight of
them at the door, but they told us the beginning of the date was like
any other. the girls had gone upstairs, pretending not to be ready, and
mr. lisbon took the boys into the living room.

"the gi
 
 ___________________________
 
yfully fleeing at the
ice-skating rink, dangling ski-hat pompoms like ripe fruit before our
faces. in the car, however, beside the actual living girls, the boys
realized the paltriness of these images. inverse properties were also
discarded: notions of the girls as damaged or demented. (the crazy old
lady in the elevator every day turns out to be, when you finally speak
to her, perfectly lucid.) something like this revelation came over the
boys. "they weren't all that different from my sister," kevin head said.
lux, complaining she never got to, wanted to sit up front. she slid in
between trip fontaine and parkie denton. mary, bonnie, and therese
crowded into the back seat, with bonnie getting the hump. joe hill
conley and kevin head sat on either side against the back doors.

even up close, the girls didn't look depressed. they settled into the

seats, not minding the tight fit. mary half sat in kevin head's lap.
they began chattering immediately. as houses passed, they had something
to say ab
 
 ___________________________
 
n at trip fontaine, rounded her lips,
and, with a chimpanzee profile, sent forth three perfect smoke rings.
"don't let it die a virgin," joe hill conley said. he leaned into the
front seat and poked one.

"that's gross," said therese. "yeah, conley," trip fontaine said. "grow
up."

on the way into the dance, the couples separated.

one of bonnie's high heels got stuck in the gravel and she leaned on joe
hill conley while she detached it. trip fontaine and lux moved on
together, already an item. kevin head walked in with therese, while
parkie denton gave mary his arm.

the light rain had stopped for a moment and the stars were out, in
patches. as bonnie's shoe came loose, she looked up and called attention
to the sky. "it's always the big dipper," she said. "you look at those
charts and they have stars all over the place, but if you look up, all
you see is the big dipper."

"it's because of the lights," joe hill conley said. "from the city."

"duh," bonnie said.

the girls were smiling as they e
 
 ___________________________
 
 and therese got it off." when we asked if the lisbon
girls had spoken about their dates in the confessional surroundings of
the bathroom, hopie answered, "mary said she was happy her guy wasn't a
total geek. that was it, though. i don't think they cared so much about
their dates as just being at the dance. i felt the same way. i was there
with tim carter, the shrimpo."

when the girls came out of the bathroom, the dance floor was getting
more crowded, circulating couples slowly around the gym. kevin head
asked therese to dance and soon they were lost in the tumult. "god, i
was so young," he said years later. "so scared. so was she. i took her
hand and we didn't know which way to do it. to interlace fingers or not.
finally we did. that's what i remember most. the finger thing."

parkie denton remembers mary's studied movements, her poise. "she led,"
he said. "she had a kleenex balled in one hand."

during the dance, she made polite conversation, the kind beautiful young
women make with dukes dur
 
 ___________________________
 
een theirs and to press our
agony against them. in the dresses the lisbon girls looked identical
again, as they flowed from hand to hand, smiling, saying thank you,
thank you. a loose thread got caught in david stark's wristwatch, and as
mary untangled it, he asked, "are you having a good time?"

"i'm having the best time of my life," she said.

she was telling the truth. never before had the lisbon girls looked so
cheerful, mixed so much, or talked so freely. after one dance, while
therese and kevin head got some cool air in the doorway, therese asked,
"what made you guys ask us out?"

"what do you mean?"

"i mean, do you feel sorry for us?"

"no way."

"liar."

"i think you're pretty. that's why. "do we seem as crazy as everyone
thinks9"

"who thinks that?"

she didn't reply, only stuck her hand out the door to test for rain.
"cecilia was weird, but we're not." and then: "we just want to live. if
anyone would let us.

later, going to the car, bonnie stopped joe hill conley to look for the
sta
 
 ___________________________
 
rs again. everything was clouded over. as they gazed up at the dull
sky, she asked, "do you think there's a god?"

"yeah."

"me too."

by that time it was ten-thirty and the girls had only a half hour to get
back home. the dance was breaking up, and mr. lisbon's car emerged from
the faculty parking lot, heading home. kevin head and therese, joe hill
conley and bonnie, parkie denton and mary all converged at the cadillac,
but lux and trip didn't follow. bonnie ran back into the gymnasium to
check, but they couldn't be found. "maybe they went home with your dad,"
parkie denton said. "i doubt it," said mary, looking off into the dark
and fingering her crushed corsage. the girls took off their high heels
so they could walk better, and searched in among the parked cars and by
the flagpole that had flown at half-mast the da
 
 ___________________________
 
ing and coming back together. they searched over
near the theater, behind the science wing, and even in the courtyard
where the small statue of a girl stood, donated in memory of laura

white, her bronze skirt just beginning to oxidize. sears crossed her
welded wrists, symbolically, but the lisbon girls didn't notice, or say
anything when they returned to the car at 10:50 p.m. they got in to be
taken home.

the ride back happened mostly in silence. joe hill conley and bonnie sat
in back beside kevin head and therese. parkie denton drove, later
complaining that this afforded him no chance to make his move on mary.
mary, however, spent the ride fixing her hair in the sun-visor mirror.
therese said to her, "forget it. we're cooked."

"luxie is. not us."

"anyone have some mints or some gum?" bonnie asked. no one did, and she
turned to joe hill conley. she scrutinized him a moment, then, using her
fingers, combed his part over to the left side. "that looks better," she
said. nearly two decades late
 
 ___________________________
 
r, the little hair he has left remains
parted by bonnie's invisible hand.

outside the lisbon house, joe hill conley kissed bonnie for the last
time and she let him. therese gave kevin head her cheek. through steamed
windows the boys looked up at the house. mr. lisbon had already returned
and a light was on in the master bedroom. "we'll walk you to the door,"
parkie denton said. "no, don't," said mary. "why not?"

"just don't." she got out without so much as a handshake. "we had a
really good time," therese said in back. bonnie whispered into joe hill
conley's ear, "will you call me?"

"absolutely.

the car doors creaked open. the girls climbed out, adjusted themselves,
and went i
 
 ___________________________
 
y cooled. they
stayed very still, and then mrs. lisbon's hand fell limply to her side,
and lux saw her chance. she shot by her, up the stairs, into her room.

we learned only years later what had happened to lux and trip fontaine.
even then trip fontaine told us with extreme reluctance, insisting, as
the twelve steps mandated, that he was a changed man. after their dance
as homecoming king and queen, trip had ushered lux through the knot of
applauding subjects to the very door where therese and kevin head had
gone to get some air. "we were hot from dancing," he said. lux was still

wearing the miss america tiara mr. durid had placed on her head. they
both bore royal ribbons across their chests. "what do we do now?" lux
had asked. "whatever we want."

"i mean as king and queen. do we have to do something?"

"this is it. we danced. we got ribbons. it only lasts for tonight."

"i thought it was for all year long."

"well, it is. but we don't do anything."

lux took this in. "i think it stopped rai
 
 ___________________________
 
assing the war memorial and the black gates of the remaining
millionaires, and rode in silence toward the girls who had become real
to them at last. as they approached the lisbons' house, they saw a light
burning in a bedroom window. parkie denton held up his hand for the
other boys to slap. "pay dirt," he said. but their jubilation was
short-lived. for even before the car stopped they knew what had
happened. "it hit me in the pit of my stomach that those girls weren't
going on any more dates," kevin head told us years later. "the old bitch
had locked them up again. don't ask me how i knew. i just did."

the window shades had closed like eyelids and the shaggy flower beds
made the house look abandoned . in the window where the one light
burned, however, the shade rippled. a hand peeled it back, revealing a
hot yellow slice of face-bonnie, mary, therese, or even lux-looking down
the street. parkie denton tooted his horn, a short hopeful blast, but
just as the girl put her palm to the glass, the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ctions, hiding in shadows of
surviving trees. as we approached, some of us crawling army-style,
others still on two feet, the smell grew stronger. the air thickened.
soon we reached an invisible barrier: no one had gotten this close to
the lisbon house in months. we hesitated, and then paul baldino held his
hand in the air, giving the signal, and we went in closer. we grazed the
brick walls, crouching under windows and getting spider-web in our hair.
we came into the damp mess of the back yard. kevin head tripped on the
bird feeder, which was still lying there. it cracked in half, the
remaining seed spilling out onto the ground. we froze, but no lights
came on.

after a minute, we inched in closer. mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, but we paid no attention. we were too busy gazing up into the
darkness for a ladder of knotted bed sheets and a descending nightgown.
we saw nothing. the house rose above us, its windows reflecting dark
masses of leaves. in a whisper, chase buell reminded us that h