 he sprang
to open it. her hair, held up by a barrette at dinner, fell over her
shoulders now. she didn't move into the bathroom but stared into his
eyes. then, laughing her hyena's laugh, she pushed past him, saying,
"you done hogging the bathroom? i need something."

she walked to the cupboard, then stopped and folded her hands behind
her. "it's private. do you mind?" she said, and peter sissen sped down
the stairs, blushing, and after thanking mr. and mrs. lisbon, hurried
off to tell us that lux lisbon was bleeding between the legs that very
instant, while the fish flies made the sky filthy and the streetlamps
came on.

when paul baldino heard peter sissen's story, he swore that he would get
inside the lisbons' house and see things even more unthinkable than
sissen had. "i'm going to watch those girls taking their showers," he
vowed. already, at the age of fourteen, paul baldino had the gangster
gut and hit-man face of his father, sammy "the shark" baldino, and of
all the men who entered and 
 
 ___________________________
 
duced herself now as
bonaventure, had the sallow complexion and sharp nose of a nun. her eyes
watered and she was a foot taller than any of her sisters, mostly
because of the length of her neck which would one day hang from the end
of a rope. therese lisbon had a heavier face, the cheeks and eyes of a

cow, and she came forward to greet us on two left feet. mary lisbon's
hair was darker; she had a widow's peak and fuzz above her upper lip
that suggested her mother had found her depilatory wax. lux lisbon was
the only one who accorded with our image of the lisbon girls. she
radiated health and mischief. her dress fit tightly, and when she came
for-ward to shake our hands, she secretly moved one finger to tickle our
palms, giving off at the same time a strange gruff laugh. cecilia was
wearing, as usual, the wedding dress with the shorn hem. the dress was
vintage 1920s. it had sequins on the bust she didn't fill out, and
someone, either cecilia herself or the owner of the used clothing store,
had 
 
 ___________________________
 
parent reason,
had turned around and looked at him. he couldn't say she was beautiful
because all he could see were her eyes. the rest of her face the pulpy
lips, the blond sideburn fuzz, the nose with its candy-pink translucent
nostrils-registered dimly as the two blue eyes lifted him on a sea wave
and held him suspended. "she was the still point of the turning world,"
he told us, quoting eliot, whose collected poems he had found on the
shelf of the detoxification center. for the eternity that lux lisbon
looked at him, trip fontaine looked back, and the love he felt at that
moment, truer than all subsequent loves because it never had to survive
real life, still plagued him, even now in the desert, with his looks and
health wasted. "you never know what'll set the memory off," he told us.
"a baby's face. a bell on a cat's collar. anything."

they didn't exchange a single word. but in the weeks that followed, trip
spent his days wandering the halls, hoping for lux to appear, the most
naked person 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was always the same: their white
faces drifting in slow motion past us, while we pretended we hadn't been
looking for them at all, that we didn't know they existed.

we have a few documents from the time (exhibits #13-#15)therese's
chemistry write-ups, bonnie's history paper on simone weil, lux's
frequent forged excuses from phys. ed. she always used the same method,
faking the rigid t's and b's of her mother's signature and then, to

distinguish her own handwriting, penning her signature, lux lisbon,
below, the two beseeching l's reaching out for each other over the ditch
of the u and the barbed-wire x. julie winthrop also used to skip gym and
spent many classes with lux in the girls' locker room. "we used to climb
up on the lockers and smoke," she told us. "you couldn't see us from the
ground, and if any teachers came by, they couldn't tell where the smoke
was coming from. they usually thought whoever was smoking had already
left." according to julie winthrop, she and lux were only "cig f
 
 ___________________________
 
hem. lux found a way of arching her back that made her dress
tight in front. we walked past them whenever we could, going to the
bathroom twenty times and drinking twenty glasses of cider. we tried to
grill the boys in order to participate vicariously in the date, but they
wouldn't leave the girls alone for a minute. when the balloting for king
and queen was finished, mr. durid mounted the portable stage and
announced the winners. everyone knew the king and queen could only be
trip fontaine and lux lisbon, and even girls in hundred-dollar dresses
applauded as they made their way forward. then they danced, and we all
danced, cutting in on head and conley and denton to dance with the
lisbon girls ourselves. they were flushed by the time they got to us,
damp under the arms and giving off heat from their high necklines. we
held their sweaty palms, turning them under the mirrored ball. we lost
them in the vastness of their dresses and found them again, squeezed the
pulp of their bodies and inhaled th
 
 ___________________________
 
 hall, the bedroom on the right,
until the pinballmachine house was lit up in sectors. it was after 9
p.m. and no moon showed. birds had built nests in the old streetlamps,
so that light filtered down through straw and moulted feathers. the
birds had flown south long ago, but in dappled beams sheriff and the fat
one appeared once again in the doorway of the lisbon house. they were
carrying the stretcher, just as we expected, but when the porch light
came on we were not prepared for what we saw: lux lisbon, sitting up,
very much alive.

she appeared to be in pain, but as they carried her out of the house she
had the presence of mind to snatch up a reader's digest, which she later
read cover iso to cover in the hospital. in fact, despite her
convulsions (she was clutching her stomach), lux had dared to put on a
coat of the forbidden pink lipstick that tasted-so the boys on the roof
told us-like strawberries. woody clabault's sister had the same brand,
and once, after we got into his parents' liquo