g twentyyard intervals, gasping for breath,
in clumsy pads and unclean athletic socks, we each tried to convince
trip fontaine to pick us. jerry burden offered three free joints. parkie
denton said they could take his father's cadillac. we all said
something. buzz romano, nicknamed "rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "i'm dying! i'm dying! you
got to pick me, tripster!"

in the end, parkie denton won because of the cadillac, kevin head
because he'd helped trip fontaine tune up his car, and joe hill conley
because he won all the school prizes, which trip thought would impress
mr. and mrs. lisbon. the next day trip presented the slate to mr.
lisbon, and by the end of the week mr. lisbon announced his and his
wife's decision. the girls could go under the following conditions: (1)
they would go in a group; (2) they would go to the dance and nowhere
else; (3) they would be home by eleven. mr
 
 ___________________________
 

it. please don't touch. we're going to put the picture back in its
envelope now.

after that portrait was taken, the girls waited for the boys in
individual ways. bonnie and therese sat down to play a game of cards,
while mary stood very still in the middle of the living room, trying not
to wrinkle her dress. lux opened the front door and wobbled onto the
porch. at first we thought she had sprained her ankle, but then we saw
she was wearing high heels. she walked up and down, practicing, until
parkie denton's car appeared at the end of the block. then she turned,
rang her own doorbell to warn her sisters, and disappeared inside again.

left out, we watched the boys drive up. parkie denton's yellow cadillac
floated down the street, the boys suspended in the car's inner
atmosphere. though it was raining, and the windshield wipers were going,
the car's interior had a warm glow. as they passed joe larson's house,
the boys gave us a thumbs-up.

trip fontaine got out first. he'd pushed up his jacket sle
 
 ___________________________
 
eves as male
models did in his father's fashion magazines. he was wearing a thin tie.
parkie denton had on a blue blazer, as did kevin head, and then joe hill
conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and communist. at that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until trip fontaine finally headed up the front path. we lost sight of
them at the door, but they told us the beginning of the date was like
any other. the girls had gone upstairs, pretending not to be ready, and
mr. lisbon took 
 
 ___________________________
 
m weeping in the next room. he had sensed (this said many
years later, of course, when joe hill conley claimed to tap at will the
energy of his chakras) an ancient pain arising from mrs. lisbon, the sum
of her people's griefs. "she came from a sad race," he said. "it wasn't
only cecilia. the sadness had started long before. before america. the
girls had it, too." he had never noticed her bifocals before. "they cut
her eyes in half"

"which one of you is driving?" mrs. lisbon asked.

i am," said parkie denton. how long have you had your license?"

"two months. but i had my permit for a year before that."

"we don't usually like the girls to go out in cars.

so many accidents nowadays. it's raining and the roads will be slick. so
i hope you'll be very careful."

"we will."

"ok," mr. lisbon said, "third degree's over.

girls! "-delivered to the ceiling-"i've got to get going. i'll see you
at the dance, boys."

"see you there, mr. lisbon."

he went out, leaving the boys alone with his wife. she didn'
 
 ___________________________
 
fortunately, their dresses
and hairdos homogenized them. once again the boys weren't even sure
which girl was which. instead of asking, they did the only thing they
could think of doing: they presented the corsages. "we got white," trip
fontaine said. "we didn't know what color you were wearing. the flower
guy said white would go with everything."

"i'm glad you got white," said lux. she reached out and took the
corsage, which was housed in a little plastic case.

"we didn't go for wrist ones," parkie denton said. "those always fall

apart."

"yeah, those are bad," said mary. no one said anything more. no one
moved. lux inspected her flower in its time capsule. in the background,
mrs. lisbon said, "why don't you let the boys pin them on?"

at that, the girls stepped forward, shyly presenting the fronts of their
dresses. the boys fumbled with the corsages, taking them out of their
cases and avoiding the decorative stickpins. they could sense mrs.
lisbon watching them, and even though they were clos
 
 ___________________________
 
ever, beside the actual living girls, the boys
realized the paltriness of these images. inverse properties were also
discarded: notions of the girls as damaged or demented. (the crazy old
lady in the elevator every day turns out to be, when you finally speak
to her, perfectly lucid.) something like this revelation came over the
boys. "they weren't all that different from my sister," kevin head said.
lux, complaining she never got to, wanted to sit up front. she slid in
between trip fontaine and parkie denton. mary, bonnie, and therese
crowded into the back seat, with bonnie getting the hump. joe hill
conley and kevin head sat on either side against the back doors.

even up close, the girls didn't look depressed. they settled into the

seats, not minding the tight fit. mary half sat in kevin head's lap.
they began chattering immediately. as houses passed, they had something
to say about the families in each one, which meant that they had been
looking out at us as intensely as we had been looking in
 
 ___________________________
 
wkward silences. their dating inexperience
showed only in their pinned-up hair, which looked like stuffing coming
out, or exposed wiring. mrs. lisbon had never given the girls beauty
tips, and forbade women's magazines in the house (a cosmo survey, "are
you multiply orgasmic?" had been the final straw). they had done the
best they could.

lux spent the ride dialing the radio for her favorite , "it makes me
crazy," she said. "you know song. they're playing it somewhere. but you
have to find it." parkie denton drove down to jefferson avenue, past the
wainwright house with its green historical marker, and toward the
gathering lakefront mansions. imitation gas lanterns burned on front

lawns. on every corner a black maid waited for the bus. they drove on,
past the glittering lake, and finally under the ragged cover of elms
near the school. "hold on a sec," lux said. "i want a cig before we go
in."

"dad'll smell it on you," bonnie said from the back seat.

"nah, i've got mints." she shook them. "he'll
 
 ___________________________
 
 smell it on our clothes."

"just tell him some kids were smoking in the bathroom. " parkie denton
lowered the front window while lux smoked. she took her time, exhaling
through her nose.

at one point she jutted out her chin at trip fontaine, rounded her lips,
and, with a chimpanzee profile, sent forth three perfect smoke rings.
"don't let it die a virgin," joe hill conley said. he leaned into the
front seat and poked one.

"that's gross," said therese. "yeah, conley," trip fontaine said. "grow
up."

on the way into the dance, the couples separated.

one of bonnie's high heels got stuck in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the gravel and she leaned on joe
hill conley while she detached it. trip fontaine and lux moved on
together, already an item. kevin head walked in with therese, while
parkie denton gave mary his arm.

the light rain had stopped for a moment and the stars were out, in
patches. as bonnie's shoe came loose, she looked up and called attention
to the sky. "it's always the big dipper," she said. "you look at those
charts and they have stars all over the place, but if you look up, all
you see is the big dipper."

"it's because of the lights," joe hill conley said. "from the city."

"duh," bonnie said.

the girls were smiling as they entered the gymnasium amid the glowing
pumpki
 
 ___________________________
 
eing at the dance. i felt the same way. i was there
with tim carter, the shrimpo."

when the girls came out of the bathroom, the dance floor was getting
more crowded, circulating couples slowly around the gym. kevin head
asked therese to dance and soon they were lost in the tumult. "god, i
was so young," he said years later. "so scared. so was she. i took her
hand and we didn't know which way to do it. to interlace fingers or not.
finally we did. that's what i remember most. the finger thing."

parkie denton remembers mary's studied movements, her poise. "she led,"
he said. "she had a kleenex balled in one hand."

during the dance, she made polite conversation, the kind beautiful young
women make with dukes during waltzes in old movies. she held herself
very straight, like audrey hepburn, whom all women idolize and men never
think about. she seemed to have a picture in her mind of what pattern
their feet should make over the floor, of how they should look together,
and she concentrated fiercely to 
 
 ___________________________
 
realize it. "her face was calm, but
inside she was tense," parkie denton said. "her back muscles were like
piano strings." when a fast song came on, mary danced less well. "like
old people at weddings trying it out."

lux and trip didn't dance until later, and instead moved about the
gymnasium looking for a place to be alone. bonnie followed. "so i
followed her," joe hill conley said. "she pretended she was just walking
around, but she kept track of lux from the corner of her eye." they went
in one side of the dance mob and out the other. they hugged the far wall
of
 
 ___________________________
 
then: "we just want to live. if
anyone would let us.

later, going to the car, bonnie stopped joe hill conley to look for the
stars again. everything was clouded over. as they gazed up at the dull
sky, she asked, "do you think there's a god?"

"yeah."

"me too."

by that time it was ten-thirty and the girls had only a half hour to get
back home. the dance was breaking up, and mr. lisbon's car emerged from
the faculty parking lot, heading home. kevin head and therese, joe hill
conley and bonnie, parkie denton and mary all converged at the cadillac,
but lux and trip didn't follow. bonnie ran back into the gymnasium to
check, but they couldn't be found. "maybe they went home with your dad,"
parkie denton said. "i doubt it," said mary, looking off into the dark
and fingering her crushed corsage. the girls took off their high heels
so they could walk better, and searched in among the parked cars and by
the flagpole that had flown at half-mast the day cecilia died, though it
had been summer and no one bu
 
 ___________________________
 
ther. they searched over
near the theater, behind the science wing, and even in the courtyard
where the small statue of a girl stood, donated in memory of laura

white, her bronze skirt just beginning to oxidize. sears crossed her
welded wrists, symbolically, but the lisbon girls didn't notice, or say
anything when they returned to the car at 10:50 p.m. they got in to be
taken home.

the ride back happened mostly in silence. joe hill conley and bonnie sat
in back beside kevin head and therese. parkie denton drove, later
complaining that this afforded him no chance to make his move on mary.
mary, however, spent the ride fixing her hair in the sun-visor mirror.
therese said to her, "forget it. we're cooked."

"luxie is. not us."

"anyone have some mints or some gum?" bonnie asked. no one did, and she
turned to joe hill conley. she scrutinized him a moment, then, using her
fingers, combed his part over to the left side. "that looks better," she
said. nearly two decades later, the little hair he has l
 
 ___________________________
 
eft remains
parted by bonnie's invisible hand.

outside the lisbon house, joe hill conley kissed bonnie for the last
time and she let him. therese gave kevin head her cheek. through steamed
windows the boys looked up at the house. mr. lisbon had already returned
and a light was on in the master bedroom. "we'll walk you to the door,"
parkie denton said. "no, don't," said mary. "why not?"

"just don't." she got out without so much as a handshake. "we had a
really good time," therese said in back. bonnie whispered into joe hill
conley's ear, "will you call me?"

"absolutely.

the car doors creaked open. the girls climbed out, adjusted themselves,
and went into the house.

uncle tucker had just gone out to the garage refrigerator to get another
six-pack when the taxi drove up two hours later. he saw lux get out and
reach into her purse for
 
 ___________________________
 
ding past the smallish houses that had once been cottages
for summer help. they passed a subdivision where one of our great
mansions had stood, its ornamental gardens replaced by red-brick houses
with antiqued doors and mammoth garages. they turned onto jefferson,
passing the war memorial and the black gates of the remaining
millionaires, and rode in silence toward the girls who had become real
to them at last. as they approached the lisbons' house, they saw a light
burning in a bedroom window. parkie denton held up his hand for the
other boys to slap. "pay dirt," he said. but their jubilation was
short-lived. for even before the car stopped they knew what had
happened. "it hit me in the pit of my stomach that those girls weren't
going on any more dates," kevin head told us years later. "the old bitch
had locked them up again. don't ask me how i knew. i just did."

the window shades had closed like eyelids and the shaggy flower beds
made the house look abandoned . in the window where the one light

 
 ___________________________
 
burned, however, the shade rippled. a hand peeled it back, revealing a
hot yellow slice of face-bonnie, mary, therese, or even lux-looking down
the street. parkie denton tooted his horn, a short hopeful blast, but
just as the girl put her palm to the glass, the light went out.

four afew weeks after mrs. lisbon shut the house in maximum-security
isolation, the sightings of lux making love on the roof began.

following the homecoming dance, mrs. lisbon closed the downstairs
shades. all we could see were the girls' incarcerated shadows, which ran
riot in our imaginations. moreover, as fall turned to winter, the trees
in the yard drooped and thickened, concealing 