iced that no one ever used it. the papers said the
barbecue had cost $50,000 to install, but not one hamburger or hot dog
was ever grilled upon it. soon the rumor began to circulate that the
tree trunk was an escape tunnel, that it led to a hideaway along the
river where sammy the shark kept a speedboat, and that the workers had
hung tarps to conceal the digging. then, a few months after the rumors
began, paul baldino began emerging in people's basements, through the
storm sewers. he came up in chase buell's house, covered with a gray
dust that smelled like friendly shit; he squeezed up into danny zinn's
cellar, this time with a flashlight, baseball bat, and a bag containing
two dead rats; and finally he ended up on the other side of tom faheem's

boiler, which he clanged three times.

he always explained to us that he had been exploring the storm sewer
underneath his own house and had gotten lost, but we began to suspect he
was playing in his father's escape tunnel. when he boasted that he woul
 
 ___________________________
 
 save her anyway. the fat
one hacksawed the fence stake while the skinny one got ready to catch
her, because it was more dangerous to pull cecilia off the barbed end
than to leave it piercing her. when the stake snapped loose, the skinny
one fell back under cecilia's released weight. then he regained his
footing, pivoted, and slipped her onto the stretcher. as they carried
her away, the sawedoff stake lifted the sheet like a tent post.

by this time it was nearly nine o'clock. from the roof of chase buell's
house where we congregated after getting out of our dress-up clothes to
watch what would happen next, we could see, over the heaps of trees
throwing themselves into the air, the abrupt demarcation where the trees
ended and the city began. the sun was falling in the haze of distant
factories, and in the adjoining slums the scatter of glass picked up the
raw glow of the smoggy sunset. sounds we usually couldn't hear reached
us now that we were up high, and crouching on the tarred shingles,
rest
 
 ___________________________
 
s exploded from chairs
and lay scattered across the floor. "they didn't even put them in
vases," he said. most people opted for generic cards that said "with

sympathy" or "our condolences," but some of the waspier types,
accustomed to writing notes for all occasions, labored over personal
responses. mrs. beards used a quote from walt whitman we took to
murmuring to one another: "all goes onward and outward, nothing
collapses, / and to die is different from what any one supposed, and
luckier." chase buell peeked at his own mother's card as he slipped it
under the lisbons' door. it read: "i don't know what you're feeling. i
won't even pretend."

a few people braved personal calls. mr. hutch and mr. peters walked over
to the lisbon house on separate occasions, but their reports differed
little. mr. lisbon invited them in, but before they could broach the
painful subject, he sat them down in front of the baseball game. "he
kept talking about the bullpen," mr. hutch said. "hell, i pitched in
college
 
 ___________________________
 
tor stacked with glasses and coke cans, the
clamshell soap dish employed, in a pinch, as an ashtray. from the age of
twelve lux spent hours in the john smoking cigarettes, exhaling either
out the window or into a wet towel she then hung outside. but father
moody saw none of this. he only passed through the tropical air current
and that was all. behind him he felt the colder drafts of the house,
circulating dust motes and that particular family smell every house had,
you knew it when you came in-chase buell's house smelled like skin, joe
larson's like mayonnaise, the lisbons' like stale popcorn, we thought,

though father moody, going there after the deaths had begun, said, "it
was a mix between a funeral parlor and broom closet. all those flowers.
all that dust." he wanted to step back into the current of jasmine, but
as he stood, listening to rain beading bathroom tiles and washing away
the girls' footprints, he heard voices. he made a quick circuit of the
hallway, calling out for mrs. lisbon, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ter looking in the direction of her house

more than ten miles away, she accepted. she hugged his waist. he kicked
the machine into life. later, lux was seen walking home alone, carrying
her shoes.

in the kriegers' basement, we lay on a strip of leftover carpeting and
dreamed of all the ways we could soothe the lisbon girls. some of us
wanted to lie down in the grass with them, or play the guitar and sing
them songs. paul baldino wanted to take them to metro beach so they
could all get a tan. chase buell, more and more under the sway of his
father the christian scientist, said only that the girls needed "help
not of this world." but when we asked him what he meant, he shrugged and
said, "nothing." nevertheless, when the girls walked by, we often found
him crouching by a tree, moving his lips with his eyes closed.

not everyone thought about the girls, however. even before cecilia's
funeral, some people could talk of nothing but the dangerousness of the
fence she'd jumped on. "it was an accident
 
 ___________________________
 
mer.

he proceeded to cut off the healthy limbs, too, and left the tree trunk
rising like a gray pillar in the lisbons' front yard. when the men drove
away, we weren't sure whether it was dead or alive.

for the next two weeks we waited for the parks department to finish the
job, but it took them three weeks to return. this time two men with
chain saws climbed out of the truck. they circled the trunk, taking its
measure, then steadied saws on thighs and pulled the starter cords. we
were down in chase buell's basement at the time, playing bumper pool,
but the whine reached us through the exposed rafters overhead. the
aluminum heating vents rattled. the bright balls trembled on the green
felt. the sound of the chain saws filled our heads like a dentist's
drill, and we ran outside to see the men moving in on the elm. they wore
goggles against flying chips, but otherwise dragged about with the
boredom of men accustomed to slaughter. they lifted the snarling guide
bars. one spit out tobacco juice. the
 
 ___________________________
 
 got out of bed, and only after rubbing our eyes at the
window did we remember the rotting house across the street, and the
mossblackened windows hiding the girls from our sight. the truth was
this: we were beginning to forget the lisbon girls, and we could
remember nothing else.

the colors of their eyes were fading, the location of moles, dimples,
centipede scars. it had been so long since the lisbon girls had smiled
we could no longer picture their crowded teeth. "they're just memories
now," chase buell said sadly. "time to write them off." but even as he
uttered these words, he rebelled against them, as we all did. and rather
than consign the girls to oblivion, we gathered their possessions once
more, everything we'd gotten hold of during our strange curatorship:
cecilia's high-tops; therese's microscope; a jewelry box in which a
strand of mary's dishwater-blond hair lay bedded on cotton; the
photocopy of cecilia's laminated picture of the virgin; one of lux's
tube tops. we piled everything i
 
 ___________________________
 
ls reached us
and no one else, like a radio station picked up by our braces. at night,
afterimages flashed on our inner eyelids, or hovered over our beds like
a swarm of fireflies. our inability to respond only made the signals
more important. we watched the show nightly, always on the verge, of
discovering the key, and joe larson even tried flashing his own bedroom
light in answer, but this made the lisbon house go dark, and we felt
reprimanded.

the first letter arrived on may 7. slipped into chase buell's mailbox
with the rest of the day's mail, the letter bore no stamp or return
address, but when we opened it, we recognized at once the purple flair
lux liked to write with.

dear whoever, tell trip i'm over him.

he's a creep.

guess who that was all it said. in the next few weeks, other letters
arrived, expressing various moods, each envelope delivered to our houses
by the girls themselves in the dead of night. the idea of their sneaking
out and moving about our street excited us, and a few n
 
 ___________________________
 
 song which most thoroughly communicated
our feelings to the lisbon girls. we can't remember the song's title
now, and an extensive search through records of the period has proved
unsuccessful. we do, however, recall the essential sentiments, which

spoke of hard days, long nights, a man waiting outside a broken
telephone booth hoping it would somehow ring, and rain, and rainbows. it
was mostly guitars, except for one interlude where a mellow cello
hummed. we played it into the phone, and then chase buell gave our
number and we hung up.

next day, same time, our phone rang. we answered it immediately, and
after some confusion (the phone was dropped), heard a needle bump down
on a record, and the voice of gilbert o'sullivan singing through
scratches. you may recall the song, a ballad which charts the
misfortunes of a young man's life (his parents die, his fiance stands
him up at the altar), each verse leaving him more and more alone. it was
mrs. eugene's favorite, and we knew it well from hearing
 
 ___________________________
 
s of the back yard. kevin head tripped on the
bird feeder, which was still lying there. it cracked in half, the
remaining seed spilling out onto the ground. we froze, but no lights
came on.

after a minute, we inched in closer. mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, but we paid no attention. we were too busy gazing up into the
darkness for a ladder of knotted bed sheets and a descending nightgown.
we saw nothing. the house rose above us, its windows reflecting dark
masses of leaves. in a whisper, chase buell reminded us that he had just
gotten his driver's license, and held up the keys to his mother's
cougar. "we can use my car," he said. tom faheem searched the overgrown
flower beds for pebbles to ping against the girls' windows. any second
an upstairs window might open, breaking its seal of fish flies, and a
face would look down at us for the rest of our lives.

at the back window, we grew brave enough to look in. through a scrub of
dead windowsill plants, we made out the interior of the house: a
 
 ___________________________
 
 climbed onto
the back porch, quietly opened the door, and let us, at last, back into
the lisbon house. "we're here" was all he said.

lux looked up, but didn't rise from the chair. her sleepy eyes showed no
surprise that we were there, but at the base of her white neck a
lobstery blush spread. "about time," she said. "we've been waiting for
you guys." she took another drag. "we've got a car," tom faheem
continued. "full tank. we'll take you wherever you want to go."

"it's just a cougar," said chase buell, "but it's got a pretty big
trunk."

"can i sit in front?" lux asked, screwing her mouth up to exhale to one
side, politely away from us.

"sure can."

"which one of you studs is going to sit up front next to me?"

she tilted her head toward the ceiling and blew a series of smoke rings.
we watched them rise, and this time joe hill conley didn't run forward
to stick his finger in them. for the first time, we looked around the

house. the smell, now that we were inside, was stronger than ever. i
 
 ___________________________
 
, mildewed cabinets, leaking pipes. paint cans were still
stationed under leaks, each full of a weak solution of other times. the
living room had a plundered look. the television sat at an angle, its
screen removed, mr. lisbon's toolbox open in front of it. chairs were
missing arms or legs, as though the lisbons had been using them for
firewood.

where are your parents?" asleep. ,:what about your sisters?"

they're coming." something thudded downstairs. we retreated to the back
door. "come on," chase buell said. "we better get out of here. it's
getting late." but lux only exhaled again, shaking her head. she pulled
a halter strap away from her skin, where it left a red mark. everything
was quiet again. "wait," she said. "five more minutes. we're not
finished packing. we had to wait until my parents were asleep. they take
forever. especially my mom. she's an insomniac. she's probably awake
right now."

she got up then. we saw her rise from the beanbag chair, leaning forward
to get enough momentum.
 
 ___________________________
 
 she approached we could hear her
printing the dusty floor. from the darkness she said, "we won't all fit

in a cougar." she took one more step and her face reappeared. for a
second it didn't seem alive: it was too white, the cheeks too perfectly
carved, the arched eyebrows painted on, the full lips made of wax. but
then she came closer and we saw the light in her eyes we have been
looking for ever since." we better take my mom's car, don't you think?
it9s bigger. which one of you can drive?"

chase buell raised his hand. "think you can drive a station wagon?"

"sure." and then: "it's not a stick, is it?"

"no."

"sure. no problem."

"will you let me steer some?"

"sure. but we should get out of here. i just heard something. maybe it's
your mom."

she came up to chase buell. she came so close her breath stirred his
hair. and then, in front of us all, lux unbuckled his belt. she didn't
even need to look down. her fingers saw their way, and only once did
something snag, at which point she shook he
 
 ___________________________
 
r head, like a musician
missing an easy note. all the while she stared into his eyes, rising up
on the balls of her feet, and in the quiet house we heard the pants
unsnap. the zipper opened all the way down our spines. none of us moved.
chase buell didn't move. lux's eyes, burning and velvet, glowed in the
dim room. a vein on her neck was softly pulsing, the one you're supposed
to put perfume on for that reason. even though she was doing it to chase
buell, we could all feel lux undoing us, reaching out for us and taking
us as she knew we could be taken. just at the last second, another soft
thud came from downstairs. upstairs, mr. lisbon coughed in his sleep.
lux stopped. she looked away, consulting with herself, and then she

said, "we 
 
 ___________________________
 
can't do this now."

she let go of chase buell's belt and crossed to the back door. "i've got
to get some fresh air. you guys have got me all worked up." she smiled
then, a loose, clumsy smile, genuine, unpretty. "i'll go wait in the
car. you guys wait here for my sisters. we've got a lot of stuff." she
fished in a bowl by the back door for the car keys. she made to leave,
but stopped again. "where will we go?"

"florida," chase buell said. "cool," said lux. "florida."

a minute later, we heard a car door slam shut in the garage. a few of us
recall hearing the faint strains of a popular song drifting through the
night, which told us she was playing the radio. we waited. we weren't
sure where the other girls were. we could hear sounds of packing
upstairs, a closet door opening, a suitcase jangling bedsprings. feet
moved above and below. something was being dragged across the basement
floor. though the nature of the sounds elu
 
 ___________________________
 
tionary
relationships: the toaster in the birdcage; ballet slippers protruding
from a wicker creel. we snaked our way amid the clutter, passing into
spaces cleared for games-a backgammon board, chinese checkers-then
moving again into thickets of eggbeaters and rubber boots. we entered
the kitchen. it was too dark to see, but we heard a small hiss, like
someone sighing. a trapezoid of light projected up from the basement. we
went to the stairs and listened. then we started down to the rec room.

chase buell led the way, and as we descended, holding on to one
another's belt loops, we traveled back to the day a year earlier when we
had descended those same steps to attend the only party the lisbon girls
were ever allowed to throw. by the time we reached bottom, we felt we'd
literally traveled back in time. for despite the inch of floodwater
covering the floor, the room was just as we had left it: cecilia's party
had never been cleaned up. the paper tablecloth, spotted with mice
droppings, still cove
 
 ___________________________
 
e rest of us
looking over car hoods or from troughs serving as first, second, and
third base, from behind barbecues or from the apex of a swing's arcshe
turned, she sent her blue gaze out in every direction, the same color
gaze the girls had had, icy and spectral and unknowable, and then she
turned back and followed her husband into the house.

because no furniture remained, we didn't think the lisbons would be
long. nevertheless, three hours went by and they did not reappear. with
a fungo bat, chase buell hit a wiffle ball into their yard, but came
back saying he didn't see a single living soul inside. later he tried to
hit another wiffle ball, but it got stuck in the trees. we didn't see
mr. and mrs. lisbon come out the rest of that day, or evening. it was in
the middle of the night that they finally left. nobody saw them go
except uncle tucker. years later, when we interviewed him, he was
completely sober and recovered from his decades of abuse, and in
contrast to everyone else, including ours