servation for a week. the hospital records show
that the artery in her right wrist was completely severed, because she

was left-handed, but the gash in her left wrist didn't go as deep,
leaving the underside of the artery intact. she received twenty-four
stitches in each wrist.

she came back still wearing the wedding dress. mrs. patz, whose sister
was a nurse at bon secours, is said that cecilia had refused to put on a
hospital gown, demanding that her wedding dress be brought to her, and
dr. hornicker, the staff psychiatrist, thought it best to humor her. she
returned home during a thunderstorm. we were in joe larson's house,
right across the street, when the first clap of thunder hit. downstairs
joe's mother shouted to close all the windows, and we ran to ours.
outside a deep vacuum stilled the air. a gust of wind stirred a paper
bag, which lifted, rolling, into the lower branches of the trees. then
the vacuum broke with the downpour, the sky grew black, and the lisbons'
station wagon tried
 
 ___________________________
 
na porter strolled under summer trees, moving
unstoppably away from the world he was going to inherit as the owner of
a carpet cleaning service. cecilia had unleashed her blood in the bath,
amy schraff said, because the ancient romans had done that when life
became unbearable, and she thought when dominic heard about it, on the
highway, amid the cactus, he would realize that it was she who loved
him.

the psychiatrist's report takes up most of the hospital record. after
talking with cecilia, dr. hornicker made the diagnosis that her suicide
was an act of aggression inspired by the repression of adolescent
libidinal urges. to each of three wildly different ink blots, she had
responded, "a banana." she also saw "prison bars,"

"a swamp,"

"an afro," and "the earth after an atomic bomb." when asked why she had
tried to kill herself, she said only, "it was a mistake," and clammed up
when dr. hornicker persisted. "despite the severity of her wounds," he
wrote, "i do not think the patient truly meant 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to his story, he didn't cry out. he didn't want to make
contact with the shade of his daughter, to learn why she had done
herself in, to ask forgiveness, or to rebuke her. he merely rushed
forward, brushing past, to close the window. as he did, however, the
ghost turned, and he saw that it was only bonnie, wrapped in a bedsheet.
"don't worry," she said, quietly. "they took the fence out."

in a handwritten note displaying the penmanship perfected during his
graduate school days in zurich, dr. hornicker called mr. and mrs. lisbon
in for a second consultation, but they didn't go. instead, from what we
observed during the remainder of the summer, mrs. lisbon once more took
charge of the house while mr. lisbon receded into a mist. when we saw
him after that, he had the sheepish look of a poor relation. by late
august, in the weeks of preparation before school, he began leaving by
the back door as though sneaking out. his car would whine inside the
garage and, when the automatic door rose, would e
 
 ___________________________
 
hatever reason, when trip tried to make another
date to come sit on the couch, lux told him she was grounded, and that
her mother had forbidden any future visits. at school, trip fontaine was
cagey about what had passed between them, and though stories circulated
about their sneaking off into various enclosures, he insisted the only
time they ever touched was in the car. "at school, we could never find a
place to go. her old man kept a close eye on her. it was agony, man.
fucking agony."

in dr. hornicker's opinion, lux's promiscuity was a commonplace reaction
to emotional need. "adolescents tend to seek love where they can find
it," he wrote in one of the many articles he hoped to publish. "lux
confused the sexual act with love. for her, sex became a substitute for
the comfort she needed as a result of her sister's suicide." a few of
the boys did provide details that supported this theory. willard said
that once, while they lay together in the field house, lux asked him if
he thought what they 
 
 ___________________________
 
 her tragedy hadn't made her more

approachable, and in fact lent her the unknowable quality of a person
who had suffered more than could be expressed. nevertheless, we wanted
to talk to her most of all because we felt that she, being the girls'
mother, understood more than anyone why they had killed themselves. but
she said, "that's what's so frightening. i don't. once they're out of
you, they're different, kids are." when we asked her why she had never
pursued the psychological counseling dr. hornicker offered, mrs. lisbon
became angry. "that doctor wanted to blame it on us. he thought ronnie
and i were to blame." a bus came into the station then, and through the
open doorway at gate 2 a gust of carbon monoxide blew over the counter
with its stacks of fried doughnuts. mrs. lisbon said she had to leave.

she had done more than take the girls out of school. the next sunday,
arriving home after a spirited church sermon, she had commanded lux to
destroy her rock records. mrs. pitzenberger (who ha
 
 ___________________________
 
i'm just here"-she lowered her voice-"to see the gyno."

"so you don't want me to ask you questions?"

"ceel told us all about your tests. i'm just not in the mood right now."

"what kind of mood are you in?"

"no mood. i'm just kind of tired is all."

"not getting enough sleep?"

"i sleep all the time."

"and yet you're still tired?"

"yeah."

"why do you think that is?"

up to this point, lux had answered briskly, swinging her feet, which
didn't reach the floor. now she paused and regarded dr. hornicker. she
settled back, retracting her head so that the slight chubbiness swelled
beneath her chin. "iron-poor blood," she said. "runs in the family. i'm
going to ask the doctor for some vitamins."

"she was in deep denial," dr. hornicker told us later. "she was
obviously not sleeping-a textbook symptom of depression-and was
pretending that her problem, and by association her sister cecilia's
problem, was of no real consequence." dr. finch came in with the test
results soon after that, and lux jumpe
 
 ___________________________
 
d happily off the cot. "but even
her delight had a manic quality to it. she bounced off the walls."

shortly after that meeting, in the second of his many reports, dr.

hornicker began to revise his view of the lisbon girls. citing a recent
study by dr. judith weisberg that examined "the bereavement process of
adolescents who have lost a sibling by suicide" (see list of funded
studies), dr. hornicker gave an explanation for the lisbon girls'
erratic behavior-their withdrawal, their sudden fits of emotion or
catatonia. the report maintained that as a result of cecilia's suicide
the surviving lisbon girls suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder.
"it's not unusual," dr. hornicker wrote, "for the sibling of an a.l.s.
[adolescent lost to suicide] to act out suicidal behavior in an attempt
to come to grips with their grief. there is a high incidence of
repetitive suicide in single families." 
 
 ___________________________
 
et it over with. in fact, the final
suicides surprised few people. even we who had tried to save the girls
came to consider ourselves temporarily insane. in hindsight, bonnie's
battered trunk lost its associations with travel and flight and became
only what it was: a drop weight for a hanging, like sandbags in old
westerns. still, while everyone agreed the suicides came as predictably
as seasons or old age, we could never agree on an explanation for them.
the final suicides seemed to confirm dr. hornicker's theory that the
girls had been suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, but dr.
hornicker later distanced himself from that conclusion. even if
cecilia's suicide led to copycatting, that still didn't explain why
cecilia had killed herself in the first place. at a hastily called lions
club meeting, dr. hornicker, the guest speaker, brought up the
possibility of a chemical link, citing a new study of "platelet
serotonin receptor indices in suicidal children." dr. kotbaum of the
western ps
 
 ___________________________
 
ychiatric institute had found that many suicidal persons
possessed deficient amounts of serotonin, a neurotransmitter essential
for the regulation of mood. since the serotonin study had been published
after cecilia's suicide, dr. hornicker had never measured her serotonin
level. he did, however, examine a blood sample taken from mary, which
showed a slight deficiency of serotonin. she was put on medication, and

after two weeks of psychological tests and intensive therapy, her blood
was tested again. at that time her serotonin level appeared normal.

as for the other girls, autopsies were performed on each of them, in
accordance with a state law requiring investigation in all deaths by
suicide. as written, the law gave the polic
 
 ___________________________
 
irls as well. it was
a small bench, made from a tree from the upper peninsula. "virgin
timber," mr. krieger said, who had retooled the machinery at his
air-filter factory in order to make the bench. the plaque bore the
simple inscription in memory of the lisbon girls, daughters of this
community.

mary was still alive at this point, of course, but the plaque did not
acknowledge that fact. she returned from the hospital a few days later,
after a two-week stay. knowing they wouldn't have come, dr. hornicker
hadn't even asked mr. and mrs. lisbon to attend the therapy sessions. he
ran mary through the same battery of tests cecilia had taken, but found
no evidence of a psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia or
manic-depression. "her scores showed her to be a relatively well
adjusted adolescent. her future wasn't bright, of course. i recommended
ongoing therapy to deal with the trauma. but we had her serotonin up,
and she looked good." she came back to a house without furniture. mr.
and mrs. lisbon
 
 ___________________________
 
nsufficiency of explanations. mr. eugene, who told us that
scientists were on the verge of finding the "bad genes" that caused
cancer, depression, and other diseases, offered his hope that they would
soon "be able to find a gene for suicide, too." unlike mr. hedlie, he
didn't see the suicides as a response to our historical moment. "shit,"
he said, "what have kids got to be worried about now? if they want
trouble, they should,go live in bangladesh,"

"it was the combination of many factors," dr. hornicker said in his last
report, written for no medical reason but just because he couldn't get
the girls out of his head. "with most people," he said, "suicide is like
russian roulette. only one chamber has a bullet. with the lisbon girls,
the gun was loaded. a bullet for family abuse. a bullet for genetic
predisposition. a bullet for historical malaise. a bullet for inevitable
momentum. the other two bullets are impossible to name, but that doesn't
mean the chambers were empty." but this is all a cha