
the virgin suicides

on the morning the last lisbon daughter took her turn at suicide-it was

mary this time, and sleeping pills, like therese, the two paramedics
arrived at the house knowing exactly where the knife drawer was, and the
gas oven, and the beam in the basement from which it was possible to tie
a rope. they got out of the ems truck, as usual moving much too slowly
in our opinion, and the fat one said under his breath, "this ain't tv,
folks, this is how fast we go." he was carrying the heavy respirator and
cardiac unit past the bushe
 
 ___________________________
 
s that had grown monstrous and over the
erupting lawn, tame and immaculate thirteen months earlier when the
trouble began.

cecilia, the youngest, only thirteen, had gone first, slitting her
wrists like a stoic while taking a bath, and when they found her, afloat
in her pink pool, with the yellow eyes of someone possessed and her
small body giving off the odor of a mature woman, the paramedics had
been so frightened by her tranquillity that they had stood mesmerized.
but then mrs. lisbon lunged in, screaming, and the reality of the room
reasserted itself: blood on the bath mat; mr. lisbon's razor sunk in the
toilet bowl, marbling the water. the paramedics fetched cecilia out of
the warm water because it quickened the bleeding, and put a tourniquet
on her arm. her wet hair hung down her back and already her extremities
were blue. she didn't say a word, but when they parted her hands they
found the laminated picture of the virgin mary she held against her
budding chest.

that was
 
 ___________________________
 
 broom, honey," mrs. scheer advised. but cecilia
fixed her with her spiritualist's gaze. "they're dead," she said. "they
only live twenty-four hours. they hatch, they reproduce, and then they
croak. they don't even get to eat." and with that she stuck her hand
into the foamy layer of bugs and cleared her initials: c. l. we've tried
to arrange the photographs chronologically, though the passage of so
many years has made it difficult. a few are fuzzy but revealing
nonetheless. exhibit #1 shows the lisbon house shortly before cecilia's
suicide attempt. it was taken by a real estate agent, ms. carmina
d'angelo, whom mr. lisbon had hired to sell the house his large family
had long outgrown. as the snapshot shows, the slate roof had not yet
begun to shed its shingles, the porch was still visible above the
bushes, and the windows were not yet held together with strips of
masking tape. a comfortable suburban home. the upper-right second-story
window contains a blur that mrs. lisbon identified as mary
 
 ___________________________
 
 lisbon. "she
used to tease her hair because she thought it was limp," she said years
later, recalling how her daughter had looked for her brief time on
earth. in the photograph mary is caught in the act of blow-drying her
hair. her head appears to be on fire but that is only a trick of the
light. it was june 13, eighty-three degrees out, under sunny skies.

when the paramedics were satisfied they had reduced the bleeding to a
trickle, they put cecilia on a stretcher and carried her out of the
house to
 
 ___________________________
 
k end of the stretcher and stepping daintily
across the lawn, peering at his police-issue shoes as though looking out
for dog shit, though later, when we were better acquainted with the

machinery, we knew he was checking the blood pressure gauge. sweating
and fumbling, they moved toward the shuddering, blinking truck. the fat
one tripped on a lone croquet wicket. in revenge he kicked it; the
wicket sprang loose, plucking up a spray of dirt, and fell with a ping
on the driveway. meanwhile, mrs. lisbon burst onto the porch, trailing
cecilia's flannel nightgown, and let out a long wail that stopped time.
under the molting trees and above the blazing, overexposed grass those
four figures paused in tableau: the two slaves offering the victim to
the altar (lifting the stretcher into the truck), the priestess
brandishing the torch (waving the flannel nightgown), and the drugged
virgin rising up on her elbows, with an otherworldly smile on her pale
lips.

mrs. lisbon rode in the back of the ems tru
 
 ___________________________
 
ck, but mr. lisbon followed
in the station wagon, observing the speed limit. two of the lisbon
daughters were away from home, therese in pittsburgh at a science
convention, and bonnie at music camp, trying to learn the flute after
giving up the piano (her hands were too small), the violin (her chin
hurt), the guitar (her fingertips bled), and the trumpet (her upper lip
swelled). mary and lux, hearing the siren, had run home from their voice
lesson across the street with mr. jessup. barging into that crowded
bathroom, they registered the same shock as their parents at the sight
of cecilia
 
 ___________________________
 
ch when they stuck a needle in her arm. dr. armonson stitched up her
wrist wounds. within five minutes of the transfusion he declared her out
of danger. chucking her under her chin, he said, "what are you doing
here, honey? you're not even old enough to know how bad life gets."

and it was then cecilia gave orally what was to be her only form of
suicide note, and a useless one at that, because she was going to live:
"obviously, doctor," she said, "you've never been a thirteen-year-old
girl." the lisbon girls were thirteen (cecilia), and fourteen (lux), and
fifteen (bonnie), and sixteen (mary), and seventeen (therese). they were
short, roundbuttocked in denim, with roundish cheeks that recalled that
same dorsal softness. whenever we got a glimpse, their faces looked
indecently revealed, as though we were used to seeing women in veils. no
one could understand how mr. and mrs. lisbon had produced such beautiful
children. mr. lisbon taught high-school math. he was thin, boyish,
stunned by his own
 
 ___________________________
 
 gray hair. he had a high voice, and when joe larson
told us how mr. lisbon had cried when lux was later rushed to the
hospital during her own suicide scare, we could easily imagine the sound
of his girlish weeping.

whenever we saw mrs. lisbon we looked in vain for some sign of the
beauty that must have once been hers. but the plump arms, the brutally
cut steel-wool hair, and the librarian's glasses foiled us every time.
we saw her only rarely, in the morning, fully dressed though the sun
hadn't come up, stepping out to snatch up the dewy milk cartons, or on
sundays when the family drove in their paneled station wagon to st.
paul's catholic church on the lake. on those mornings mrs. lisbon
assumed a queenly iciness. clutching her goo
 
 ___________________________
 
ecked each
daughter for signs of makeup before allowing her to get in the car, and
it was not unusual for her to send lux back inside to put on a less
revealing top. none of us went to church, so we had a lot of time to
watch them, the two parents leached of color, like photographic
negatives, and then the five glittering daughters in their homemade

dresses, all lace and ruffle, bursting with their fructifying flesh.

only one boy had ever been allowed in the house. peter sissen had helped
mr. lisbon install a working model of the solar system in his classroom
at school, and in return mr. lisbon had invited him for dinner. he told
us the girls had kicked him continually under the table, from every
direction, so that he couldn't tell who was doing it. they gazed at him
with their blue febrile eyes and smiled, showing their crowded teeth,
the only feature of the lisbon girls we could ever find fault with.
bonnie was the only one who didn't give peter sissen a secret look or
kick. she only sai
 
 ___________________________
 
mary were both in the downstairs one,
giggling and whispering, he had to use the girls', upstairs. he came
back to us with stories of bedrooms filled with crumpled panties, of
stuffed animals hugged to death by the passion of the girls, of a
crucifix draped with a brassiere, of gauzy chambers of canopied beds,
and of the effluvia of so many young girls becoming women together in
the same cramped space. in the bathroom, running the faucet to cloak the
sounds of his search, peter sissen found mary lisbon's secret cache of
cosmetics tied up in a sock under the sink: tubes of red lipstick and
the second skin of blush and base, and the depilatory wax that informed
us she had a mustache we had never seen. in fact, we didn't know whose
makeup peter sissen had found until we saw mary lisbon two weeks later
on the pier with a crimson mouth that matched the shade of his
descriptions.

he inventoried deodorants and perfumes and scouring pads for rubbing
away dead skin, and we were surprised to learn tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t there were no
douches anywhere because we had thought girls douched every night like
brushing their teeth. but our disappointment was forgotten in the next
second when sissen told us of a discovery that went beyond our wildest
imaginings. in the trash can was one tampax, spotted, still fresh from
the insides of one of the lisbon girls. sissen said that he wanted to

bring it to us, that it wasn't gross but a beautiful thing, you had to
see it, like a modern painting or something, and then he told us he had
counted twelve boxes of tampax in the cupboard. it was only then that
lux knocked on the door, asking if he had died in there, and he sprang
to open it. her hair, held up by a barrette at dinner, fell over her
shoulders now. she didn't move into the bathroom but stared into his
eyes. then, laughing her hyena's laugh
 
 ___________________________
 
, she pushed past him, saying,
"you done hogging the bathroom? i need something."

she walked to the cupboard, then stopped and folded her hands behind
her. "it's private. do you mind?" she said, and peter sissen sped down
the stairs, blushing, and after thanking mr. and mrs. lisbon, hurried
off to tell us that lux lisbon was bleeding between the legs that very
instant, while the fish flies made the sky filthy and the streetlamps
came on.

when paul baldino heard peter sissen's story, he swore that he would get
inside the lisbons' house and see things even more unthinkable than
sissen had. "i'm going to watch those girls taking their showers," he
vowed. already, at the age of fourteen, paul baldino had the gangster
gut and hit-man face of his father, sammy "the shark" baldino, and of
all the men who entered and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 covered with a gray
dust that smelled like friendly shit; he squeezed up into danny zinn's
cellar, this time with a flashlight, baseball bat, and a bag containing
two dead rats; and finally he ended up on the other side of tom faheem's

boiler, which he clanged three times.

he always explained to us that he had been exploring the storm sewer
underneath his own house and had gotten lost, but we began to suspect he
was playing in his father's escape tunnel. when he boasted that he would
see the lisbon girls taking their showers, we all believed he was going
to enter the lisbon house the same way he had entered the others. we
never learned exactly what happened, though the police interrogated paul
baldino for over an hour. he told them only what he told us. he said he
had crawled into the sewer duct underneath his own basement and had
started walking, a few feet at a time. he described the surprising size
of the pipes, the coffee cups and cigarette butts left by workmen, and
the charcoal draw
 
 ___________________________
 
ings of naked women that resembled cave paintings. he
told how he had chosen tunnels at random, and how as he passed under
people's houses he could smell what they were cooking. finally he had
come up through the sewer grate in the lisbons' basement. after brushing
himself off, he went looking for someone on the first floor, but no one
was home. he called out again and again, moving through the rooms. he
climbed the stairs to the second floor. down the hall, he heard water
running. he approached the bathroom door. he insisted that he had
knocked. and then paul baldino told how he had stepped into the bathroom
and found cecilia, naked, her wrists oozing blood, and how after
overcoming his shock he had run downstairs to call the p
 
 ___________________________
 
olice first
thing, because that was what his father had always taught him to do.

the paramedics found the laminated picture first, of course, and in the
crisis the fat one put it in his pocket. only at the hospital did he
think to give it to mr. and mrs. lisbon. cecilia was out of danger by
that point, and her parents were sitting in the waiting room, relieved
but confused. mr. lisbon thanked the paramedic for saving his daughter's
life. then he turned the picture over and saw the message printed on the
back: the virgin mary has been appearing in our city, bringing her
message of peace to a crumbling world. as in lourdes and fatima, our
lady has granted her presence to people just like you. for information

call 555- mary mr. lisbon read the words three times. then he said in a
defeated voice, "we baptized her, we confirmed her, and now she believes
this crap."

it was his 
 
 ___________________________
 
only blasphemy during the entire ordeal. mrs. lisbon reacted
by crumpling the picture in her fist (it survived; we have a photocopy
here).

our local newspaper neglected to run an article on the suicide attempt,
because the editor, mr. baubee, felt such depressing information
wouldn't fit between the front-page article on the junior league flower
show and the back-page photographs of grinning brides. the only
newsworthy article in that day's edition concerned the cemetery workers'
strike (bodies piling up, no agreement in sight), but that was on 
 
 ___________________________
 
page 4
beneath the little league scores.

after they returned home, mr. and mrs. lisbon shut themselves and the
girls in the house, and didn't say a word about what had happened. only
when pressed by mrs. scheer did mrs. lisbon refer to "cecilia's
accident," acting as though she had cut herself in a fall. with
precision and objectivity, however, already bored by blood, paul baldino
described to us what he had seen, and left no doubt that cecilia had
done violence to herself.

mrs. buck found it odd that the razor ended up in the toilet. "if you
were cutting your wrists in the tub," she said, "wouldn't you just lay
the razor on the side?" this led to the question as to whether cecilia
had cut her wrists while already i
 
 ___________________________
 
ght to her, and
dr. hornicker, the staff psychiatrist, thought it best to humor her. she
returned home during a thunderstorm. we were in joe larson's house,
right across the street, when the first clap of thunder hit. downstairs
joe's mother shouted to close all the windows, and we ran to ours.
outside a deep vacuum stilled the air. a gust of wind stirred a paper
bag, which lifted, rolling, into the lower branches of the trees. then
the vacuum broke with the downpour, the sky grew black, and the lisbons'
station wagon tried to sneak by in the darkness.

we called joe's mother to come see. in a few seconds we heard her quick
feet on the carpeted stairs and she joined us by the window. it was
tuesday and she smelled of furniture polish. together we watched mrs.
lisbon push open her car door with one foot, then climb out, holding her
purse over her head to keep dry. crouching and frowning, she opened the
rear door. rain fell. mrs. lisbon's hair fell into her face. at last
cecilia's small head ca
 
 ___________________________
 
me into view, hazy in the rain, swimming up with
odd thrusting movements because of the double slings that impeded her
arms. it took her a while to get up enough steam to roll to her feet.
when she finally tumbled out she lifted both slings like canvas wings
and mrs. lisbon took hold of her left elbow and led her into the house.
by that time the rain had found total release and we couldn't see across
the street.

in the following days we saw cecilia a lot. she would sit on her front
steps, picking red berries off the bushes and eating them, or staining
her palms with the juice. she always wore the wedding dress and her bare
feet were dirty. in the afternoons, when sun lit the front yard, she

would watch ants swarming in sidewalk cracks or lie on her back in
fert
 
 ___________________________
 
 arabic designs on her own leg with a
stick. at other times cecilia would accost her guard, hugging her neck
and whispering in her ear.

everyone had a theory as to why she had tried to kill herself. mrs.
buell said the parents were to blame. "that girl didn't want to die,"
she told us. "she just wanted out of that house."

mrs. scheer added, "she wanted out of that decorating scheme."

on the day cecilia returned from the hospital, those two women brought
over a bundt cake in sympathy, but mrs. lisbon refused to acknowledge
any calamity. we found mrs. buell much aged and hugely fat, still
sleeping in a separate bedroom from her husband, the christian
scientist. propped up in bed, she still wore pearled cat's-eye
sunglasses during the daytime, and still rattled ice cubes in the tall
glass she claimed contained only water; but there was a new odor of
afternoon indolence to her, a soap-opera smell. "as soon as lily and i
took over that bundt cake, that woman told the girls to go upstairs. we
sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id, "it's still warm, let's all have a piece,' but she took the cake
and put it in the refrigerator. right in front of us." mrs. scheer
remembered it differently. "i hate to say it, but joan's been potted for
years. the truth is, mrs. lisbon thanked us quite graciously. nothing
seemed wrong at all. i started to wonder if maybe it was true that the
girl had only fallen and cut herself. mrs. lisbon invited us out to the
sun room and we each had a piece of cake. joan disappeared at one point.
maybe she went back home to have another belt. it wouldn't surprise me."

we found mr. buell just down the hall from his wife, in a bedroom with a

sporting theme. on the shelf stood a photograph of his first wife, whom
he had loved ever since divorcing her, and when he rose from his desk to
greet us, he was still stooped from the shoulder injury faith had never
quite healed. "it was like anything el
 
 ___________________________
 
d back so that his
sunglasses reflected sky, and would say, "i love her." every time he
said it he seemed delivered of a profundity that amazed him, as though
he had coughed up a pearl. at the beginning of june, when diana porter
left on vacation to switzerland, dominic was stricken. "fuck the holy
mother," he said, despondent. "fuck god." and to show his desperation
and the validity of his love, he climbed onto the roof of his relatives'
house and jumped off.

we watched him. we watched cecilia lisbon watching from her front yard.
dominic palazzolo, with his tight pants, his dingo boots, his pompadour,
went into the house, we saw him passing the plate-glass picture windows
downstairs; and then he appeared at an upstairs window, with a silk
handkerchief around his neck. climbing onto the ledge, he swung himself
up to the flat roof. aloft, he looked frail, diseased, and
temperamental, as we expected a european to look. he toed the roof's
edge like a high diver, and whispered, "i love her," to 
 
 ___________________________
 
himself as he
dropped past the windows and into the yard's calculated shrubbery.

he didn't hurt himself. he stood up after the fall, having proved his
love, and down the block, some maintained, cecilia lisbon developed her
own. amy schraff, who knew cecilia in school, said that dominic had been
all she could talk about for the final week before commencement. instead
of studying for exams, she spent study halls looking up italy in the
encyclopedia. she started saying "ciao," and began slipping into st.
paul's catholic church on the lake to sprinkle her forehead with holy
water. in the cafeteria, even on hot days when the place was thick with
the fumes of institutional food, cecilia always chose the s
 
 ___________________________
 
 by the repression of adolescent
libidinal urges. to each of three wildly different ink blots, she had
responded, "a banana." she also saw "prison bars,"

"a swamp,"

"an afro," and "the earth after an atomic bomb." when asked why she had
tried to kill herself, she said only, "it was a mistake," and clammed up
when dr. hornicker persisted. "despite the severity of her wounds," he
wrote, "i do not think the patient truly meant to end her life. her act
was a cry for help." he met with mr. and mrs. lisbon and recommended
that they relax their rules. he thought cecilia would benefit by "having
a social outlet, outside the codification of school, where she can
interact with males her own age. at thirteen, cecilia should be allowed
to wear the sort of makeup popular among girls her age, in order to bond
with them. the aping of shared customs is an indispensable step in the
process of individuation."

from that time on, the lisbon house began to change. almost every day,
and even when she wasn't kee
 
 ___________________________
 
monstration for nothing. the front door was

always left open, because one of the girls was always running in or out.

once, outside jeff maldrum's house, playing catch, we saw a group of
girls dancing to rock and roll in his living room. they were very
serious about learning the right ways to move, and we were amazed to
learn that girls danced together for fun, while jeff maldrum only rapped
the glass and made kissing noises until they pulled down the shade.
before they disappeared we saw mary lisbon in the back near the
bookcase, wearing bell-bottomed blue jeans with a heart embroidered on
the seat.

there were other miraculous changes. butch, who cut the lisbon grass,
was now allowed inside for a glass of water, no longer having to drink
from the outside faucet. sweaty, shirtless, and tattooed, he walked
right into the kitchen where the lisbon girls lived and breathed, but we
never asked him what he saw because we were scared of his muscles and
his poverty.

we assumed mr. and mrs. lisbon
 
 ___________________________
 
 were in agreement about the new leniency,
but when we met with mr. lisbon years later, he told us his wife had
never agreed with the psychiatrist. "she just gave in for a while," he
said. divorced by that time, he lived alone in an efficiency apartment,
the floor of which was covered with shavings from his wood carvings.
whittled birds and frogs crowded the shelves. according to mr. lisbon,
he had long harbored doubts about his wife's strictness, knowing in his
heart that girls forbidden to dance would only attract husbands with bad
complexions and sunken chests. also, the odor of all those cooped-up
girls had begun to annoy him. he felt at times as though he were living
in the bird house at the zoo. everywhere he looked he found hairpins and
fuzzy combs, and because so many females roamed the house they forgot he
was a male and discussed their menstruation openly in front of him
 
 ___________________________
 
.
cecilia had just gotten her period, on the same day of the month as the
other girls, who were all synchronized in their lunar rhythms. those
five days of each month were the worst for mr. lisbon, who had to

dispense aspirin as though feeding the ducks and comfort crying jags
that arose because a dog was killed on tv. he said the girls also
displayed a dramatic womanliness during their "monthly time." they were
more languorous, descended the stairs in an actressy way, and kept
saying with a wink, "cousin herbie's come for a visit." on some nights
they sent him out to buy more tampax, not just one box but four or five,
and the young store clerks with their thin mustaches would smirk. h
 
 ___________________________
 
e
loved his daughters, they were precious to him, but he longed for the
presence of a few boys.

that was why, two weeks after cecilia returned home, mr. lisbon
persuaded his wife to allow the girls to throw the first and only party
of their short lives. we all received invitations, made by hand from
construction paper, with balloons containing our names in magic marker.
our amazement at being formally invited to a house we had only visited
in our bathroom fantasies was so great that we had to compare one
another's invitations before we believed it. it was thrilling to know
that the lisbon girls knew our names, that their delicate vocal cords
had prono
 
 ___________________________
 
the metal numbers nailed to the trees.

as the night of the party approached, we watched the house for signs of
decorating or other preparations, but saw none. the yellow bricks
retained their look of a church-run orphanage and the silence of the
lawn was absolute. the curtains didn't rustle, nor did a van deliver
six-foot submarine sandwiches or drums of potato chips.

then the night arrived. in blue blazers, with khaki trousers and clip-on
neckties, we walked along the sidewalk in front of the lisbon house as
we had so many times before, but this time we turned up the walk, and
climbed the front steps between the pots of red geraniums, and rang the
doorbell. peter sissen acted as our leader, and even looked slightly
bored, saying again and again, "wait'll you see this." the door opened.

above us, the face of mrs. lisbon took form in the dimness. she told us
to come in, we bumped against each other getting through the doorway,
and as soon as we set foot on the hooked rug in the foyer we sa
 
 ___________________________
 
w that
peter sissen's descriptions of the house had been all wrong. instead of
a heady atmosphere of feminine chaos, we found the house to be a tidy,
dry-looking place that smelled faintly of stale popcorn. a piece of
needlepoint saying "bless this home" was framed over the arch, and to
the right, on a shelf above the radiator, five pairs of bronzed baby
shoes preserved for all time the unstimulating stage of the lisbon
girls' infancy. the dining room was full of stark colonial furniture.
one wall had a painting of pilgrims plucking a turkey. the living room
revealed orange carpeting and a brown vinyl sofa. mr. lisbon's la-z-boy
flanked a small table on which sat the partially completed model of a
sailing ship, without rigging and with the busty mermaid on the prow
painted over.

we were directed downstairs to the rec room. the steps were metal-tipped
and steep, and as we descended, the light at the bottom gre
 
 ___________________________
 
w brighter
and brighter, as though we were approaching the molten core of the
earth. by the time we reached the last step it was blinding. fluorescent
lights buzzed overhead; table lamps burned on every surface. the green
and red linoleum checkerboard flamed beneath our buckled shoes. on a
card table, the punch bowl erupted lava. the paneled walls gleamed, and
for the first few seconds the lisbon girls were only a patch of glare
like a congregation of angels. then, however, our eyes got used to the
light and informed us of something we had never realized: the lisbon
girls were all different people. instead of five replicas with the same
blond hair and puffy cheeks we saw that they were distinct beings, their
personalities beginning to transform their faces and reroute their
expressions. we saw at once that bonnie, who introduced herself now as
bonaventure, had the sallow complexion and 
 
 ___________________________
 
sharp nose of a nun. her eyes
watered and she was a foot taller than any of her sisters, mostly
because of the length of her neck which would one day hang from the end
of a rope. therese lisbon had a heavier face, the cheeks and eyes of a

cow, and she came forward to greet us on two left feet. mary lisbon's
hair was darker; she had a widow's peak and fuzz above her upper lip
that suggested her mother had found her depilatory wax. lux lisbon was
the only one who accorded with our image of the lisbon girls. she
radiated health and mischief. her dress fit tightly, and when she came
for-ward to shake our hands, she secretly moved one finger to tickle our
palms, giving off at the same time a strange gruff laugh. cecilia was
wearing, as usual, the wedding dress with the shorn hem. the dress was
vintage 1920s. it had sequins on the bust she didn't fill out, and
someone, either cecilia herself or the owner of the used clothing store,
had cut off the bottom of the dress with a jagged stroke so tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t
look, but she acted as though no one were there.

we knew to stay away from her. the bandages had been removed, but she
was wearing a collection of bracelets to hide the scars. none of the
other girls had any bracelets on, and we assumed they'd given cecilia
all they had. scotch tape held the undersides of the bracelets to
cecilia's skin, so they wouldn't slide. the wedding dress bore spots of
hospital food, stewed carrots and beets. we got our punch and stood on
one side of the room while the lisbon girls stood on the other.

we had never been to a chaperoned party. we were used to the parties our
older brothers threw with our parents out of town, to dark rooms
vibrating with heaps of bodies, musical vomiting, beer kegs beached on
ice in the bathtub, riots in the hallways, and the destruction of living
room sculpture. this was all different. mrs. lisbon ladled out more
glasses of punch while we watched therese and mary play dominoes, and
across the room mr. lisbon opened his tool kit. he s
 
 ___________________________
 
ing for him to keep still, saying if they slit his throat
it wouldn't be their fault, while joe turned white and became as
motionless as a lizard. we also knew that retards didn't live long and
aged faster than other people, which explained the gray hairs peeking
out from under joe's baseball cap. as children we had expected that joe
the retard would be dead by the time we became adolescents, but now we
were adolescents and joe was still a child.

now that he had arrived we were able to show the lisbon girls all the
things we knew about him, how his ears wiggled if you scratched his
chin, how he could only say "heads" when you flipped a coin, never
"tails," because that was too complicated, even if we said, "joe, try
tails," he would say, "heads!" thinking he won every time because we let
him. we had him sing the song he always sang, the one mr. eugene taught
him. he sang, "oh, the monkeys have no tails in sambo wango, oh, the
monkeys have no tails in sambo wango, oh, the monkeys have no tail
 
 ___________________________
 
s,
they were bitten off by whales," and we clapped, and the lisbon girls
clapped, lux clapped, and leaned against joe the retard, who was too

dense to appreciate it.

the party was just beginning to get fun when cecilia slipped off her
stool and made her way to her mother. playing with the bracelets on her
left wrist, she asked if she could be excused. it was the only time we
ever heard her speak, and we were surprised by the maturity of her
voice. more than anything she sounded old and tired. she kept pulling on
the bracelets, until mrs. lisbon said, "if th
 
 ___________________________
 
at's what you want,
cecilia. but we've gone to all this trouble to have a party for you."
cecilia tugged the bracelets until the tape came unstuck. then she
froze. mrs. lisbon said, "all right. go up, then. we'll have fun without
you." as soon as she had permission, cecilia made for the stairs. she
kept her face to the floor, moving in her personal oblivion, her
sunflower eyes fixed on the predicament of her life we would never
understand. she climbed the steps to the kitchen, closed the door behind
her, and proceeded through the upstairs hallway. we could hear her feet
right above us. halfway up the staircase to the second floor her steps
made no more noise, but it 
 
 ___________________________
 
't matter whether her brain continued to flash on the way
down, or if she regretted what she'd done, or if she had time to focus
on the fence spikes shooting toward her. her mind no longer existed in
any way that mattered. the wind sound huffed, once, and then the moist
thud jolted us, the sound of a watermelon breaking open, and for that
moment everyone remained still and composed, as though listening to an
orchestra, heads tilted to allow the ears to work and no belief coming
in yet. then mrs. lisbon, as though alone, said, "oh, my god."

mr. lisbon ran upstairs. mrs. lisbon ran to the top and stood holding
the banister. in the stairwell we could see her silhouette, the thick

legs, the great sloping back, the big head stilled with panic, the
eyeglasses jutting into space and filled with light. she took up most of
the stairs and we were hesitant to go around her until the lisbon girls
did. then we squeezed by. we reached the kitchen. through a side window
we could see mr. lisbon standing i
 
 ___________________________
 
one hand under her neck
and the other under her knees. he was trying to lift her off the spike
that had punctured her left breast, traveled through her inexplicable
heart, separated two vertebrae without shattering either, and come out
her back, ripping the dress and finding the air again. the spike had
gone through so fast there was no blood on it. it was perfectly clean
and cecilia merely seemed balanced on the pole like a gymnast. the
fluttering wedding dress added to this circusy effect. mr. lisbon kept
trying to lift her off, gently, but even in our ignorance we knew it was
hopeless and that despite cecilia's open eyes and the way her mouth kept
contracting like that of a fish on a stringer it was just nerves and she
had succeeded, on the second try, in hurling herself out of the world.

we didn't understand why cecilia had killed herself the first time and
we understood even less when she did it twice. her diary, which the
police inspected as part of the customary investigation, didn't 
 
 ___________________________
 
dders and striped
shamrocks, but the entry about dominic read, "palazzolo jumped off the
roof today over that rich bitch, porter. how stupid can you be?"

the paramedics came back again, the same two, though it took us a while
to recognize them. out of fear and politeness we had moved across the
street to sit on the hood of mr. larson's oldsmobile. as we made our
exit, none of us had said a word except for valentine stamarowski, who
called across the lawn, "thank you for the party, mr. and mrs. lisbon."
mr. lisbon was still sunk in bushes up to his waist, his back jerking as
though he were trying to pull cecilia up and off, or as though he were
sobbing. on the porch mrs. lisbon made the other girls face the house.
the sprinkler system, timed to go on at 8:15 p.m., spurted into life
just as the ems truck appeared at the end of the block, moving at about
fifteen miles an hour, without flashing lights or siren, as though the
paramedics already knew it was hopeless. the skinny one with the
musta
 
 ___________________________
 
che climbed out first, then the fat one. they got the stretcher
immediately, instead of first checking on the victim, a lapse which we
later learned from medical professionals violated procedure. we didn't
know who had called the paramedics or how they knew they were no more
than undertakers that day. tom faheem said therese had gone inside and
called, but the rest of us remember the remaining four lisbon girls
immobile on the porch until after the ems truck arrived. no one else on
our street was aware of what had happened. the identical lawns down the
block  were  empty.  someone  was  barbecuing  somewhere.  behind  joe
larson's
house we could hear a birdie being batted back and forth, endlessly, by
the two greatest badminton players in the world.

the paramedics moved mr. lisbon aside so they could examine cecilia.
they found no pulse, but went ahead trying to save her anyway. the fat
one hac
 
 ___________________________
 
bed hairless from years of wearing pants,
but they were still a long way from death. their own parents, who spoke
foreign languages and lived in converted attics like buzzards, had the
finest medical care available and were threatening to live on until the
next century. nobody's grandfather had died, nobody's grandmother,
nobody's parents, only a few dogs: tom burke's beagle, muffin, who
choked on bazooka joe bubble gum, and then that summer, a creature who
in dog years was still a puppy-cecilia lisbon.

the cemetery workers' strike hit its sixth week the day she died.

nobody had given much thought to the strike, nor to the cemetery
workers' grievances, because most of us had never been to a cemetery.
occasionally we heard gunshots coming from the ghetto, but our fathers
insisted it was only cars backfiring. therefore, when the newspapers
reported that burials in the city had completely stopped, we didn't
think it affected us. likewise, mr. and mrs. lisbon, only in their
forties, with a cro
 
 ___________________________
 
p of young daughters, had given little thought to the
strike, until those same daughters began killing themselves.

funerals continued, but without the consummation of burial. caskets were
carted out beside undug plots; priests performed eulogies; tears were
shed; after which the caskets were taken back to the deep freeze of the
mortuary to await a settlement. cremation enjoyed a rise in popularity.
mrs. lisbon, however, objected to this idea, fearing it was heathen, and
even pointed to a biblical passage that suggested the dead will rise
bodily at the second coming, no ashes allowed.

only one cemetery existed in our suburb, a drowsy field owned by various
denominations over the years, from lutheran through episcopalian to
catholic. it contained three french canadian-fur trappers, a line of
bakers named kropp, and j. b. milbank, who invented a local soft drink
resembling root beer. with its leaning h
 
 ___________________________
 
eadstones, its red gravel drive
in the shape of a horseshoe, and its many trees nourished by well-fed
carcasses, the cemetery had filled up long ago in the time of the last
deaths. because of this, the funeral director, mr. alton, was forced to
take mr. lisbon on a tour of possible alternatives.

he remembered the trip well. the days of the cemetery strike weren't
easily forgotten, but mr. alton also confessed, "it was my first
suicide. a young kid, too. you couldn't use the same sort of
condolences. i was kind of sweating it out, to tell you the truth." on
the west side they visited a quiet cemetery in the palestinian section,

but mr. lisbon didn't like the foreign sound of the muezzin calling the
people to prayer, and had heard that the neighbors
 
 ___________________________
 
 still ritually
slaughtered goats in their bathtubs. "not here," he said, "not here."
next they toured a small catholic cemetery that looked perfect, until,
coming to the back, mr. lisbon saw two miles of leveled land that
reminded him of photographs of hiroshima. "it was poletown," mr. alton
told us. "gm bought out like twenty-five thousand polacks to build this
huge automotive plant. they knocked down twenty-four city blocks, then
ran out of money. so the place was all rubble and weeds. it was
desolate, sure, but only if you were looking out the back fence."
finally they arrived at a public nondenominational cemetery located
between two freeways, and it was here that cecilia l
 
 ___________________________
 
ze up was full-size, more
than cecilia required. when they had opened her casket at the funeral
home, all anyone had seen was the satin pillow and the ruffled
cushioning of the casket's lid. mrs. turner said, "for a minute i
thought the thing was empty." but then, making only a shallow imprint
because of her eighty-six pounds, pale skin and hair blending with white
satin, cecilia emerged from the background like a figure in an optical
illusion. she was dressed not in the wedding gown, which mrs. lisbon had
thrown away, but in a beige dress with a lace collar, a christmas gift
from her grandmother which she had refused to wear in life. the open
section of lid revealed not only her face and shoulders, but her hands
with their bitten nails, her rough elbows, the twin prongs of her hips,
and even her knees.

only the family filed past the coffin. first the girls walked past, each
dazed and expressionless, and, later, people said we should have known
by their faces. "it was like they were giving h
 
 ___________________________
 
er a wink," mrs.
carruthers said. "they should have been bawling, but what did they do?
up to the coffin, peek in, and away. why didn't we see it?" curt van
osdol, the only kid at the funeral home, said he would have copped a
last feel, right there in front of the priest and everybody, if only we
had been there to appreciate it. after the girls passed by, mrs. lisbon,
on her husband's arm, took ten stricken steps to dangle her weak head
over cecilia's face, rouged for the first and last time ever. "look at
her nails," mr. burton thought he heard her say. "couldn't they do

something about her nails?"

and then mr. lisbon replied: "they'll grow out. fingernails keep
growing. she can't bite them now, dear." our own knowledge of cecilia
kept growing after her death, too, with the same unnatural persistence.
though she had spoken only rarely and had had no rea
 
 ___________________________
 
l friends, everybody
possessed his own vivid memories of cecilia. some of us had held her for
five minutes as a baby while mrs. lisbon ran back into the house to get
her purse. some of us had played in the sandbox with her, fighting over
a shovel, or had exposed ourselves to her behind the mulberry tree that
grew like deformed flesh through the chain link fence. we had stood in
line with her for smallpox vaccinations, had held polio sugar cubes
under our tongues with her, had taught her to jump rope, to light
snakes, had stopped her from picking her scabs on numerous occasions,
and had cautioned her against touching her mouth 
 
 ___________________________
 
, scrubbing her
high-tops with a toothbrush and cup of ivory liquid.

cecilia's diary begins a year and a half before her suicide. many people

felt the illuminated pages constituted a hieroglyphics of unreadable
despair, though the pictures looked cheerful for the most part. the
diary had a lock, but david barker, who got it from skip ortega, the
plumber's assistant, told us that skip had found the diary next to the
toilet in the master bathroom, its lock already jimmied as though mr.
and mrs. lisbon had been reading it themselves. tim winer, the brain,
insisted on examining the diary. we carried it to the study his parents
had built for him, with its green desk lamps, contour globe, and
gilt-edged encyclopedias. "emotional instability," he said, analyzing
the handwriting. "look at the dots on these i's. all over the place."
and then, leaning forward, showing the blue veins beneath his weakling's
skin, he added: "basically, what we have here is a dreamer. somebody out
of touch with reality.
 
 ___________________________
 
rry skies the girls had
gazed at while camping years before, and the boredom of summers
traipsing from back yard to front to back again, and even a certain
indefinable smell that arose from toilets on rainy nights, which the
girls called "sewery." we knew what it felt like to see a boy with his
shirt off, and why it made lux write the name kevin in purple magic
marker all over her three-ring binder and even on her bras and panties,
and we understood her rage coming home one day to find that mrs. lisbon
had soaked her things in clorox, bleaching all the "kevins" out. we knew
the pain of winter wind rushing up your skirt, and the ache of keeping
your knees together in class, and how drab and infuriating it was to
jump rope while the boys played baseball. we could never understand why
the girls cared so much about being mature, or why they felt compelled
to compliment each other, but sometimes, after one of us had read a long
portion of the diary out loud, we had to fight back the urge to hug on
 
 ___________________________
 
 names are
so many vague chemical pollutants. from invective she shifts without
pause into her poetic reveries again. a couplet about summer from a poem
she never finished, is quite nice, we think: the trees like lungsfilling
with air my sister, the mean one, pulling my hair the fragment is dated
june 26, three days after she returned from the hospital, when we used
to see her lying in the front-yard grass.

little is known of cecilia's state of mind on the last day of her life.
according to mr. lisbon, she seemed pleased about her party. when he
went downstairs to check on the preparations, he found cecilia standing
on a chair, tying balloons to the ceiling with red and blue ribbons. "i
told her to get down. the doctor said she shouldn't hold her hands over
her head. because of the stitches." she did as commanded, and spent the
rest of the day lying on the rug in her bedroom, staring up at her
zodiac mobile and listening to the odd celtic records she'd gotten
through a mail-order house. "it 
 
 ___________________________
 
was always some soprano singing about
marshes and dead roses." the melancholic music alarmed mr. lisbon,
comparing it as he did to the optimistic tunes of his own youth, but,
passing down the hall, he realized that it was certainly no worse than
lux's howling rock music or even the inhuman screech of therese's ham
radio.

from two in the afternoon on, cecilia soaked in the bathtub. it wasn't
unusual for her to take marathon baths, but after what had happened the
last time, mr. and mrs. lisbon took no chances. "we made her leave the
door open a crack," mrs. lisbon said. "she didn't like it, of course.

and now she had new ammunition. that psychiatrist had said ceel was at
the age where she needed a lot of privacy." throughout the afternoon,
mr. lisbon kept coming up with excuses to pass by the bathroom. "i'd
wait to hear a splash, then i'd go on past. we'd taken everything sharp
out of there, of course."

at four-thirty, mrs. lisbon sent lux up to check on cecilia. when she
came bac
 
 ___________________________
 
k downstairs, she seemed unconcerned, and nothing about her
demeanor suggested she had an inkling about what her sister would do
later that day. "she's fine," lux said. "she's stinking up the place
with those bath salts."

at five-thirty, cecilia got out of the bath and dressed for the party.
mrs. lisbon heard her going back and forth between her sisters' two
bedrooms (bonnie shared with mary, therese with lux). the rattling of
her bracelets comforted her parents because it allowed them to keep
track of her movements like an animal with a bell on its collar. from
time to time during the hours before we arrived, mr. lisbon heard the
tinkling of cecilia's bracelets as she went up and down the stairs,
trying on different shoes.

according to what they told us later on separate occasions and in
sep
 
 ___________________________
 
arate states, mr. and mrs. lisbon didn't find cecilia's behavior
strange during the party. "she was always quiet with company," mrs.
lisbon said. and perhaps because of their lack of socializing, mr. and
mrs. lisbon remembered the party as a successful event. mrs. lisbon, in
fact, was surprised when cecilia asked to be excused. "i thought she was
having a nice time." even at this point, the other girls didn't act as
though they knew what was about to happen. tom faheem recalls mary
telling him about a jumper she wanted to buy at penney's. therese and
tim winer discussed their anxiety over getting into an ivy league
college.

from clues later discovered, it appears cecilia's ascent to her bedroom

was not as quick as we remember it. she took time, for instance,
 
 ___________________________
 
 between
leaving us and reaching the upstairs to drink juice from a can of pears
(she left the can on the counter, punctured with only one hole in
disregard of mrs. lisbon's prescribed method). either before or after
drinking the juice, she went to the back door. "i thought they were
sending her on a trip," mrs. pitzenberger said. "she was carrying a
suitcase."

no suitcase was ever found. we can only explain mrs. pitzenberger's
testimony as the hallucination of a bifocal wearer, or a prophecy of the
later suicides where luggage played such a central motif. whatever the
truth, mrs. pitzenberger saw cecilia close the back door, and it was
only seconds later that s
 
 ___________________________
 
droom as she
entered, though it was still light out. across the street, mr. buell saw
her open her bedroom window. "i waved to her, but she didn't see me," he
told us.

just then his wife groaned from the other room. he didn't hear about
cecilia until after the ems truck had come and gone. "unfortunately, we
had problems of our own," he said. he went to check on his sick spouse
just as cecilia stuck her head out the window, into the pink, humid,
pillowing air.

flower arrangements arrived at the lisbon house later than was
customary. because of the nature of the death, most people decided not
to send flowers to the funeral home, and in general everybody put off
placing their orders, unsure whether to let the catastrophe pass in
silence or to act as though the death were natural. in the end, however,
everybody sent something, white roses in wreaths, clusters of orchids,
weeping peonies. peter loomis, who delivered for ftd, said flowers
crammed the lisbons' entire living room. bouquets exploded
 
 ___________________________
 
t even put them in
vases," he said. most people opted for generic cards that said "with

sympathy" or "our condolences," but some of the waspier types,
accustomed to writing notes for all occasions, labored over personal
responses. mrs. beards used a quote from walt whitman we took to
murmuring to one another: "all goes onward and outward, nothing
collapses, / and to die is different from what any one supposed, and
luckier." chase buell peeked at his own mother's card as he slipped it
under the lisbons' door. it read: "i don't know what you're feeling. i
won't even pretend."

a few people braved personal calls. mr. hutch and mr. peters walked over
to the lisbon house on separate occasions, but their reports differed
little. mr. lisbon invited them in, but before they could broach the
painful subject, he sat them down in front of the baseball game. "he
kept talking about the bullpen," mr. hutch said. "hell, i pitched in
college. i had to straighten him out on a few essentials. first of all,
h
 
 ___________________________
 
t what i'd gone over there to do." mr. peters said, "the guy was
only half there. he kept turning the tint control up, so that the
infield was practically blue. then he'd sit back down. then he'd get up
again. one of the girls came in-can you tell them apart?-and brought us
a couple beers. took a swig from his before handing it over."

neither of the men mentioned the suicide. "i wanted to, i really did,"
said mr. hutch. "i just never got around to it." father moody showed
more perseverance. mr. lisbon welcomed the cleric as he had the other
men, ushering him to a seat before the baseball game. a few minutes
later, as though on cue, mary served beers. but father moody wasn't
deflected. during the second inning, he said, "how about we get the mrs.
down here?

have a little chat."

mr. lisbon hunched toward the screen. "afraid she's not seeing anybody
right now. under the weather."

"she'll see her priest," father moody said.

he stood up to go. mr. lisbon held up two fingers. his eyes were
wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ring. "father," he said. "doubleplay ball, father."

paolo conelli, an altar boy, overheard father moody tell fred simpson,
the choirmaster, how he had left "that strange man, god forgive me for
saying so, but he made him that way," and climbed the front stairs.
already the house showed signs of uncleanliness, though they were
nothing compared to what was to come later. dust balls lined the steps.
a halfeaten sandwich sat atop the landing where someone had felt too sad
to finish it. because mrs. lisbon had stopped doing laundry or even
buying detergent, the girls had taken to washing clothes by hand in the
bathtub, and when father moody passed their bathroom, he saw shirts and
pants and underthings draped over the shower curtain. "it sounded quite
pleasant, actually," he said. "like rain." steam rose from the floor,
along with the smell of jasmine soap (weeks later, we asked the
cosmetics lady at jacobsen's for some jasmine soap we could smell).
father moody stood outside the bathroom, too ba
 
 ___________________________
 
shful to enter that moist
cave that existed as a common room between the girls' two shared
bedrooms. inside, if he hadn't been a priest and had looked, he would
have seen the throne-like toilet where the lisbon girls defecated
publicly, the bathtub they used as a couch, filling it with pillows so
that two sisters could luxuriate while so another curled her hair. he
would have seen the radiator stacked with glasses and coke cans, the
clamshell soap dish employed, in a pinch, as an ashtray. from the age of
twelve lux spent hours in the john smoking cigarettes, exhaling either
out the window or into a wet towel she then hung outside. but father
moody saw none of this. he only passed through the tropical 
 
 ___________________________
 
air current
and that was all. behind him he felt the colder drafts of the house,
circulating dust motes and that particular family smell every house had,
you knew it when you came in-chase buell's house smelled like skin, joe
larson's like mayonnaise, the lisbons' like stale popcorn, we thought,

though father moody, going there after the deaths had begun, said, "it
was a mix between a funeral parlor and broom closet. all those flowers.
all that dust." he wanted to step back into the current of jasmine, but
as he stood, listening to rain beading bathroom tiles and washing away
the girls' footprints, he heard voices. he made a quick circuit of the
hallway, calling out for mrs. lisbon, but she didn't respond. returning
to the top of the stairs, he had s
 
 ___________________________
 
tarted down when he saw the lisbon
girls through a partly open doorway. "at that point, those girls had no
intention of repeating cecilia's mistake. i know everyone thinks it was
a plan, or that we handled it poorly, but they were just as shocked as i
was." father moody rapped softly on the door and asked for permission to
enter. "they were sitting on the floor together, and i could tell they'd
been crying. i think they were having some kind of slumber party. they
had pillows all over.

i hate to mention it, and i remember scold
 
 ___________________________
 
at the time, but it was unmistakable: they hadn't bathed."

we asked father moody whether he had discussed cecilia's death or the
girls' grief, but he said he hadn't. "i brought it up a few times, but
they didn't take up the subject. i've learned you can't force it. the
time has to be right and the heart willing." when we asked him to sum up
his impression of the girls' emotional state at that point, he said,
"buffeted but not broken." in the first few days after the funeral, our
interest in the lisbon girls only increased. added to their loveliness
was a new mysterious suffering, perfectly silent, visible in the blue
puffiness beneath their eyes or the way they would sometimes stop in
mid-stride, look down, and shake their heads as though disagreeing with
life. grief made them wander. we heard reports of the girls walking
aimlessly through eastland, down the lighted mall with its timid
fountains and hot dogs impaled beneath heat lamps. now and then they
fingered a blouse, or dress, but bough
 
 ___________________________
 
t nothing. woody clabault saw lux
lisbon talking to a motorcycle gang outside hudson's. one biker asked
her to go for a ride, and after looking in the direction of her house

more than ten miles away, she accepted. she hugged his waist. he kicked
the machine into life. later, lux was seen walking home alone, carrying
her shoes.

in the kriegers' basement, we lay on a strip of leftover carpeting and
dreamed of all the ways we could soothe the lisbon girls. some of us
wanted to lie down in the grass with them, or play the guitar and sing
them songs. paul baldino wanted to take them to metro beach so they
could all get a tan. chase buell, more and more under the sway of his
father the christian scientist, said only that the girls needed "help
not of this world." but when we asked him what he meant, he shrugged and
said, "nothing." nevertheless, when the girls walked by, we often found
him crouching by a tree, moving his lips with his eyes cl
 
 ___________________________
 
 the dangerousness of the
fence she'd jumped on. "it was an accident waiting to happen," said mr.
frank, who worked in insurance. "you couldn't get a policy to cover it."

"our kids could jump on it, too," mrs. zaretti insisted during coffee
hour following sunday mass. not long after, a group of fathers began
digging the fence out free of charge. it turned out the fence stood on
the bateses' property. mr. buck, a lawyer, negotiated with mr. bates
about the fence's removal and didn't speak to mr. lisbon at all.
everyone assumed, of course, that the lisbons would be grateful.

we had rarely seen our fathers in work boots before, toiling in the
earth and wielding brand-new root clippers. they struggled with the
fence, bent over like marines hoisting the flag on iwo jima. it was the
greatest show of common effort we could remember in our neighborhood,
all those lawyers, doctors, and mortgage bankers locked arm in arm in
the trench, with our mothers bringing out orange kool-aid, and for a
moment o
 
 ___________________________
 
k, attached a hook to the fence, pressed a button to make his
giant winch revolve, and with a deep earth sound, the murdering fence
came loose. "you can see blood," anthony turkis said, and we looked to
see if the blood that hadn't been there at the time of the suicide had
arrived after the fact. some said it was on the third spike, some said
the fourth, but it was as impossible as finding the bloody shovel on the
back of abbey road where all the clues proclaimed that paul was dead.

none of the lisbons helped with the fence removal. from time to time,
however, we saw their faces blinking at the windows. just after the
truck pulled the fence free, mr. lisbon himself came out the side door
and coiled up a garden hose. he didn't move to the trench. he raised one
hand in a neighborly salute and returned inside. the man lashed the
fence, in sections, to his truck and-getting paid for it-gave mr. bates
the worst lawn job we'd ever seen. we were amazed our parents permitted
this, when lawn jobs usu
 
 ___________________________
 
e
scent of carp. we tried to light them but they wouldn't burn (which made
the fish flies seem deader than anything). we hit bushes, beat rugs,
turned on windshield wipers full blast. fish flies clogged sewer grates
so that we had to stuff them down with sticks. crouching over sewers, we
could hear the river under the city flowing away. we dropped rocks and
listened for the splash.

we didn't stop with our own houses. once our walls were clean, mr. buell
told chase to start cleaning bugs off the lisbon house. because of his
religious beliefs, mr. buell often went the extra mile, raking ten feet
into the hessens' yard, or shoveling their walk and even throwing down
rock salt. it wasn't odd for him to tell chase to start sweeping the
lisbons' house, even though they lived across the street and not next
door. because mr. lisbon only had daughters, boys and men had gone over
in the past to help him drag away lightning-struck limbs, and as chase
approached, holding his broom over his head like a r
 
 ___________________________
 
egimental banner,
nobody said a word. then, however, mr. krieger told kyle to go over and
sweep some, and mr. hutch sent ralph, and soon we were all over at the
lisbon house, brushing walls and scraping away bug husks. they had even
more than we did, the walls an inch thick, and paul baldino asked us the
riddle, "what smells like fish, is fun to eat, but isn't fish?"

once we got to the lisbons' windows, our new inexplicable feelings for
the girls came to the fore. as we slapped off bugs, we saw mary lisbon
in the kitchen, holding a box of kraft macaroni & cheese. she appeared
to be contemplating whether or not to open it. she read the directions,
turned the box over to look at the vivid picture of the noodles, and
then put the box back on the counter. anthony turkis, pressing his face
to the window, said, "she should eat something." she picked up the box
again. hopefully, we watched
 
 ___________________________
 
. but then she turned and disappeared.

outside it grew dark. lights came on down the block, but not in the
lisbon house. we couldn't see in any better, and in fact the glass panes

began to reflect our own gaping faces. it was only nine o'clock, but
everything confirmed what people had been saying: that since cecilia's
suicide the lisbons could hardly wait for night to forget themselves in
sleep. up in a bedroom window, bonnie's three votive candles glimmered
in a reddish haze, but otherwise the house absorbed the shadows of
night. insects started up in their hiding places all around, vibrating
the minute we turned our backs. everyone called them crickets, but we
never found any in the sprayed bushes or aerated lawns, and had no idea
what they looked like. they were merely sound. our parents had been more
intimate with crickets
 
 ___________________________
 
. for them the buzzing apparently didn't sound
mechanical. it came from every direction, always from a height just
above our heads, or just below, and always with the suggestion that the
insect world felt more than we did. as we stood charmed into stillness,
listening to the crickets, mr. lisbon came out the side door and thanked
us.

so his hair looked even grayer than usual, but grief hadn't altered the
highness of his voice. he had on overalls, one knee covered by sawdust.
"feel free to use the hose," he said, and then he looked at the good
humor truck passing by, the jingle of the bell seemed to trigger a
memory, he smiled, or wincedwe couldn't tell which-and returned inside.

we went with him only later, invisibly, with the ghosts of our
questions. apparently, as he stepped back i
 
 ___________________________
 
nside, he saw therese come
out of the dining room. she was stuffing her mouth with candym&m's, by
the colors-but stopped immediately on seeing him. she swallowed an
unchewed chunk. her high forehead glowed in the light from the street
and her cupid's lips were redder, smaller, and more shapely than he
remembered, especially in contrast to her cheeks and chin, which had
gained weight. her eyelashes were crusted, as though recently glued
shut. at that moment mr. lisbon had the feeling that he didn't know who
she was, that children were only strangers you agreed to live with, and
he reached out in order to meet her for the first time. he rested his
hands on her shoulders, then dropped them to his sides. therese brushed

the hair out of her face, smiled, and began walking slowly up the
stairs.

mr. lisbon went on his usual nighttime rounds, checking to see that the
front door was locked (it wasn't), that the garage light was off (it
was), and that none of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
burners on the stove had been left on (none
had). he turned off the light in the first-floor bathroom, where he
found kyle krieger's retainer in the sink, left from when he'd taken it
out during the party to eat cake. mr. lisbon ran the retainer under
water, examining the pink shell form-fitted to the roof of kyle's mouth,
the crenellations in the plastic that encircled the turret of his teeth,
the looping front wire bent at key spots (you could see plier marks) to
provide modulated pressure. mr. lisbon knew his parental and neighborly
duty entailed putting the retainer in a ziploc bag, calling the
kriegers, and telling them their expensive orthodontal device was in
safe keeping. acts like these-simple, humane, conscie
 
 ___________________________
 
ntious,
forgiving-held life together. only a few days earlier he would have been
able to perform them. but now he took the retainer and dropped it in the
toilet. he pressed the handle. the retainer, jostled in the surge,
disappeared down the porcelain throat, and, when waters abated, floated
triumphantly, mockingly, out. mr. lisbon waited for the tank to refill
and flushed again, but the same thing happened. the replica of the boy's
mouth clung to the white slope.

at that point something flashed in the corner of his eye. "i thought i
saw somebody, but when i looked, there was nothing there." nor did he
see anything as he came around the back hall into the foyer and up the
front stairs. on the second floor he listened at the girls' doors, but
heard only mary coughing in her sleep, lux playing a radio softly,
singing along
 
 ___________________________
 
. he stepped into the girls' bathroom. a beam of light from
the risen moon penetrated the window, lighting up a portion of mirror.
amid smudged fingerprints, a small circle had been wiped clean where his
daughters contemplated their images, and above the mirror itself bonnie
had taped a white construction-paper dove. mr. lisbon parted his lips in

a grimace and saw in the clean circle the one dead canine tooth
beginning to turn green on the left side of his mouth. the doors to the
girls' shared bedrooms were not completely closed. breathings and
murmurings issued from them. he listened to the sounds as though they
could tell him what the girls were feeling and how to comfort them. lux
switched her radio off, and everything was silent. "i couldn't go in,"
mr. lisbon confessed to us years later. "i didn't know what to 
 
 ___________________________
 
say."
only as he left the bathroom, heading for the oblivion of sleep himself,
did mr. lisbon see cecilia's ghost. she was standing in her old bedroom,
dressed in the wedding dress again, having somehow shed the beige dress
with the lace collar she'd worn in her coffin. "the window was still
open," mr. lisbon said. "i don't think we'd ever remembered to shut it.
it was all clear to me. i knew i had to close that window or else she'd
go on jumping out of it forever."

according to his story, he didn't cry out. he didn't want to make
contact with the shade of his daughter, to learn why she had done
herself in, to ask forgiveness, or to rebuke her. he merely rushed
forward, brushing past, to close the window. as he did, however, the
ghost turned, and he saw that it was only bonnie, wrapped in a bedshee
 
 ___________________________
 
t.
"don't worry," she said, quietly. "they took the fence out."

in a handwritten note displaying the penmanship perfected during his
graduate school days in zurich, dr. hornicker called mr. and mrs. lisbon
in for a second consultation, but they didn't go. instead, from what we
observed during the remainder of the summer, mrs. lisbon once more took
charge of the house while mr. lisbon receded into a mist. when we saw
him after that, he had the sheepish look of a poor relation. by late
august, in the weeks of preparation before school, he began leaving by
the back door as though sneaking out. his car would whine inside the
garage and, when the automatic door rose, would emerge tentatively,
lopsided like an animal missing a leg. through the windshield we could
see mr. lisbon at the wheel, his hair still wet and his face sometimes
dabbed with shaving cream, but he made no expre
 
 ___________________________
 
er with rubber
bands. our tongues searched out pockets of scar tissue left by jutting
back braces, and even fifteen years later the fissures still seemed
sweet with blood. but dr. becker was saying, "i remember mary because
she came in without her parents. no kid had ever done that before. when
i asked her what she wanted, she put two fingers in her mouth and pulled
up her front lip. then she said, "how mucht she was worried her parents
wouldn't be able to pay."

dr. becker declined to give mary lisbon an estimate. "bring your mother
in and we'll talk about it," he said. in fact, the process would have
been extensive, as mary, like her sisters, appeared to have two extra
canine teeth. disappointed, she lay back in the dentist's chair, her
feet raised, while a silver tube chirred water into a sucking cup. "i
had to leave her sitting in the chair," dr. becker said. "i had five
other kids waiting. later my nurse told me she heard the girl crying."

the girls didn't appear as a group until convoc
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, with meandering trim. therese had on a white
dress that looked like a lab coat. nevertheless, the girls filed in with
an unexpected dignity as a hush fell over the auditorium. bonnie had
picked a simple bouquet of late-season dandelions from the school green.
she held them under lux's chin to see if she liked butter. their recent
shock was undetectable, but sitting down they left a folding seat empty
as though saving it for cecilia.

the girls didn't miss a single day of classes, nor did mr. lisbon, who
taught with his usual enthusiasm. he continued to pump students for
answers by pretending to strangle them, and scratched out equations in a
cloud of chalk dust. at lunchtime, however, rather than going to the
teachers' lounge, he began to eat in his classroom, bringing a cafeteria
apple and plate of cottage cheese back to his desk. he showed other odd
behavior. we saw him walking along the science wing, conversing with
spider plants hanging from the geodesic panes. after the first week, h
 
 ___________________________
 
 an hour earlier than his late-sleeping,
bused-in daughters. entering the main door, past the suit of armor (our
athletic teams were called the knights), he went straight into his

classroom where the nine planets of our solar system hung from
perforated ceiling panels (sixty-six holes in each square, according to
joe hill conley, who counted them during class). nearly invisible white
strings attached the planets to a track. each day they rotated and
revolved, the whole cosmos controlled by mr. lisbon, who consulted an
astronomy chart and turned a crank next to the pencil sharpener. beneath
the planets hung black-and-white triangles, orange helices, blue cones
with detachable noses. on his desk mr. lisbon displayed a soma cube,
solved for all time in a ribbon of scotch tape. beside the blackboard a
wire clamp held five sticks of chalk so that he could draw sheet music
for his male singing group. he had been a teacher so long he had a sink
in his room.

the girls, on the other hand, entered t
 
 ___________________________
 
hrough the side door, past the
bed of dormant daffodils tended each spring by the headmaster's slim,
industrious wife. scattering to separate lockers, they reunited in the
cafeteria during juice break. julie freeman had been mary lisbon's best
friend, but after the suicide they stopped talking. "she was a neat kid,
but i just couldn't deal with it. she sort of freaked me out. also i was
starting to go out with todd by then." the sisters walked with poise
down the halls, carrying books over their chests and staring at a fixed
point in space we couldn't see. they were like aeneas, who (as we
translated him into existence amid the cloud of dr. timmerman's b. 0.)
had gone down to the underworld, seen the dead, and returned, weepin
 
 ___________________________
 
d leaf over lux's head.
bits fell down the back of her shirt and she hit him. the next thing we
knew, they were walking together around back of the school, out past the
tennis courts, through the row of memorial elms, and to the towering

fence that marked the property of the mansions on the private drive
beyond.

it wasn't only willard. paul wanamaker, kurt siles, peter mcguire, tom
sellers, and jim czeslawski all had their few days of going steady with
lux. it was well known that mr. and mrs. lisbon didn't allow their
daughters to date, and that mrs. lisbon in particular disapproved of
dances, proms, and the general expectation that teenagers should be
allowed to paw one another in back seats. lux's brief unions were
clandestine. they sprouted in the dead time of study halls, bloomed on
the way to the drinking found- tain, and were consummated in the hot box
above the auditorium, amid uncomfortable theatrical lights and cables.
the boys met lux in transit on sanctioned errands, in the aisl
 
 ___________________________
 
e of the
pharmacy while mrs. lisbon waited outside in the car, and once, in the
most daring rendezvous, in the station wagon itself, for the fifteen
minutes mrs. lisbon stood in line at the bank. but the boys who snuck
off with lux were always the stupidest boys, the most selfish and abused
at home, and they made terrible sources of information. no matter what
we asked, they responded with lewd assertions such as, "squeezebox is
all right. let me tell you," or, "you want to know what happened? smell
my fingers, man." that lux consented to meet them in the dells and
thickets of our school grounds only showed too well her disequilibrium.
we asked whether she spo
 
 ___________________________
 
ent reason,
had turned around and looked at him. he couldn't say she was beautiful
because all he could see were her eyes. the rest of her face the pulpy
lips, the blond sideburn fuzz, the nose with its candy-pink translucent
nostrils-registered dimly as the two blue eyes lifted him on a sea wave
and held him suspended. "she was the still point of the turning world,"
he told us, quoting eliot, whose collected poems he had found on the
shelf of the detoxification center. for the eternity that lux lisbon
looked at him, trip fontaine looked back, and the love he felt at that
moment, truer than all subsequent loves because it never had to survive
real life, still plagued him, even now in the desert, with his looks and
health wasted. "you never know what'll set the memory off," he told us.
"a baby's face. a bell on a cat's collar. anything."

they didn't exchange a single word. but in the weeks that followed, trip
spent his days wandering the halls, hoping for lux to appear, the most
naked person 
 
 ___________________________
 
with clothes on he had ever seen. even in sensible school

shoes she shuffled as though barefoot, and the baggy apparel mrs. lisbon
bought for her only increased her appeal, as though after undressing she
had put on whatever was handy. in corduroys her thighs rubbed together,
buzzing, and there was always at least one untidy marvel to unravel him:
an untucked shirttail, a sock with a hole, a ripped scam showing
underarm hair. she carted her books from class to class but never opened
them. her pens and pencils looked as temporary as cinderella's broom.
when she smiled, her mouth showed too many teeth, but at night trip
fonta
 
 ___________________________
 
ine dreamed of being bitten by each one.

he didn't know the first step in pursuing her because he'd always been
the one pursued. little by little, from the girls who came up to his
bedroom, he learned where lux lived, though he had to be discreet in his
questions in order to avoid provoking their jealousy. he began driving
by the lisbon house in hopes of getting a glimpse of her, or the
consolation prize of a sister. unlike us, trip fontaine never mixed up
the lisbon girls, but from the outset saw lux as their shining pinnacle.
he opened the windows of his trans am as he drove by, turning up his
eight-track so that she might hear his favorite song in her bedroom.
other times, unable to control the riot in his gut, he floored the
accelerator, leaving behind as a love token only the smell of burning
rubber.

he didn't understand how she had bewitched him, nor why having done so
she promptly forgot his existence, and in desperate moods he asked his
mirror why 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him, especially as he insisted during his interview that he had
taken no stealthy measures, driving up in plain sight and parking his
trans am in front of an elm stump so it wouldn't get covered with sap.
he'd had his hair cut for the occasion, and instead of a western getup
wore a white shirt and black pants like a caterer. lux met him at the
door and, without saying much (she was keeping track of her knitting),
led him to his assigned seat in the living room. he sat on the couch
beside mrs. lisbon, with lux on her other side. trip fontaine told us
the girls paid him little attention, certainly less than a school
heartthrob would expect. therese sat in the corner, holding a stuffed
iguana and explaining to bonnie what iguanas ate, how they reproduced,
and what their natural habitat was like. the only sister who spoke to
trip was mary, who kept offering to refill his coke. a walt disney
special was on, and the lisbons watched it with the acceptance of a

family accustomed to bland enterta
 
 ___________________________
 
inment, laughing together at the same
lame stunts, sitting up during the rigged climaxes. trip fontaine didn't
see any signs of twistedness in the girls, but later he did say, "you
would have killed yourself just to have something to do." mrs. lisbon
oversaw lux's knitting. before the channel could be changed, she
consulted tv guide to judge the program's suitability. the curtains were
thick as canvas. a few spindly plants sat on the windowsill, and this
differed so much from his own leafy living room (mr. fontaine was a
gardening buff) that trip would have felt he was on a dead planet had it
not been for the pulsing life of lux at the sofa's other end. he could
see her bare feet every time she put them up on the coffee table. the
soles wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e black, her toenails flecked with pink polish. each time they
appeared, mrs. lisbon tapped them with a knitting needle, driving them
back under the table.

and that was all that happened. trip didn't get to sit next to lux, nor
speak to her, nor even look at her, but the bright nearby fact of her
presence burned in his mind. at ten o'clock, taking a cue from his wife,
mr. lisbon slapped trip on the back and said, "well, son, we usually hit
the hay about now." trip shook his hand, then mrs. lisbon's colder one,
and lux stepped forward to escort him out. she must have seen the
situation was futile, because she hardly looked at him during the short
trip to the door. she walked with her head down, digging in her ear for
wax, and looked up as she opened the door to give him a sad smile that
promised only frustration. trip fontaine left crushed, knowing that all
he could hope for was another night on the sofa beside mrs. lisbon. he
walked across the lawn, uninown since cecilia died. he sat in
 
 ___________________________
 
tasted it once, man." in comparison,
the loves of his early manhood and maturity were docile creatures with
smooth flanks and dependable outcries. even during the act of love he
could envision them bringing him hot milk, doing his taxes, or presiding

tearfully at his deathbed. they were warm, loving, hot-water-bottle
women. even the screamers of his adult years always hit false notes, and
no erotic intensity ever matched the silence in which lux flayed him
alive.

we never learned whether mrs. lisbon caught lux as she tried to sneak
back inside, but for whatever reason, when trip tried to make another
date to come sit on the couch, lux told him she was grounded, and that
her mother had forbidden any future visits. at school, trip fontaine was
cagey about what had passed between them, and though stories circulated
about their sneaking off into various enclosures, he insisted the only
time they ever touched was in the car. "at school, we could never find a
place to go. her old man kept a clos
 
 ___________________________
 
hey lay together in the field house, lux asked him if
he thought what they had done was dirty. "i knew what to say. i said no.
then she grabs my hand and goes, "you like me, don't yout i didn't say
anything. it's best to keep chicks guessing." years later, trip fontaine
was irritated by our suggestion that lux's passion might have come from
a misplaced need. "what are you saying, that i was just a vehicle?

you can't fake that, man. it was real." we even managed to bring up the
subject with mrs. lisbon during our single interview with her in a bus
station cafeteria, but she grew rigid. "none of my daughters lacked for
any love. we had plenty of love in our house."

it was hard to tell. as october came, the lisbon house began to look

less cheerful. the blue slate roof, which in certain lights had
resembled a pond suspended in the air, visibly darkened. the yellow
bricks turned brown. bats flew out of the chimney in the evening, as
they did from the stamarowski mansion the next block over. we
 
 ___________________________
 
is', zigzagging and diving as
girls screamed and covered their long hair. mr. stamarowski wore black
turtlenecks and stood on his balcony. at sunset he let us roam his big
lawn, and as once in the flower bed we found a dead bat with its face of
a shrunken old man with two prize teeth. we always thought the bats had
come with the stamarowskis from poland; they made sense swooping over
that somber house with its velvet curtains and old world decay, but not
over the practical double chimneys of the lisbon house. there were other
signs of creeping desolation. the illuminated doorbell went out. the
bird feeder fell in the back yard and was left on the ground. on the
milk box mrs. lisbon left a curt note to the milkman: "stop bringing bad
milk!" recalling that time, mrs. higbie insisted that mr. lisbon, using
a long pole, had closed the outside shutters. when we asked around,
everyone agreed. exhibit #3, however, a photograph taken by mr. buell,
shows chase ready to swing his new louisville slugger
 
 ___________________________
 
, and in the
background the lisbon house has all its shutters open (we find a
magnifying glass helpful). the photo was taken on october 13, chase's
birthday and the opening of the world series.

other than to school or church the lisbon girls never went anywhere.
once a week a kroger's truck delivered groceries. little johnny buell
and vince fusilli stopped it one day by holding an imaginary rope across
the street, one on each side tugging air like twin marcel marceaux. the
driver let them climb in, and they looked through his order slips, lying
that they wanted to grow up and be deliverymen themselves. the lisbon
order, which vince fusilli pocketed, turned out to resemble a
requisition of army supplies.

1 - 5 lb.

5 -1 gal 
 
 ___________________________
 
ls. sometimes the pleasure was so keen we raked up the grass itself,
leaving patches of dirt. at the end of day we stood at the curbside
surveying our lawns where every blade had been flattened, every dirt
clod obliterated, and even some of the dormant crocus bulbs violated. in
those days before universal pollution we were allowed to bum our leaves,
and at night, in one of the last rituals of our disintegrating tribe,
every father came down to the street to ignite his family's pile.

usually mr. lisbon did their raking alone, singing in his soprano's
voice, but from fifteen therese had begun to help, stooping and
scratching in mannish clothes, knee-high rubber boots and a fishing cap.
at night mr. lisbon would light his pile like the rest of the fathers,
but his anxiety over the fire's getting out of control would diminish
his pleasure. he patrolled his pile, tossing leaves into the center,
tidying the conflagration, and when mr. wadsworth offered him a sip from
his monogrammed flask, as he d
 
 ___________________________
 
id every father on his rounds, mr. lisbon
would say, "thanks no, thanks no."

the year of the suicides the lisbons' leaves went unraked. on the
appropriate saturday mr. lisbon didn't stir from his house. from time to
time as we raked, we looked over at the lisbon house, its walls
accumulating autumn's dampness, its littered and varicolored lawn hemmed
in by lawns becoming increasingly exposed and green. the more leaves we
swept away, the more seemed heaped over the lisbons' yard, smothering
bushes and covering the first porch step. when we lit bonfires that
night, every house leaped forward, blazing orange. only the lisbon house
remained dark, a tunnel, an emptiness, past our smoke and flames. as
weeks passed, their leaves remained. when they blew onto other people's
lawns there was grumbling. "these aren't my leaves," mr. anderson said,
stuffing them into a can. it rained twice and the leaves grew soggy and
brown, making the lisbon lawn look like a field of mud
 
 ___________________________
 
, hardly a day passed without some despairing soul
sinking beneath the tide of the recession, men found in garages with
cars running, or twisted in the shower, still wearing work clothes. only
murder-suicides made the papers, and then only on page 3 or 4, stories
of fathers shotgunning families before turning the guns on themselves,
descriptions of men setting fire to their own houses after securing the
doors. mr. larkin, publisher of the city's largest newspaper, lived only
a half mile from the lisbons, and there was no doubt he knew what had
transpired. joe hill conley, who fooled around with missy larkin every
so often (she'd had a yearlong crush on him despite his frequent shaving
cuts), testified to us that missy and her mother had discussed the
suicide within mr. larkins hearing, but that he showed no interest as he
lay on his chaise in the sun with a wet cloth over his eyes.
nevertheless, on october 15, over three months later, a letter to the
editor was published describing in the ske
 
 ___________________________
 
tchiest manner possible the
particulars of cecilia's suicide, and calling on the schools to address
"today's teenagers' overwhelming anxiety." the letter was signed "mrs.
1. dew hopewell," an obvious pseudonym, but certain details pointed to

someone on our street. first of all, the rest of the town had forgotten
about cecilia's suicide by that point, whereas the growing disrepair of
the lisbon house constantly reminded us of the trouble within. years
later, after there were no more daughters to save, mrs. denton confessed
that she had written the letter, in a fit of righteous indignation under
the hair dryer. she did not regret it. "you can't just stand by and let
your neighborhood go down the toilet," she said. "we're good people
around here."

the day after her letter appeared, a blue pontiac drove up to the lisbon
house and an unfamiliar woman got out. after checking the address
a
 
 ___________________________
 
gainst a piece of paper, she walked up to the front porch nobody had
climbed in weeks. shaft tiggs, the paper boy, now lobbed papers against
the door from ten feet away. he'd even stopped collecting on thursdays
(his mother made up the difference from her pocketbook, cautioning him
not to tell his father). the lisbon porch, where we'd first stood to see
cecilia on the fence, had become like a sidewalk crack: stepping on it
was bad luck. the astroturf welcome mat curled at the edges. unread
papers lay in a waterlogged heap, red ink running from color sports
photographs. the metal mailbox released an odor of rust. the young woman
moved the newspapers aside with her blue pump and knocked. the door
opened a crack and the woman, squinting into the darkness, launched into
her spiel. at some point she realized her
 
 ___________________________
 
d papers spies wave in
war films. it worked. the door opened a few more inches to let her in.

linda perl's story appeared the next day, though mr. larkin would never
discuss his reasons for running it. it gave a detailed account of
cecilia's suicide. from the quotations in the piece (you may read it for
yourself if you like; we've included it as exhibit #9), it's clear ms.
perl, a staff reporter recently hired from a provincial newspaper in
mackinac, interviewed only bonnie and mary before mrs. lisbon threw her
out.

the story proceeds by the logic of the many "human interest" pieces that
had begun to proliferate at the time. it paints the picture of the
lisbon house in the broadest terms. phrases such as "the tony suburb
known more for debutante parties than for funerals of debutante-aged
girls" and "the bright bouncy girls show little sign of the recent
tragedy" give an idea of ms. perl's style. after rendering the most
cursory description of cecilia ("she liked to paint and write in her

 
 ___________________________
 
s presented the teenagers smiling in happier times, often over
birthday cakes flaming with conclusive candles. because mr. and mrs.

lisbon refused interviews, the papers had to obtain photographs of
cecilia from our school yearbook, spirit. on the torn-out page (exhibit
#4), cecilia's penetrating face peers from between the sweatered
shoulders of two cropped-out schoolmates. ngly dreary exterior of the
lisbon house, first channel 2, then channel 4, then finally channel 7.
we watched to see the lisbon house on tv, but they didn't use the
footage until months later after the rest of the girls killed
themselves, and by then the season was all wrong. meanwhile, a local
television show focused on the subject of teenage suicide, inviting two
girls and one boy to explain their reasons for attempting it. we
listened to them, but it was clear they'd received too much therapy to
know the truth. their answers sounded rehearsed, relying on concepts of
self-esteem and other words clumsy on their tongues
 
 ___________________________
 
ear-old grandmother, a lover of
sweets. at this point rannie broke down weeping, the host consoled her,
and we were into a commercial.

many people objected to the articles and television shows, coming as
they did so long after the fact. mrs. eugene said, "why can't they let
her rest in peace," while mrs. larson lamented that the media attention
had come "just when things were getting back to normal." nevertheless,
the coverage alerted us to danger signals we couldn't help but look for.
were the lisbon girls' pupils dilated? did they use nose spay
excessively? eye drops? had they lost interest in school activities, in
sports, in hobbies? had they withdrawn from their peers? did they suffer
crying jags for no reason? did they complain of insomnia, pains in the
chest, constant fatigue? pamphlets arrived, dark green with white
lettering, sent out by our local chamber of commerce. "we thought green
was cheerful. but not too cheerful," said mr. babson, who was president.
"green was also serious. s
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
girls would vanish, and, looking into classrooms they might have
entered, we would see every other face but theirs, or would overshoot
their trail and end up in the lower school amid a meaningless swirl of
finger paintings. the smell of egg tempera still brings back those
useless pursuits. the halls, cleaned by lonely janitors at night, were
silent, and we would follow a pencil arrow some kid had drawn on the
wall for fifty feet, telling ourselves that this would be the time we
spoke to the lisbon girls and asked them what was troubling them.
sometimes we caught sight of tattered knee socks rounding a corner, or
came upon them doubled over, shoving books into a cubbyhole, flicking
the hair out of their eyes. but it was always the same: their white
faces drifting in slow motion past us, while we pretended we hadn't been
looking for them at all, that we didn't know they existed.

we have a few documents from the time (exhibits #13-#15)therese's
chemistry write-ups, bonnie's history paper o
 
 ___________________________
 
n simone weil, lux's
frequent forged excuses from phys. ed. she always used the same method,
faking the rigid t's and b's of her mother's signature and then, to

distinguish her own handwriting, penning her signature, lux lisbon,
below, the two beseeching l's reaching out for each other over the ditch
of the u and the barbed-wire x. julie winthrop also used to skip gym and
spent many classes with lux in the girls' locker room. "we used to climb
up on the lockers and smoke," she told us. "you couldn't see us from the
ground, and if any teachers came by, they couldn't tell where the smoke
was coming from. they usually thought whoever was smoking had already
left." according to julie winthrop, she and lux were only "cig f
 
 ___________________________
 
ing in college, and during those three heady years in
'the village.' could i foresee she would commit suicide? i regret to
say, no. at least ten percent of my students were born with modernist
tendencies. i ask you: is dullness a gift? intelligence a curse? i'm
forty-seven years old and live alone."

day by day, the girls ostracized themselves. because they stayed in a
group, other girls found it difficult to talk or walk with them, and
many assumed they wanted to be left alone. and the more the lisbon girls
were left alone, the more they retreated. sheila davis told of being in
an english study group with bonnie lisbon. "we were discussing this book
portrait of a lady. we had to do a character sketch on ralph. bonnie
didn't say much at first. but then she reminded us how ralph always
keeps his hands in his pockets. then, like a jerk, i go, "it's really
sad when he dies.' i wasn't even thinking. grace hilton elbowed me and i
turned purple. it got totally quiet."

it was mrs. woodhouse, the he
 
 ___________________________
 
all team failed to clinch the division title. mr. tonover, who
taught chemistry and still lived with his mother, was at a loss for
words on the occasion, and let his students cook peanut brittle over a
bunsen burner. other classes, dividing into groups, played games where
they envisioned themselves as architectural structures. "if you were a
building," the leader would ask, "what kind of building would you be?"
they had to describe these structures in great detail and then make
improvements. the lisbon girls, stranded in separate home rooms,
declined to play, or kept asking to be excused to go to the bathroom.

none of the teachers insisted on their participating, with the result
that all the healing was done by those of us without wounds. at midday,
becky talbridge saw the lisbon girls together in the girls' bathroom in
the science wing. "they'd brought chairs in from the hall and they were
just sitting there, waiting it out. mary had a run in her nylon-can you
believe she wore nylons?-and 
 
 ___________________________
 
she was fixing it with fingernail polish.
her sisters were sort of watching her but they seemed pretty ion bored.
i went into the stall, but i could feel them out there and i couldn't,
you know, go."

mrs. lisbon never learned about the day of grieving. neither her husband
nor her daughters mentioned it when they returned home that day. mr.
lisbon had of course been present at the teachers' meeting when mrs.
woodhouse made her proposal, but accounts differ as to his reaction. mr.
rodriguez remembered him as "nodding his head, but not saying anything,"
while miss shuttleworth recalled that he left the meeting shortly after
it began and never returned. "he never heard about the day of grieving.
he left in
 
 ___________________________
 
o. she still had the plaster bust of cicero on her
desk and the imitation grecian urn we had given her upon graduation, and
still exuded the air of a powdered celibate polymath. "i don't think mr.
lisbon knew about the dies lacrimarum until it was well under way. i
passed by his classroom during second period and he was at the
blackboard, in his chair, instructing. i don't think anyone had had the
fortitude to acquaint him with the day's activities." indeed, when we
spoke to him years later, mr. lisbon possessed only a vague memory of
the day of grieving. "try decade," he told us.

for a long time no one agreed on the success of the various attempts to

address cecilia's suicide. mrs. woodhouse thought the day of grieving
had served a vital purpose, and many teachers were pleased that the
silence around the subject had been broken. a psychological counselor
came on staff once a week, sharing the small office of the school nurse.
any student feeling the need to talk was encouraged to go. we n
 
 ___________________________
 
ever did,
but every friday peeked in to see if any of the lisbon girls met with
the counselor. her name was miss lynn kilsem, but a year later, after
the rest of the suicides, she disappeared without a word. her degree in
social work turned out to be fake, and no one is sure if her name was
really lynn kilsem, or who she was, or where she went off to. in any
case, she is one of the few people we haven't been able to track down,
and in the characteristic irony of fate, one of the few people who might
have been able to tell us something. for apparently the gir
 
 ___________________________
 
cilia
appeared in our consciousness at odd moments, most often as we were just
waking up, or staring out a car-pool window streaked with rainshe rose
up in her wedding dress, muddy with the i i i afterlife, but then a horn
would honk, or our radio alarms would unleash a popular song, and we
snapped back to reality. other people filed cecilia's memory away even
more easily. when they spoke of her, it was to say that they had always
expected cecilia to meet a bad end, and that far from viewing the lisbon
girls as a single species, they had always seen cecilia as apart, a
freak of nature. mr. hillyer summed up the majority sentiment at the
time: "those girls have a bright future ahead of them. that other one
was just going to end up a kook."

little by little, people ceased to discuss the mystery of cecilia's
suicide, preferring to see it as inevitable, or as something best left
behind. though mrs. lisbon continued her shadowy existence, rarely
leaving the house and getting her groceries deliver
 
 ___________________________
 
fering, surviving girls, they grew in stature like
the kennedys. kids once again sat next to them on the bus. leslie
tompkins borrowed mary's brush to tame her long red hair. julie winthrop
smoked with lux atop the lockers, and said the shaking episode was not

repeated. day by day, the girls appeared to be getting over their loss.

it was during this convalescent period that trip fontaine made his move.
without consulting anyone or confessing his feelings for lux, trip
fontaine walked into mr. lisbon's classroom and stood at attention
before his desk. he found mr. lisbon alone, in his swivel chair, staring
vacantly at the planets hanging above his head. a youthful cowlick
sprang from his gray hair. "it's fourth period, trip," he said wearily.
"i don't have you until fifth."

"i'm not here for math today, sir."

"you're not?"

"i'm here to tell you that my intentions toward your daughter are
entirely honorable."

mr. lisbon's eyebrows rose, but his expression was used up, as though
six or se
 
 ___________________________
 
ven boys had made the same declaration that very morning. "and
what might those intentions be?"

trip brought his boots together. "i want to ask lux to homecoming."

at that point, mr. lisbon told trip to sit down, and for the next few
minutes, in a patient voice, he explained that he and his wife had
certain rules, they had been the same rules for the older girls and he
couldn't very well change them now for the younger ones, even if he
wanted to his wife wouldn't let him, ha ha, and while it was fine if
trip wanted to come over to watch television again, he could not, repeat
not, take lux out, especially in a car. mr. lisbon spoke, trip told us,
with surprising sympathy, as though
 
 ___________________________
 
 he, too, recalled the below-thebelt
pain of adolescence. he could also tell how starved mr. lisbon was for a
son, because as he spoke he got up and gave trip's shoulders three
sporting shakes. "i'm afraid it's just our policy," he said, finally.

trip fontaine saw the doors closing. then he saw the family photograph
on mr. lisbon's desk. before a ferris wheel, lux held in one red fist a
candy apple whose polished surface reflected the baby fat under her
chin. one side of her sugarcoated lips had come unstuck, showing a
tooth. "what if it was a bunch of us guys?" trip fontaine said. "and we
took out your other daughters, too, like in a group? and we had them
back by whatever time you say."

trip fontaine made this new offer in a controlled voice, but his hands
shook and his eyes grew moist. mr. lisbon looked at him a lon
 
 ___________________________
 
 take his father's cadillac. we all said
something. buzz romano, nicknamed "rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "i'm dying! i'm dying! you
got to pick me, tripster!"

in the end, parkie denton won because of the cadillac, kevin head
because he'd helped trip fontaine tune up his car, and joe hill conley
because he won all the school prizes, which trip thought would impress
mr. and mrs. lisbon. the next day trip presented the slate to mr.
lisbon, and by the end of the week mr. lisbon announced his and his
wife's decision. the girls could go under the following conditions: (1)
they would go in a group; (2) they would go to the dance and nowhere
else; (3) they would be home by eleven. mr. lisbon told trip it would be
impossible to get around these conditions. "i'm going to be one of the
chaperons," he said.

it's difficult to know what the date meant to the girls. when mr. lisbon
gave 
 
 ___________________________
 
husiasm.
at the time, therese and mary were playing chinese checkers while bonnie
looked on. they broke their concentration from the dimpled metal board
only for a moment, asking their father the identities of the other boys

in the group. he told them. "who's taking who?" mary asked. "they're
just going to raffle us off," therese said, and then made six ringing
jumps into her safety zone.

their lukewarm reaction made sense in terms of family history. in
concert with other church mothers, mrs. lisbon had arranged group dates
before. the perkins boys had paddled the lisbon girls in five aluminum
canoes along a murky canal at belle isle, while mr. and mrs. lisbon and
mr. and mrs. perkins kept a watchful distance in paddle boats. mrs.
lisbon thought the darker urges of dating could be satisfied by frolic
in the open air-love sublimated by lawn darts. on a road trip recently
(no reason for going other than boredom and gray skies) we stopped in
pennsylvania and, while buying candles in a roughhe
 
 ___________________________
 
wn store, learned of
the amish courting custom wherein a boy takes his homespun date for a
ride in a black buggy, followed by her parents in another.

mrs. lisbon, too, believed in keeping romance under surveillance. but
whereas the amish boy later returns in the dead of night to throw
pebbles against the girl's window (pebbles everyone agrees not to hear),
no nocturnal amnesty existed in mrs. lisbon's doctrine. her canoes never
led to campfires.

the girls could expect only more of the same. and with mr. lisbon
chaperoning, they would be kept on the usual short leash. it was
difficult enough having a teacher for a parent, on view day after day in
his three suits, making a living. the lisbon girls received free tuition
because of their father's position, but mary had once told julie ford
this made her feel "like a charity case." now he would be patrolling the
dance along with other teachers
 
 ___________________________
 
y, however, his name
had been continuously announcing itself against her skin.) presumably
she confessed her feelings about trip to her sisters, but no girl at
school ever heard her mention his name. trip and lux sat together at
lunch, and sometimes we saw them walking the halls, searching for a
closet or bin or heating duct to lie down inside, but even at school mr.
lisbon was on hand, and after a few suppressed circuits, they came past
the cafeteria and up the rubber-matted ramp leading to mr. lisbon's
classroom and, briefly touching hands, went their separate ways.

the other girls barely knew their dates. "they hadn't even been asked,"
mary peters said. "it was like an arranged marriage or something.
creepy." nevertheless, they allowed the date to go forward, to please
lux, to please themselves, or just to break the monotony of another
friday night. when we talked to mrs. lisbon years later, she told us she
had had no qualms about the date, mentioning in support of this claim
the dresses 
 
 ___________________________
 
she had sewn especially for the evening. the week before
homecoming, in fact, she had taken the girls to a fabric store. the
girls wandered amid the racks of patterns, each containing the tissue
paper outline of a dream dress, but in the end it made no difference
which pattern they chose. mrs. lisbon added an inch to the bust lines
and two inches to the waists and hems, and the dresses came out as four
identical shapeless sacks.

a photo survives of that night (exhibit #10). the girls are lined up in
their party dresses, shoulder to square shoulder, like pioneer women.
their stiff hairdos ("hairdon'ts," tessie nepi, the beautician, said)
have the stoic, presumptuous quality of european fashions enduring the
wilderness. the dresses, too, look frontierish, with lace-trimmed bibs
and high neck
 
 ___________________________
 
lines. here you have them, as we knew them, as we're still
coming to know them: skittish bonnie, shrinking from the flash; therese,
with her braincase squeezing shut the suspicious slits of her eyes;
mary, ila proper and posed; and lux, looking not at the camera but up in
the air. it was raining that night, and a leak had developed just over

her head, hitting her cheek a second before mr. lisbon said, "cheese."
though hardly ideal (a distracting'light source invades from the left),
the photograph still conveys the pride of attractive offspring and
liminal rites. an air of expectancy glows in the girls' faces. gripping
one another, pulling each other into the frame, they seem braced for
some discovery or change of life. of life. that, at least, is how we see
it. please don't touch. we're going to put the picture back in its
envelope now.

after that portrait was taken, the girls waited 
 
 ___________________________
 
parkie denton had on a blue blazer, as did kevin head, and then joe hill
conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and communist. at that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until trip fontaine finally headed up the front path. we lost sight of
them at the door, but they told us the beginning of the date was like
any other. the girls had gone upstairs, pretending not to be ready, and
mr. lisbon took the boys into the living room.

"the girls'll be down in just a minute," he said, looking at his watch.
"jeez. i better get going myself." mrs. lisbon came to the archway. she
was holding her temple as though she had a headache, but her smile was
polite. "hello, boys."

"hello, mrs. lisbon" (in unison).

she had the rectitude, joe hill conley later said, of someone who had
just come from weeping in the next room. he had sensed (this said many
years later, of course, when joe hill conley c
 
 ___________________________
 
laimed to tap at will the
energy of his chakras) an ancient pain arising from mrs. lisbon, the sum
of her people's griefs. "she came from a sad race," he said. "it wasn't
only cecilia. the sadness had started long before. before america. the
girls had it, too." he had never noticed her bifocals before. "they cut
her eyes in half"

"which one of you is driving?" mrs. lisbon asked.

i am," said parkie denton. how long have you had your license?"

"two months. but i had my permit for a year before that."

"we don't usually like the girls to go out in cars.

so many accidents nowadays. it's raining and the roads will be slick. so
i hope you'll be very careful."

"we will."

"ok," mr. lisbon said, "third degree's over.

girls! "-delivered to the ceiling-"i've got to get going. i'll see you
at the dance, boys."

"see you there, mr. lisbon."

he went out, leaving the b
 
 ___________________________
 
oys alone with his wife. she didn't meet their
eyes but scanned them generally, like a head nurse reading charts. then
she went to the bottom of the stairs and stared up. not even joe hill
conley could imagine what she was thinking. of cecilia perhaps, climbing
those same stairs four months ago. of the stairs she had descended on
her own first date. of sounds only a mother can hear. none of the boys
ever remembered seeing mrs. lisbon so distracted. it was as though she
had suddenly forgotten they were there. she touched her temple (it was a
headache).

at last the girls came to the top of the stairs. it was dim up there
(three of twelve chandelier bulbs had burned out), and they held the
banister lightly as they descended. their loose dresses reminded kevin
head of choir robes. "they didn't seem to notice, though. personally, i
think they liked the dresses. or else they were just so happy to be
going out they didn't care wh
 
 ___________________________
 
esented the corsages. "we got white," trip
fontaine said. "we didn't know what color you were wearing. the flower
guy said white would go with everything."

"i'm glad you got white," said lux. she reached out and took the
corsage, which was housed in a little plastic case.

"we didn't go for wrist ones," parkie denton said. "those always fall

apart."

"yeah, those are bad," said mary. no one said anything more. no one
moved. lux inspected her flower in its time capsule. in the background,
mrs. lisbon said, "why don't you let the boys pin them on?"

at that, the girls stepped forward, shyly presenting the fronts of their
dresses. the boys fumbled with the corsages, taking them out of their
cases and avoiding the decorative stickpins. they could sense mrs.
lisbon watching them, and even though they were close enough to feel the
lisbon girls' breath and to smell the first perfume they had ever been
allowed to wear, the boys tried not to stick the girls or even to touch
them. they gently lifted
 
 ___________________________
 
 the material from the girls' chests and hung
white flowers over their hearts. whichever lisbon girl a boy pinned
became his date. when they finished, they said good night to mrs. lisbon
and led the girls outside to the cadillac, holding the empty corsage
cases over the girls' heads to protect their hair from the drizzle.

from that point on, things went better than expected. at home, each boy
had pictured the lisbon girls amid the stock scenery of our impoverished
imaginations-cavorting in the surf or playfully fleeing at the
ice-skating rink, dangling ski-hat pompoms like ripe fruit before our
faces. in the car, however, beside the actual living girls, the boys
realized the paltriness of these images. inverse properties were also
discarded: notions of the girls as damaged or demented. (the crazy old
lady in the elevator every day turns out to be, when you finally speak
to her, perfectly lucid.) something 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. they loathed
the kriegers' aluminum siding. "mr. belvedere strikes again," said
therese, referring to the president of the homeimprovement company in
his late-night commercial. like us, the girls had distinct memories tied
to various bushes, trees, and garage roofs. they recalled the race
riots, when tanks had appeared at the end of our block and national
guardsmen had parachuted into our back yards. they were, after all, our
neighbors.

at first the boys said nothing, too overwhelmed by the lisbon girls'
volubility. who had known they talked so much, held so many opinions,
jabbed at the world's sights with so many fingers? between our sporadic
glimpses of the girls they had been continuously living, developing in
ways we couldn't imagine, reading every book on the bowdlerized family
bookshelf. somehow, too, they'd kept up on dating etiquette, through
television or observation at school, so that they knew how to keep the
conversation flowing or fill awkward silences. their dating inexperi
 
 ___________________________
 
ence
showed only in their pinned-up hair, which looked like stuffing coming
out, or exposed wiring. mrs. lisbon had never given the girls beauty
tips, and forbade women's magazines in the house (a cosmo survey, "are
you multiply orgasmic?" had been the final straw). they had done the
best they could.

lux spent the ride dialing the radio for her favorite , "it makes me
crazy," she said. "you know song. they're playing it somewhere. but you
have to find it." parkie denton drove down to jefferson avenue, past the
wainwright house with its green historical marker, and toward the
gathering lakefront mansions
 
 ___________________________
 
ux and therese kept
them company, lux looking in the mirror for the instant it took to
reconfirm her beauty, therese avoiding it altogether. "there's no
paper," mary said from her stall. "throw me some."

lux ripped a bunch of paper towels from the dispenser and lofted them
over the stall. "it's snowing," mary said, "they were really loud,"
hopie riggs told us.

"they acted like they owned the place. i had something on the back of my

dress, though, and therese got it off." when we asked if the lisbon
girls had spoken about their dates in the confessional surroundings of
the bathroom, hopie answered, "mary said she was happy her guy wasn't a
total geek. that was it, though. i don't think they cared so much about
their dates as just being at the dance. i felt the same way. i was there
with tim carter, the shrimpo."

when the girls came out of the bathroom, the dance floor was getting
more crowded, circulating couples slowly around the gym. kevin head
asked therese to dance and soon they were 
 
 ___________________________
 
. lux found a way of arching her back that made her dress
tight in front. we walked past them whenever we could, going to the
bathroom twenty times and drinking twenty glasses of cider. we tried to
grill the boys in order to participate vicariously in the date, but they
wouldn't leave the girls alone for a minute. when the balloting for king
and queen was finished, mr. durid mounted the portable stage and
announced the winners. everyone knew the king and queen could only be
trip fontaine and lux lisbon, and even girls in hundred-dollar dresses
applauded as they made their way forward. then they danced, and we all
danced, cutting in on head and conley and denton to dance with the
lisbon girls ourselves. they were flushed by the time they got to us,
damp under the arms and giving off heat from their high necklines. we
held their sweaty palms, turning them under the mirrored ball. we lost
them in the vastness of their dresses and found them again, squeezed the
pulp of their bodies and inhaled th
 
 ___________________________
 
e perfume of their exertion. a few of
us grew brave enough to insert our legs between theirs and to press our
agony against them. in the dresses the lisbon girls looked identical
again, as they flowed from hand to hand, smiling, saying thank you,
thank you. a loose thread got caught in david stark's wristwatch, and as
mary untangled it, he asked, "are you having a good time?"

"i'm having the best time of my life," she said.

she was telling the truth. never before had the lisbon girls looked so
cheerful, mixed so much, or talked so freely. after one dance, while
therese and kevin head got some cool air in the doorway, therese asked,
"what made you guys ask us out?"

"what do you mean?"

"i mean, do you feel sorry for us?"

"no way."

"liar."

"i think you're pretty. that's why. "do we seem as crazy as everyone
thinks9"

"who thinks that?"

she didn't reply, only stuck her hand out the door to test for rain.
"cecilia was weird, but we're not." and then: "we just want t
 
 ___________________________
 
o live. if
anyone would let us.

later, going to the car, bonnie stopped joe hill conley to look for the
stars again. everything was clouded over. as they gazed up at the dull
sky, she asked, "do you think there's a god?"

"yeah."

"me too."

by that time it was ten-thirty and the girls had only a half hour to get
back home. the dance was breaking up, and mr. lisbon's car emerged from
the faculty parking lot, heading home. kevin head and therese, joe hill
conley and bonnie, parkie denton and mary all converged at the cadillac,
but lux and trip didn't follow. bonnie ran back into the gymnasium to
check, but they couldn't be found. "maybe they went home with your dad,"
parkie denton said. "i doubt it," said mary, looking off into the dark
and fingering her crushed corsage. the girls took off their high heels
so they could walk better, and searched in among t
 
 ___________________________
 
 half-mast the day cecilia died, though it
had been summer and no one but the lawn crew had noticed. the girls, so
happy moments before, grew quiet, and forgot about their dates. they
moved in a pack, separating and coming back together. they searched over
near the theater, behind the science wing, and even in the courtyard
where the small statue of a girl stood, donated in memory of laura

white, her bronze skirt just beginning to oxidize. sears crossed her
welded wrists, symbolically, but the lisbon girls didn't notice, or say
anything when they returned to the car at 10:50 p.m. they got in to be
taken home.

the ride back happened mostly in silence. joe hill conley and bonnie sat
in back beside kevin head and therese. parkie denton drove, later
complaining that this afforded him no chance to make his move on mary.
mary, however, spent the ride fixing her hair in the sun-visor mirror.
therese said to her, "forget it. we're cooked."

"luxie is. not us."

"anyone have some mints or some gum?
 
 ___________________________
 
" bonnie asked. no one did, and she
turned to joe hill conley. she scrutinized him a moment, then, using her
fingers, combed his part over to the left side. "that looks better," she
said. nearly two decades later, the little hair he has left remains
parted by bonnie's invisible hand.

outside the lisbon house, joe hill conley kissed bonnie for the last
time and she let him. therese gave kevin head her cheek. through steamed
windows the boys looked up at the house. mr. lisbon had already returned
and a light was on in the master bedroom. "we'll walk you to the door,"
parkie denton said. "no, don't," said mary. "why not?"

"just don't." she got out without so much as a handshake. "we had a
really good time," therese said in back. bonnie whispered into joe hill
conley's ear, "will you call me?"

"absolutely.

the car doors creaked open. the girls climbed out, adjusted themselves,
and went into the house.

uncle tucker had just gone out to the garage refrigerator to g
 
 ___________________________
 
et another
six-pack when the taxi drove up two hours later. he saw lux get out and
reach into her purse for the five-dollar bill mrs. lisbon had given each
daughter before leaving that evening. "always have cab fare" was her
dictum, even though that night was the first time she had allowed the
girls to go out, and, hence, to need any. lux didn't wait for her
change. she started up the driveway, lifting her dress to walk and
staring at the ground. the back of her coat was smudged white. the front
door opened and mr. lisbon stepped onto the porch. his jacket was off
but he was still wearing the orange necktie. he came down the steps a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
met lux halfway. lux began making excuses with her hands. when mr.
lisbon cut her off, she hung her head and then, grudgingly, nodded.
uncle tucker couldn't recall the exact moment mrs. lisbon joined the
scene. at some point, however, he became conscious of music playing in
the background and, looking up at the house, saw mrs. lisbon in the open
doorway. she was dressed in a plaid robe and held a drink in her hand.
behind her, music filtered out, full of reverberating organs and
seraphic harps. having started drinking at noon, uncle tucker had almost
finished the case of beer he consumed each day. he began to weep,
looking out from the garage, as music filled the street like air. "it
was the kind of music they play when you die," he said.

it was church music, a selection from among the three albums mrs. lisbon
liked to pla
 
 ___________________________
 
 it's the same
music we pass by on the radio, in between the motown and rock and roll,
a beacon of light in a world of darkness, and totally shitty. choirs
sing in blond voices, scales ascend toward harmonic crescendos, like

marshmallow foaming into the ears. we'd always wondered who listened to
such music, picturing lonely widows in rest homes, or pastors' families
passing plates of ham. never once did we imagine those pious voices
drifting up through floorboards to churchify niches where the lisbon
girls knelt to pumice calluses on their big toes. father moody heard the
music the few times he visited for coffee on sunday afternoons. "it
wasn't my cup of tea," he said to us later. "i go in for the more august
stuff. handel's messiah. mozart's requiem. this was basically, if i may
say so, what you might expect to hear in a protestant household."

as the music played, mrs. lisbon stood in the doorway, unmoving.

mr. lisbon herded lux inside.

lux came up the steps and crossed the porch, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
her mother did not let
her enter. mrs. lisbon said something uncle tucker couldn't hear. lux
opened her mouth. mrs. lisbon bent forward and held her face motionless
near lux's. "breathalizer," uncle tucker explained to us. the test
lasted no more than five seconds before mrs. lisbon reared back to
strike lux across the face. lux flinched, but the blow never came. arm
raised, mrs. lisbon froze. she turned toward the dark street, as though
a hundred eyes and not only uncle tucker's two were watching. mr. lisbon
also turned. as did lux. the three of them stared into the largely
lightless neighborhood, where trees continued to drip, and cars slept in
garages and carports, engines pinging all night as they cooled. they
stayed very still, and then mrs. lisbon's hand fell limply to her side,
and lux saw her chance. she shot by her, up the stairs, into her room.

we learned only years
 
 ___________________________
 
w she got home. i just took off." then:
"it's weird. i mean, i liked her. i really liked her. i just got sick of
her right then." as for the other boys, they spent the rest of the night

driving around our suburb. they drove past the little club, the yacht
club, the hunt club. they drove through the village, where halloween
displays had given way to thanksgiving. at 1:30 a.m., unable to stop
thinking about the girls whose presence still filled the car, they
decided to make one final pass by the lisbon house. they stopped for joe
hill conley to relieve himself behind a tree, then proceeded down
cadieux, speeding past the smallish houses that had once been cottages
for summer help. they passed a subdivision where one of our great
mansions had stood, its ornamental gardens replaced by red-brick houses
with antiqued doors and mammoth garages. they turned onto jefferson,
passing the war memorial and the black gates of the remaining
millionaires, and rode in silence toward the girls who had become
 
 ___________________________
 
 real
to them at last. as they approached the lisbons' house, they saw a light
burning in a bedroom window. parkie denton held up his hand for the
other boys to slap. "pay dirt," he said. but their jubilation was
short-lived. for even before the car stopped they knew what had
happened. "it hit me in the pit of my stomach that those girls weren't
going on any more dates," kevin head told us years later. "the old bitch
had locked them up again. don't ask me how i knew. i just did."

the window shades had closed like eyelids and the shaggy flower be
 
 ___________________________
 
ds
made the house look abandoned . in the window where the one light
burned, however, the shade rippled. a hand peeled it back, revealing a
hot yellow slice of face-bonnie, mary, therese, or even lux-looking down
the street. parkie denton tooted his horn, a short hopeful blast, but
just as the girl put her palm to the glass, the light went out.

four afew weeks after mrs. lisbon shut the house in maximum-security
isolation, the sightings of lux making love on the roof began.

following the homecoming dance, mrs. lisbon closed the downstairs
shades. all we could see were the girls' incarcerated shadows, which ran
riot in our imaginations. moreover, as fall turned to winter, the trees
in the yard drooped and thickened, concealing the house, even though

their leaflessness should have revealed it. a cloud always seemed to
hover over the lisbons' roof. there was no explan
 
 ___________________________
 
ation except the
psychic one that the house became obscured because mrs. lisbon willed it
to. the sky grew darker, and light abandoned the daytime, so that we
found ourselves always moving in a timeless murk, the only way to
discern the hour the taste of our burps, toothpasty in the morning,
redolent in the afternoon of the jellied beef of school cafeteria meals.

without explanation, the girls were taken out of school. they merely
failed to show up one morning, and then again the next. when mr.
woodhouse asked about the matter, mr. lisbon seemed to have no idea the
girls 
 
 ___________________________
 
g the name of a bright new subject she never got
to study. inside american history, amid spasmodic notes, jerry burden
found the following doodle: a girl with pigtails is bent under the
weight of a gigantic boulder. her cheeks puff out, and her rounded lips
expel steam. one widening steam cloud contains the word pressure, darkly
retraced.

given lux's failure to make curfew, everyone expected a crackdown, but
few anticipated it would be so drastic. when we spoke to her years
later, however, mrs. lisbon maintained that her decision was never
intended to be punitive. "at that point being in school was just making
things worse," she said. "none of the other children were speaking to
the girls. except boys, and you knew what they were after. the girls
needed time to themselves. a mother knows. i thought if they stayed at
home, they'd heal better." our interview with mrs. lisbon was brief. she
met us at the bus station in the small town she now lives in, because
the station was the only place that
 
 ___________________________
 
 her more

approachable, and in fact lent her the unknowable quality of a person
who had suffered more than could be expressed. nevertheless, we wanted
to talk to her most of all because we felt that she, being the girls'
mother, understood more than anyone why they had killed themselves. but
she said, "that's what's so frightening. i don't. once they're out of
you, they're different, kids are." when we asked her why she had never
pursued the psychological counseling dr. hornicker offered, mrs. lisbon
became angry. "that doctor wanted to blame it on us. he thought ronnie
and i were to blame." a bus came into the station then, and through the
open doorway at gate 2 a gust of carbon monoxide blew over the counter
with its stacks of fried doughnuts. mrs. lisbon said she had to leave.

she had done more than take the girls out of school. the next sunday,
arriving home after a spirited church sermon, she had commanded lux to
destroy her rock records. mrs. pitzenberger (who happened to be
redecora
 
 ___________________________
 
ting a room next door) heard the fierce argument. "now!" mrs.
lisbon kept repeating, while lux tried to reason, to negotiate, and
finally burst into tears. through the upstairs hall window, mrs.
pitzenberger saw lux stomp to her bedroom, returning with a collection
of peach crates. the crates were heavy and lux slid them down the stairs
like sleds. "she acted like she was going to whiz them down. but she
always grabbed them before they got out of control." in the living room,
mrs. lisbon had the fire going, and lux, now crying without sound, began
to consign her records one by one to the flames. we never learned which
albums were condemned at that auto-da-f6, but apparently lux held up
album after album, appealing for mrs. lisbon's mercy. the smell quickly
grew overpowering, and the plastic melted over the andirons, so that
mrs. lisbon told lux to stop. (she threw out the rest of the albums with
that week's trash.) still, will timber, who was getting a grape pop,
said he could 
 
 ___________________________
 
smell burning plastic all the way to mr. z's, the party
store on kercheval.

for the next few weeks we hardly saw the girls at all. lux never spoke
to trip fontaine again, nor did joe hill conley call bonnie, as he had

promised. mrs. lisbon took the girls to their grandmother's house to get
advice from an old woman who had lived through everything. when we
called her in roswell, new mexico, where she had moved after living
forty-three years in the same single-story house, the old lady (mrs.
lema crawford) did not respond to questions about her involvement in the
punishment, either out of stubbornness or because of the feedback her
hearing aid picked up over the phone. she did refer, however, to her own
misfortune at the hands of l
 
 ___________________________
 
ove some sixty years earlier. "you never get
over it," she said. "but you get to where it doesn't bother you so
much." and then, before hanging up: "lovely weather down here. best
thing i ever did was to throw down the old shovel and hoe and get out of
that town." the smoky sound of her voice brought the scene to life for
us: the old woman at the kitchen table, her skimpy hair up in an
elasticized turban; mrs. lisbon tight-lipped and grim in a chair
opposite; and the four penitents, heads lowered, fingering knickknacks
and porcelain figurines. there is no discussion of how they feel or what
they want out of life; there is only the descending order-grandmother,
mother, daughters with the back yard outside under rain, and the dead
vegetable garden.

mr. lisbon continued to go to work in the mornings and the family
continued to attend church on sundays, but that was it. the house
receded behind its mists of yo
 
 ___________________________
 
uth being choked off, and even our own
parents began to mention how dim and unhealthy the place looked.
raccoons were attracted by its miasmic vapors at night, and it wasn't
unusual to find a dead one squashed by a car as it had tried to make its
getaway from the lisbons' trash cans. one week, on the front porch, mrs.
lisbon set off tiny smoke bombs that gave off a sulfurous stench. no one
had ever seen the gadgets before, but it was rumored they were a defense
against the raccoons. then, about the time the first cold spell hit,
people began to see lux copulating on the roof with faceless boys and
men.

at first it was impossible to tell what was happening. a cellophane body

swept its arms back and forth against the slate tiles like a child
drawing an angel 
 
 ___________________________
 
 assortment of gold chains, once in the drab gray suit of an
accountant. through the bronchioles of leafless elm branches, from the
pit zenbergers' attic, we finally made out lux's face as she sat wrapped
in a hudson's bay blanket, smoking a cigarette, impossibly close in the
circle of our binoculars because she moved her lips only inches away but
without sound.

we wondered how she could do such a thing on her own house, with her
parents sleeping nearby. true, it was impossible for mr. and mrs. lisbon
to see their own roof, and, once installed, lux and her partners enjoyed
relative safety; but there was the unavoidable prior noise of sneaking
down to let the boys and men in, of leading them up creaking stairs in a
darkness charged with anxious vibrations, night noises humming in their
ears, the men sweating, risking statutory rape charges, the loss of
their careers, divorce, just to be led up the stairway, through a
window, to the roof, where in the midst of their passion they chafed
their k
 
 ___________________________
 
ilance. some reported her administering complex procedures, inserting
three or four jellies or creams at once, topping them off with a white
spermicide she referred to as "the cream cheese."

occasionally she sufficed with her "australian method," which involved
shaking up a coke bottle and hosing down her insides. in stricter moods
she laid down her catch-phrase ultimatum: "no erection without
protection." often she used sanitized pharmaceutical products; other
times, presumably cut off by mrs. lisbon's blockade, she fell back on
the ingenious methods devised by midwives in centuries past. vinegar
proved useful, as did tomato juice. love's tiny seacraft foundered in
acidic seas. lux kept an assortment of bottles, as well as one foul rag,
behind the chimney. nine months later, when the roofers hired by the new
young couple found the bottles, they called down to the young wife,
"looks like somebody was having salad up here."

it was crazy to make love on the roof at any time, but to make love
 
 ___________________________
 
he windows, for lights to chart
the paramedics' progress toward the victim, first the foyer light going
on, then the hall light, the upstairs hall, the bedroom on the right,
until the pinballmachine house was lit up in sectors. it was after 9
p.m. and no moon showed. birds had built nests in the old streetlamps,
so that light filtered down through straw and moulted feathers. the
birds had flown south long ago, but in dappled beams sheriff and the fat
one appeared once again in the doorway of the lisbon house. they were
carrying the stretcher, just as we expected, but when the porch light
came on we were not prepared for what we saw: lux lisbon, sitting up,
very much alive.

she appeared to be in pain, but as they carried her out of the house she
had the presence of mind to snatch up a reader's digest, which she later
read cover iso to cover in the hospital. in fact, despite her
convulsions (she was clutching her stomach), lux had dared to put on a
coat of the forbidden pink lipstick that tast
 
 ___________________________
 
 we tasted, not clabault's.

her hair clearly needed washing. george pappas, who reached the truck
before sheriff closed the door, described how blood had pooled in lux's
cheeks. "you could see veins," he said. holding the magazine in one
hand, clutching her midsection with the other, she rode the stretcher as
though it were a bobbing lifeboat. her thrashing, cries, scowls of agony
only emphasized the inertness of cecilia, whom we now saw in memory as
even deader than she had actually been. mrs. lisbon didn't jump into the
truck as she had previously but remained on the lawn, waving as though
lux had boarded a bus to summer camp. neither mary, bonnie, nor therese
came outside. discussing it later, many of us felt we suffered a mental
dislocation at that moment, which only grew worse through the course of
the remaining deaths. the prevailing symptom of this state was an
inability to recall any sound. truck doors slammed silently; lux's mouth
(eleven fillings, according to dr. roth's records) s
 
 ___________________________
 
he asked. "a while."

"a month?"

"fortytwo days. "don't want your parents to know?"

"no, thank you. "

"why all the commotion? why the ambulance?"

"only way i could get out of the house."

they were whispering, the doctor leaning over the bed, lux sitting up.
brent christopher heard a sound he identified as teeth chattering. then
lux said, "i just want a test. can you give me one?"

the doctor didn't verbally agree to the test, but for some reason, when
he stepped into the hall, he told mrs. lisbon, who had just arrived,
leaving her husband home with the girls, "your daughter's going to be
fine." he then went into his office, where a nurse later found him
chain-smoking his pipe. we've imagined various possibilities of what
went through dr. finch's mind that day: that he had fallen in love with
a fourteen-yearold with a late period, that he was estimating in his
head how much money he had in the bank, how much gas in the car, how far
they could get before his wife and kids found out. we ne
 
 ___________________________
 
 see a doctor. when dr. finch came back, he said,
"i'm going to tell your mother we're running gastrointestinal tests."
brent christopher stood up then, silently vowing to help lux escape
himself he heard her say, "how long will it take to find out?"

"about half an hour."

"do you really use a rabbit?"

the doctor laughed. upright, brent christopher felt his hand throb, his
eyes blurred, he became dizzy; but before he fell back into
unconsciousness, he saw dr. finch pass by, heading toward mrs. lisbon.
she heard about it first, and then the nurses heard about it, and then
we did. joe larson ran across the street to hide in the lisbons' bushes,
and it was then he heard mr. lisbon's girlish weeping, a sound quite
musical, he said. mr. lisbon was sitting in his la-z-boy, his feet up on

the footrest, his hands over his face. the phone rang. he looked at it.
he picked it up. "thank god," he said, "thank god." lux, it turned out,
had only a bad case of indigestion.

in addition to a pregnancy te
 
 ___________________________
 
 denial," dr. hornicker told us later. "she was
obviously not sleeping-a textbook symptom of depression-and was
pretending that her problem, and by association her sister cecilia's
problem, was of no real consequence." dr. finch came in with the test
results soon after that, and lux jumped happily off the cot. "but even
her delight had a manic quality to it. she bounced off the walls."

shortly after that meeting, in the second of his many reports, dr.

hornicker began to revise his view of the lisbon girls. citing a recent
study by dr. judith weisberg that examined "the bereavement process of
adolescents who have lost a sibling by suicide" (see list of funded
studies), dr. hornicker gave an explanation for the lisbon girls'
erratic behavior-their withdrawal, their sudden fits of emotion or
catatonia. the report maintained that as a result of cecilia's suicide
the surviving lisbon girls suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder.
"it's not unusual," dr. hornicker wrote, "for the sibling of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ason. when we thought of
the girls along these lines, it was as feverish creatures, exhaling
soupy breath, succumbing day by day in their isolated ward. we went
outside with our hair wet in the hopes of catching flu ourselves so that
we might share their delirium.

at night the cries of cats making love or fighting, their caterwauling
in the dark, told us that the world was pure emotion, flung back and
forth among its creatures, the agony of the one-eyed siamese no difiso
ferent from that of the lisbon girls, and even the trees plunged in
feeling. the first slate tile slid off their roof, missing the porch by
an inch and embedding itself in the soft turf, and from a distance we
could see the tar underneath, letting in water. in the living room, mr.
lisbon positioned an old paint can underneath a leak, then watched as it
filled with the midnight-blue shade of cecilia's bedroom ceiling (she'd
chosen the shade to look like the night sky; the can had been in the
closet for years). in the days fol
 
 ___________________________
 
lowing, other cans caught streams, on
top of the radiator, the mantel, the dining room table, but no roofer
showed up, most likely, people believed, because the lisbons could no
longer bear anyone intruding into their house. they endured their leaks
on their own, staying in the rain forest of their living room. mary kept
up appearances by getting the mail (heating bills, advertisements, never
anything personal anymore), coming out in bright green or pink sweaters
emblazoned with red hearts. bonnie wore a kind of smock we took to
calling her hair shirt, largely because of the spiky feathers that
covered it. "her pillow must leak," said vince fusilli. the pluma
 
 ___________________________
 
mailbox,
lifted the lid with the spine of mrs. eugene's family circle.

now the soft decay of the house began to show up more clearly. we
noticed how tattered the curtains had become, then realized we weren't
looking at curtains at all but at a film of dirt, with spy holes wiped
clean. the best thing was to see them make one: the pink heel of a hand
flattening against the glass, then rubbing back and forth to uncover the
bright mosaic of an eye, looking out at us. also, the gutters sagged.

mr. lisbon alone left the house, and our only contact with the girls was
through the signs they left on him. his hair looked excessively combed,
as though the girls, unable to preen for anybody else, preened him. his
cheeks no longer sported banners of tissue paper, blood-spotted like
tiny japanese flags, suggesting to many people that his daughters had
begun to shave him with considerably more care than joe the retard's
brothers lavished on him. (mrs. loomis, however, maintained he'd gotten
an electric r
 
 ___________________________
 
azor after what had happened with cecilia.) whatever the
details, mr. lisbon became the medium through which we glimpsed the
girls' spirits. we saw them through the toll they exacted on him: his
puffy red eyes that hardly opened anymore to see his daughters wasting
away; his shoes scuffed from climbing stairs forever threatening to lead
to another inert body; his sallow complexion dying in sympathy with
them; and his lost look of a man who realized that all this dying was
going to be the only life he ever had. as he set off for work, mrs.
lisbon no longer fortified him 
 
 ___________________________
 
with a mug of coffee. nevertheless, at
the wheel, he automatically reached for the mug in its dashboard holder
.. . and brought last week's cold coffee to his lips. at school, he
walked the halls with a fake smile and welling eyes, or in shows of
boyish spirits shouted, "hip check!" and pinned students against the
wall. he held on too long, though, freezing until the kids said,
"face-off," or, "you're in the penalty box now, mr. lisbon," anything to
snap him out of it. kenny jenkins got in a headlock with mr. lisbon and
spoke only of the serenity that came over the two of them. "it was
weird. i could smell his breath and everything, but i didn't try to get
away. it was like being on the bottom of a nigger pile, when you're
getting squashed but it's all peaceful and everything." some people

admired his continuing to work; others condemned it as hardness of
heart. he began to look skeletal beneath his green suit, as though
ce
 
 ___________________________
 
cilia, in dying, had tugged him briefly to the other side. he reminded
us of abraham lincoln, loose-limbed, silent, carrying around the world's
pain. he never passed a drinking fountain without sampling its small
relief.

then, abruptly, less than six weeks after the girls left school, mr.
lisbon resigned. from dini fleisher, the headmaster's secretary, we
learned that mr. woodhouse had called mr. lisbon in for a meeting over
christmas vacation. dick jensen, chairman of the board of trustees, also
attended. mr. woodhouse asked dini to serve eggnog from the carton in
the small office refrigerator. before accepting, mr. lisbon asked, "this
isn't spiked, is it?"

"it's christmas," mr. woodhouse said.

mr. jensen spoke about the rose bowl. he said to mr. lisbon, "you're a
u. of m. man yourself, right?" at this point mr. woodhouse indicated
that dini should leave, but before she was out the door, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e heard mr.
lisbon say, "i am. but i don't think i've ever told you that, dick.
sounds like you've been looking into my file."

the men laughed, without mirth. dini shut the door.

on january 7, when school resumed, mr. lisbon was no longer on staff.
technically, he had taken a leave of absence, but the new math teacher,
miss kolinski, evidently felt secure enough about her position to remove
the planets from their ceiling orbit. the fallen globes sat in the
corner like the final trash heap of the universe, mars embedded in
earth, jupiter cracked in half, saturn's rings slicing poor neptune. we
never learned exactly what was said in the meeting, but the gist was
clear: dini fleisher told us that parents had begun mak
 
 ___________________________
 
ing complaints
shortly after cecilia killed herself. they maintained that a person who

couldn't run his own family had no business teaching their children, and
the chorus of disapproval had grown steadily louder as the lisbon house
deteriorated. mr. lisbon's behavior hadn't helped, his eternal green
suit, his avoidance of the faculty lunch room, his piercing tenor
cutting through the male singing group like the keening of a bereaved
old woman. he was dismissed. and returned to a house where, some nights,
lights never went on, not even in the evening, nor did the front door
open.

now the house truly died. for as long as mr. lisbon had gone back and
forth to school, he circulated a thin current of life through the house,
bringing the girls treats-
 
 ___________________________
 
mounds bars, orange push-ups, rainbow-colored
kool-pops. we could imagine what the girls felt inside because we knew
what they were eating. we could share their headaches from wolfing ice
cream. we could make ourselves sick on chocolate. when mr. lisbon
stopped going out, however, he stopped bringing home sweets. we couldn't
be sure the girls were eating at all. offended by mrs. lisbon's note,
the milkman had stopped delivering milk, good or bad. kroger's stopped
bringing groceries. mrs. lisbon's mother, lema crawford, mentioned
during that same crackling phone call to new mexico that she had given
mrs. lisbon most of her summer pickles and preserves (she had hesitated
saying "summer" because that had been the summer cecilia had died, and
all the while the cucumbers, strawberries, and even she herself,
seventy-one years old, had gone on growing and living). she also told us
that mrs. lisbon kept an abundant supply of canned goods downstairs, as
well as fresh water and other preparatio
 
 ___________________________
 
ns against nuclear attack. they
had a kind of bomb shelter downstairs, apparently, just off the rec room
from which we had watched cecilia climb to her death. mr. lisbon had
even installed a propane camping toilet. but that was in the days when
they expected perils to come from without, and nothing made less sense
by that time than a survival room buried in a house itself becoming one
big coffin.

our concern increased when we saw bonnie visibly wasting away. just

after dawn, as uncle tucker was going to bed, he used to see her come
onto the front porch, under the mistaken notion that everyone on the
street was asleep. she always wore the feathered smock and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ts
lacked lubrication. because he was so skinny himself from his liquid
beer diet, we believed uncle tucker's statements about bonnie's weight.
it wasn't as if mrs. amberson had said bonnie was wasting away. compared
to her, everyone was. but uncle tucker's turquoise-and-silver belt
buckle looked as big on him as the jeweled belt of a heavyweight champ.
he knew what he was talking about. and, peering from his garage, one
hand on the refrigerator, he watched as with uncoordinated movements
bonnie lisbon came down the two front steps, proceeded across the lawn
to the small dirt mound left from the digging months ago, and, at the
site of her sister's death, began to say the rosary. holding the pillow
in one hand, she told her beads with the other, making sure to finish
before the first house light came on down the block and the neighborhood
awoke.

we didn't know whether it was asceticism or starvation. she looked
peaceful, uncle tucker said, without the feverish appetite of lux, or
the tight-li
 
 ___________________________
 
ell we could never
identify. one morning, as bonnie came out to the dirt mound, she left
the front door open, and uncle tucker became aware of an odor unlike any
other he had ever encountered. at first he thought it was merely an
intensification of bonnie's wet-bird aroma, but it persisted even after
she returned inside, and when we woke up, we smelled it, too. for even

as the house began to fall apart, casting out whiffs of rotten wood and
soggy carpet, this other smell began wafting from the lisbons', invading
our dreams and making us wash our hands over and over again. the smell
was so thick it seemed liquid, and stepping into its current felt like
being sprayed. we tried to locate its source, looking for dead squirrels
in the yard or a bag of fertilizer, but the smell contained too much
syrup to be death itself. the smell was definitely on the side of life,
and reminded david black of a fancy mushroom salad he'd eaten on a trip
with his parents to new york. "it's the smell of trapped be
 
 ___________________________
 
ed smell of drilled teeth. it was the kind of bad breath
you get used to the closer you go in, until you can't really notice
because it's your own breath, too. over the years, of course, the open
mouths of women have blown into our faces ingredients of that original
smell, and occasionally, poised over unfamiliar bedsheets, in the dark
of that night's betrayal or blind date, we've greedily welcomed any new
particular reek because of its partial connection to the fumes that
began blowing from the lisbon house shortly after it was closed up, and
never really stopped. right now, if we concentrate, we can smell it
still. it found us in our beds, and on the playground as we played kill
the man with the ball; it came down the stairs of the karafilises' so
that old mrs. karafilis dreamed she was back in bursa cooking grape
leaves. it reached us even over the stink of joe barton's grandfather's
cigar, as he showed us the photo album of his navy days, explaining that
the plump women in petticoats were
 
 ___________________________
 

listening to school closings on the radio (a parade of indian county
names, washtenaw, shiawassee, until our own anglo-saxon wayne), we still
knew the vivifying feeling of staying warm inside a shelter like
pioneers. nowadays, because of shifting winds from the factories and the
rising temperature of the earth, snow never comes in an onslaught
anymore but by a slow accretion in the night, momentary suds. the world,
a tired performer, offers us another half-assed season. back in the days
of the lisbon girls, snow fell every week and we shoveled our driveways
into heaps higher than our cars. trucks dumped salt. christmas lights
went up, and old man wilson sprang for his annual extravagant display: a
twenty-foot snowman, with three mechanized reindeer pulling a fat santa
in his sleigh. the display always brought a line of cars up our street,
but that year the traffic slowed down twice. we could see families
pointing and smiling at santa, then growing still and avid before the
lisbons' house li
 
 ___________________________
 
ke rubberneckers at a crash site. the fact that the
lisbons put up no lights until after christmas made their house look
even bleaker. on the pitzenbergers' lawn next door, three snowbound
angels blew red trumpets. at the bateses' on the other side,
multicolored gumdrops glowed within the frosted bushes. it was only in
january, after mr. lisbon had been out of work a week, that he came out
to string lights. he covered the front bushes, but when he plugged in
the lights he wasn't pleased with the result. "one of these is a
blinker," he said to mr. bates as the latter walked to his car. "the box
says it's got a red tip, but i've checked them all and can't find the
culprit. i hate blinking lights." perhaps he did, but they stayed
blinking, whenever he remembered to plug them in at night.

all winter, the girls remained elusive. sometimes
 
 ___________________________
 
bride in calcutta, with a red
veil and the soles of her feet dyed with henna. the only way we could
feel close to the girls was through these impossible excursions, which
have scarred us forever, making us happier with dreams than wives. some
of us abused the catalogues, taking them off into rooms alone, or
sneaking them out under our shirts. but we had little else to do, and
the snow came down, and the sky was unremittingly gray.

we'd like to tell you with authority what it was like inside the lisbon
house, or what the girls felt being imprisoned in it. sometimes, drained
by this investigation, we long for some shred of evidence, some rosetta
stone that would explain the girls at last. but even though that winter
was certainly not a happy one, little more can be averred. trying to
locate the girls' exact pain is like the self-examination doctors urge
us to make (we've reached that age). on a regular basis, we're forced to
explore with clinical detachment our most private pouch and, pressing
 
 ___________________________
 
ound was
mortal or not, or whether (in our blind doctoring) it's a wound at all.
it might just as well be a mouth, which is as wet and as warm. the scar
might be over the heart or the kneecap. we can't tell. all we can do is
go groping up the legs and arms, over the soft bivalvular torso, to the
imagined face. it is speaking to us. but we can't hear.

every night we scanned the girls' bedroom windows. around dinner tables
our conversations inevitably turned to the family's predicament. would
mr. lisbon get another job? how would he support his family? how long
could the girls endure being cooped up? even old mrs. karafilis made one
of her rare journeys to the first floor (it not being bath day) just to
stare down the street at the lisbon house. we couldn't remember another
instance where old mrs. karafilis had taken interest in the world,
because ever since we had known her, she had lived in the basement
waiting to die. sometimes demo karafilis took us downstairs to play
foosball, and, moving
 
 ___________________________
 
ese descents, gripping the
banister, eyes magnified behind rimless glasses. sometimes as she passed
we'd tell her the latest about the girls, and she'd cry, "mana!," which
meant something like "holy shit!," demo said, but she never really
seemed surprised. out past the weekly glimpsed windows, out past the
street, lived the world, which had, old mrs. karafilis knew, been dying
for years.

in the end, it wasn't death that surprised her but the stubbornness of
life. she couldn't understand how the lisbons kept so quiet, why they

didn't wail to heaven or go mad. seeing mr. lisbon stringing christmas
lights, she shook her head and muttered. she let go of the special
geriatric banister installed along the first floor, took a few steps at
sea level without support, and for the first time in seven years
suffered no pain. demo explained it to us like this: "we greeks are a
moody people. suicide makes sense to us. putting up christmas lights
after your own daughter does itthat makes no sense. what m
 
 ___________________________
 
culations. she made

much of the record-burning incident, and often quoted rock lyrics that
alluded to death or suicide. ms. perl befriended a local deejay and
spent an entire night listening to the records that lux's schoolmates
listed among her favorites. from this "research," she came up with the
find she was most proud of: a song by the band cruel crux, entitled
"virgin suicide." the chorus follows, though neither ms. perl nor we
have been able to determine if the album was among those mrs. lisbon
forced lux to burn: virgin suicide what was that she cried?

no use in stayin' on this holocaust ride she gave me her cherry she's my
virgin suicide the song certainly ties in nicely with the notion that a
dark force beset the girls, some monolithic evil we weren't responsible
for. their behavior, however, was anything but monolithic. while lux
trysted on the roof, therese grew fluorescent sea horses in a drinking
glass, and, down the hall, mary spent hours looking into her portable
mirror. set
 
 ___________________________
 
 in an oval of pink plastic, the mirror was surrounded by
exposed bulbs like a mirror in an actress's dressing room. a switch
allowed mary to simulate various times and weathers. there were settings
for "morning,"

"afternoon," and 66evening," as well as one for "brite sun" and
"overcast." for hours mary would sit before the mirror, watching her
face swim through the alterations of counterfeit worlds. she wore dark
glasses in sunshine, and bundled up under clouds. mr. lisbon sometimes
saw her flipping the switch back and forth, passing through ten or
twenty days at once, and she often got one of her sisters to sit before
the mirror so that she could dispense advice. "see, the circles under
your eyes come out in overcast. that's because we've got pale skin. in
sunlight .. . just a minute . .. see, like this, they're gone. so you
should wear more base or concealer on cloudy days. on sunny days, our
complexions tend to wash out, so we need color. lipstick and even
eye
 
 ___________________________
 
d on the lawn at a safe distance from
the chain saws, a tired mom and dad with two or three long-haired
teenagers, and a poodle with a ribbon in its hair. people felt they
owned the trees. their dogs had marked them daily. their children had
used them for home plate. the trees had been there when they'd moved in,
and had promised to be there when they moved out. but when the parks
department came to cut them down, it was clear our trees were not ours
but the city's. to do with as it wished.

the lisbons, however, didn't come out during the debranching. the girls
looked on from an upstairs window, their faces coldcream white. lunging
and retreating, the elevated man sheared off the elm's great green
crown. he chopped off the sick limb that had sagged and sprouted yellow
leaves last summer.

he proceeded to cut off the healthy limbs, too, and left the tree trunk
rising like a gray pillar in the lisbons' front yard. when the men drove
away, we weren't sure whether it was dead or alive.

for the 
 
 ___________________________
 
across the lawn, in a phalanx, the
lisbon girls were running toward the men. mrs. bates, who was looking
on, said she thought the girls were going to fling themselves on the
chain saws. "they were heading straight for them. and their eyes looked
wild." the parks department men didn't know what the foreman was jumping
up and down about. "i was blind-sided," one said. "the girls ducked
right under my saw. thank god i saw them in time." both men did, and
held their saws in the air, backing off. the lisbon girls ran past them.
they might have been playing a game. they looked behind them as though
afraid of being tagged. but then they reached the too safety zone. the
men turned off their chain saws and the pulsing air subsided into
silence. the girls surrounded the tree, linking hands in a daisy chain.
"go away," said mary. "this is our tree."

they weren't facing the men but the tree itself, pressing their cheeks
against the trunk. while therese and mary had shoes on, bonnie and lux
had run out b
 
 ___________________________
 
n seeds housed in a single fibrous
wing, and how they helicoptered to the ground, but we can't be sure
whether they came from the elms or from, say, the chestnuts, and none of
us has a botany handbook handy, so popular with rangers and realists.)
at any rate, many people in our neighborhood found it easy to imagine
why the girls might connect the elm with cecilia. "they weren't saving
it," said mrs. scheer. "they were saving her memory."

three rings formed around the tree: the blond ring of the lisbon girls,
the forest green of the parks department men, and, farther out, the ring
of onlookers. the men reasoned with the girls, grew stem, tried to bribe
them with a ride on the truck, and finally threatened them. the foreman
had his men break for lunch, thinking the girls would give up, but after
forty-five minutes they remained belted around the tree. finally he went
up to the house to talk with mr. and mrs. lisbon, but, to our surprise,
they offered no help. they answered the door together, m
 
 ___________________________
 
r. lisbon with
his arm around his wife in a rare display of physical affection. "we've
got an order to cut down your elm," the foreman said. "but your kids
won't let us."

"how do you know that tree's sick?" mrs. lisbon said. "believe me. we
know. it's got yellow leaves. it had yellow leaves. we cut that branch
off already. the tree's dead, for christ's sake."

"we're for aritex," mr. lisbon said. "are you familiar with that? our
daughter showed us an article. it's a less aggressive therapy."

"and it doesn't work. look, we leave this tree and the others will all
be gone by next year."

"will be anyway, way things are going," said mr. lisbon. "i don't want
to have to call the police."

"the police?" mrs. lisbon asked. "the girls are just standing in their
own front yard. since when is that a crime?"

the foreman gave up then, but he never followed through on his threat.
by the time
 
 ___________________________
 
n whose suicide last summer focused awareness
on a national problem, put their own bodies in jeopardy wednesday in an
attempt to save the elm cecilia had so dearly loved. the tree was
diagnosed with dutch elm disease last year and was scheduled to be
removed this spring." from the above, it's clear ms. perl accepted the
theory that the girls saved the tree in memory of cecilia, and from what
we've read in cecilia's journal, we see no reason to disagree. years
later, however, when we spoke to mr. lisbon, he denied this. "therese
was the one who was into trees. she knew everything about them. all the

varieties. how deep the roots went. i never remember cecilia taking much
interest in plant life, to be honest."

only after the parks department drove away did the girls break their
daisy chain. rubbing sore arms, they went back inside the house without
so much as looking at any of us gathered on neighboring lawns. chase
buell heard mary say, "they'll be back," as they went inside. mr. patz,
who 
 
 ___________________________
 
moved down their list,
removing other trees on our block, but no one else was courageous or
misled enough to oppose them. the buells' elm, with its car tire swing,
was taken down; the fusillis' disappeared one day while we were at
school; and the shalaans' vanished, too. soon the parks department moved
on to other blocks, though the incessant whine of their chain saws never
let us, or the girls, forget about them.

baseball season began and we lost ourselves in green fields. in the old
days, mr. lisbon would sometimes bring the girls to a home game, and
they would sit in the bleachers, rooting like everybody else. mary would
talk to the cheerleaders. "she always wanted to be one. but her mother
wouldn't let her," kristi mcculchan told us. "i used to teach her some
of the cheers and she was really good." we didn't doubt it. we always
watched the lisbon girls instead of our dizzy cheerleaders. in close
games they chewed their fists, and thought every ball hit to the
outfield would be a home run
 
 ___________________________
 
. they bounced up and down, then rose to
their feet just as the ball descended, too soon, into the outfielder's
rnitt. the year of the suicides the girls didn't come to a single game,
nor did we expect them to. gradually, we stopped scanning the bleachers
for their excited faces, and stopped walking underneath to see what we
could see of them, cut up in slices from behind.

though we felt for the lisbon girls, and continued to think about them,
they were slipping away from us. the images we treasured of them-in

bathing suits, jumping through a sprinkler, or running from a garden
hose charmed by water pressure into a giant snake-began to fade, no
matter how religiously we meditated on them in our most private moments,
lying in bed beside two pillows belted together to simulate a human
shape. we could no longer evoke with our inner ears the precise pitches
and lilts of the lisbon girls' voices
 
 ___________________________
 
 in an old bread box, had gotten damp and lost
its aroma, smelling now like a wet matchbook. at the same time, the fact
that the girls were slowly sinking hadn't completely penetrated our
minds, and on some mornings we awoke to a world still unruptured: we
stretched, we got out of bed, and only after rubbing our eyes at the
window did we remember the rotting house across the street, and the
mossblackened windows hiding the girls from our sight. the truth was
this: we were beginning to forget the lisbon girls, and we could
remember nothing else.

the colors of their eyes were fading, the location of moles, dimples,
centipede scars. it had been so long since the lisbon girls had smiled
we could no longer picture their crowded teeth. "they're just memories
now," chase buell said sadly. "time to write them off." but even as he
uttered these words, he rebelled against them, as we all did. and rather
than consign the girls to oblivion, we gathered their possessions once
more, everything we'd gotten
 
 ___________________________
 
f during our strange curatorship:
cecilia's high-tops; therese's microscope; a jewelry box in which a
strand of mary's dishwater-blond hair lay bedded on cotton; the
photocopy of cecilia's laminated picture of the virgin; one of lux's
tube tops. we piled everything in the middle of joe larson's garage,
opening the automatic door halfway to see out. the sun had set and the
sky was dark. with the parks department gone, the street was ours again.
for the first time in months, a light came on in the lisbon house, then
winked out. another light, in an adjoining room, flickered in answer.
around the aureolae of streetlights we noticed a dim swirling we didn't
recognize at first because we knew it so well, a senseless pattern of
ecstasy and madness: the massing of the first fish flies of the season.

a year had passed and still we knew nothing. from five the girls had
reduced themselves to four, and they were all-the living and the
dead-becoming shadows. even their assorted possessions arrayed at o
 
 ___________________________
 
embled the grotto at st. paul's
catholic church on the lake, but instead of neat ascending rows of
votive candles, each alike in size and importance like the souls they
pilotlighted, the girls had engineered a phantasmagoria of beacons. they
had fused drippings from dinner candles into a single paraffin bundle
wrapped with its own wick. they had fashioned ten torches from a
psychedelic "craft candle" cecilia had bought at a street art fair. they
had lit the box of six squat emergency candles mr. lisbon kept in the
upstairs closet in case of power failures. they had ignited three tubes

of mary's lipstick, which burned surprisingly well. from the windowsill,
from cups suspended on clothes hangers, from old flowerpots, from
cut-out milk cartons, the candles burned. at night we saw bonnie tending
the flames. occasionally, finding candles drowning in their own wax, she
dug runoff trenches with a pair of scissors; but most often she watched
the candles as if their outcome held her own, the flames
 
 ___________________________
 
 almost
extinguishing themselves, but, by some greed of oxygen, persisting.

in addition to god, the candles beseeched us. the chinese lantern sent
out its untranslatable s. 0. s. the overhead light showed us the shabby
state of the lisbon house, and showed us billy jack, who had avenged his
girlfriend's rape using forsworn karate. the girls' signals reached us
and no one else, like a radio station picked up by our braces. at night,
afterimages flashed on our inner eyelids, or hovered over our beds like
a swarm of fireflies. our inability to respond only made the signals
more important. we watched the show nightly, always on the verge, of
discovering the key, and joe larson even tried flashing his own bedroom
light in answer, but
 
 ___________________________
 
 this made the lisbon house go dark, and we felt
reprimanded.

the first letter arrived on may 7. slipped into chase buell's mailbox
with the rest of the day's mail, the letter bore no stamp or return
address, but when we opened it, we recognized at once the purple flair
lux liked to write with.

dear whoever, tell trip i'm over him.

he's a creep.

guess who that was all it said. in the next few weeks, other letters
arrived, expressing various moods, each envelope delivered to our houses
by the girls themselves in 
 
 ___________________________
 
see them. we always awoke in the morning

realizing that we'd fallen asleep at our posts. in the mailbox, like a
quarter deposited under our pillows by the tooth fairy, a letter would
be waiting. there were eight letters in all. not all of them were
written by lux. all were unsigned. all were briel one letter said:
"remember us?" another said: "down with unsavory boys." another: "watch
for our lights." the longest said: "in this dark, there will be light.
will you help us?"

in the daytime, the lisbon house looked vacant. the trash the family put
out once a week (also in the middle of the night because no one saw
them, not even uncle tucker) looked more and more like the refuse of
people resigned to a long siege. they were eating canned lima beans.
they were flavoring rice with sloppy-joe mix. at night, when the lights
signaled, we racked our brains for a way of contacting the girls. tom
faheem suggested flying a kite with a message alongside the house, but
this was voted down on logistical 
 
 ___________________________
 
grounds. little johnny buell offered
the recourse of tossing the same message on a rock through the girls'
windows, but we were afraid the breaking glass would alert mrs. lisbon.
in the end, the answer was so simple it took a week to come up with.

we called them on the telephone. in the larsons' sun-faded phone book,
right between licker and little, we found the intact listing for lisbon,
ronald a. it sat halfway down the righthand page, unmarked by any code
or symbol, not even an asterisk referring to an appendix of pain. we
stared at it for some time. then, three index fingers at once, we
dialed.

the telephone tolled eleven times before mr. lisbon answered. "what's it
going to be today?" he said right away in a tired voice. his speech was
slurred. we covered the phone and said nothing. "i'm waiting. today i'll
listen to all your crap."

another click sounded on the line, lik
 
 ___________________________
 
e a door opening onto a hollow
corridor. "look, give us a break, will you?" mr. lisbon muttered.

there was a pause. assorted breathing, mechanically reformulated, met in
electronic space. then mr. lisbon spoke in a voice unlike his own, a
high screech .. .mrs. lisbon had grabbed the receiver. "why won't you
leave us alone!" she shouted, and slammed down the phone.

we stayed on. for five more seconds her furious breath blew through the
receiver, but just as we expected, the line didn't go dead. on the other
end, an obscure presence waited.

we called out a tentative hello. after a moment, a faint, crippled voice
returned, "hi."

we hadn't heard the lisbon girls speak in a long time, but the voice
didn't jog our memories. it sounded-perhaps because the speak
 
 ___________________________
 
 circuit
must have freed, because the couple were shunted off suddenly, leaving
us in buzzing silence, and the voice, raw but stronger now, said, "shit.
see you later," and the phone was hung up.

we called again next day, at the same time, and were answered on the
first ring. we waited a moment for safety's sake, then proceeded with
the plan we'd devised the night before. holding the phone to one of mr.
larson's speakers, we played the song which most thoroughly communicated
our feelings to the lisbon girls. we can't remember the song's title
now, and an extensive search through records of the period has proved
unsuccessful. we do, however, recall the essential sentiments, which

spoke of hard days, long nights, a man waiting outside a broken
telephone booth hoping it would somehow ring, and rain, and rainbows. it
was mostly guitars, except for one interlude where a mellow cello
hummed. we played it into the phone, and then chase buell gave our
number and we hung up.

next day, same time, o
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of gilbert o'sullivan singing through
scratches. you may recall the song, a ballad which charts the
misfortunes of a young man's life (his parents die, his fiance stands
him up at the altar), each verse leaving him more and more alone. it was
mrs. eugene's favorite, and we knew it well from hearing her singing
along over her simmering pots. the song never meant much to us, speaking
as it did of an age we hadn't reached, but once we heard it playing
tinily through the receiver, coming from the lisbon girls, the song made
an impact. gilbert o'sullivan's elfin voice sounded high enough to be a
girl's. the lyrics might have been diary entries the girls whispered
into our ears. though it wasn't their voices we heard, the song conjured
their images more vividly than ever.

we could feel them, on the other end, blowing dust off the needle,
holding the telephone over the spinning black disk, playing the volume
low so as not to be overheard. when the song stopped, the needle skated
through the inne
 
 ___________________________
 
r ring, sending out a repeating click (like the same
time lived over and over again). already joe larson had our response
ready, and after we played it, the lisbon girls played theirs, and the
evening went on like that. most of the songs we've forgotten, but a
portion of that contrapuntal exchange survives, in pencil, on the back
of demo karafilis's teafor the tillerman, where he jotted it. we provide
it here: the lisbon girls us the lisbon girls us the lisbon girls us the
lisbon girls "alone again, naturally," gilbert o'sullivan "you've got a
friend," james taylor "where do the children play?, cat stevens "dear
prudence, " the beatles "candle in the wind, " elton john "wild horses,"

the rolling stones "at seventeen, " janice ian us "time in a bottle,"
jim croce the lisbon girls "so far away," carole king actually, we're
not sure about the order. demo karafilis scribbled the titles
haphazardly. the above order, however, does chart the basic progres
 
 ___________________________
 
le evoked the country the
country had once been. the singers had bad skin or wore boots. song
after song throbbed with secret pain. we passed the sticky receiver from
ear to ear, the drumbeats so regular we might have been pressing our
ears to the girls' chests. occasionally, we thought we heard them
singing along, and it was almost like being at a concert with them. our
songs, for the most part, were love songs. each selection tried to turn
the conversation in a more intimate direction. but the lisbon girls kept
to impersonal topics. (we leaned in and commented on their perfume. they
said it was probably the magnolias.) after a while, our songs turned
sadder and sappier. that was when the girls played "so far away." we
noted the shift at once (they had let their hand linger on our wrist)
and followed with "bridge over troubled water," turning up the volume
because the song expressed more than any other how we felt about the
girls, how we wanted to help them. when it finished, we waited for t
 
 ___________________________
 
 had an extension ladder we could
easily prop against the girls' windows. "just like eloping," eugie kent
said, and the words made our minds drift, to a red-faced, small-town
justice of the peace, and a sleeper compartment in a train passing
through blue wheat fields at night. we imagined all sorts of things,
waiting for the girls to signal for us.

none of this-the record-playing, the flashing lights, the virgin
cards-ever got into the papers, of course. we thought of our
communication with the lisbon girls as a sacred confidence, even after
such fidelity ceased to make sense. ms. perl (who later published a book
with a chapter dedicated to the lisbon girls) described their spirits
sinking further and further in an inevitable progression. she shows
their pathetic last attempts to make a life-bonnie's tending the shrine,
mary's wearing bright sweatersbut every stone the girls built shelter
with has, for ms. perl, an underside of mud and worms. the candles were
a two-way mirror between worlds:
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the way he intended. the last note, written
on the back of a laminated picture of the virgin, arrived in chase
buell's mailbox on june 14. it said simply: "tomorrow.

midnight. wait for our signal."

by this time of year, fish flies coated our windows, making it difficult
to see out. the next night, we gathered in the vacant lot beside joe
larson's house. the sun had fallen below the horizon, but still lit the
sky in an orange chemical streak more beautiful than nature. across the
street the lisbon house was dark except for the red haze of cecilia's
shrine, nearly hidden. from the ground we couldn't see the upper story
well, and tried to go up to the larsons' roof. mr. larson stopped us. "i
just got finished retarring it," he said. we wandered back to the lot,
then walked down to the street, putting our palms against the asphalt
still warm from the day's sun. the sodden smell of the lisbon house
reached us, then faded, so that we thought we'd imagined it. joe hill
conley began climbing tr
 
 ___________________________
 
touch, the doorknob, was
missing, but the structure still looked habitable.

we climbed up to the tree house the way we always had, stepping in the
knothole, then on the nailed board, then on two bent nails, before
grasping the frayed rope and pulling ourselves through the trapdoor. we

were so much bigger now we could barely squeeze through, and once we
were inside, the plywood floor sagged under our weight. the oblong
window we'd cut with a handsaw years ago still looked onto the front of
the lisbon house. next to it were five spotted photographs of the lisbon
girls, pinned with rusty tacks. we didn't remember putting them up, but
there they were, dim from time and weather so that all we could make out
were the phosphorescent outlines of the girls' bodies, each a different
glowing letter of an unknown alphabet. outside and below, a few people
had come out to water lawns or flower beds, tossing silver lassos. the
cracker voice of our local baseball announcer rose from a score of
radios, des
 
 ___________________________
 
ched, they
flapped furiously between our fingers, then flew away to cling again, on
anything, inert. the scum of their dead or dying bodies darkened street-
and headlights, turned house windows into theater scrims poking out
light. we settled back, pulling up a warm six-pack on a rope, and drank,
and waited.

each of us had said he was sleeping over at a friend's house, so we had
all night to sit and drink, unmolested by adults. but neither at
twilight nor thereafter did we see any lights in the lisbon house other
than the candles. they seemed to bum more dimly, and we suspected that
despite their ministrations, the girls were running out of wax.
cecilia's window had the dank glow of an unclean fish tank. angling carl
tagel's telescope out the tree-house window, we managed to see the
pockmarked moon steaming silently across space, then blue venus, but
when we turned the telescope on lux's window it brought us so close we
couldn't see a thing. what at first appeared the xylophone of her spine,
 
 ___________________________
 
nighttime territory. moving behind a
tree, he waited for bonnie to appear, rosary in hand. from his vantage
point he couldn't see the flashlight come on in the bedroom window, and
he had gone back inside before we heard the window open. by that time we
were fixed on it. the flashlight waved through the darkness. then the
light went on and off three times in succession.

a breeze arose. in the blackness, the leaves of our tree began to
flutter, and the air filled with the crepuscular scent of the lisbon
house. none of us remembers thinking anything, or deciding anything,
because at that moment our minds had ceased to work, filling us with the
only peace we've ever known. we were above the street, aloft, at the
same height as the lisbon girls in their crumbling bedrooms, and they
were calling to us. we heard wood scrape. then, for an instant, we saw
them-lux, bonnie, mary, and therese-framed in a single window. they
looked our way, looked across the void at us. mary blew us a kiss, or
wiped her
 
 ___________________________
 
 ten feet down. jumping
from the grass, we could nearly touch the tree-house floor. our new
height astounded us, and later many said this contributed to our
resolve, because for the first time ever we felt like men.

we advanced on the house from different directions, hiding in shadows of
surviving trees. as we approached, some of us crawling army-style,
others still on two feet, the smell grew stronger. the air thickened.
soon we reached an invisible barrier: no one had gotten this close to
the lisbon house in months. we hesitated, and then paul baldino held his
hand in the air, giving the signal, and we went in closer. we grazed the
brick walls, crouching under windows and getting spider-web in our hair.
we came into the damp mess of the back yard. kevin head tripped on the
bird feeder, which was still lying there. it cracked in half, the
remaining seed spilling out onto the ground. we froze, but no lights
came on.

after a minute, we inched in closer. mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, b
 
 ___________________________
 
s
cougar. "we can use my car," he said. tom faheem searched the overgrown
flower beds for pebbles to ping against the girls' windows. any second
an upstairs window might open, breaking its seal of fish flies, and a
face would look down at us for the rest of our lives.

at the back window, we grew brave enough to look in. through a scrub of
dead windowsill plants, we made out the interior of the house: a
seascape of confused objects, advancing and retreating as our eyes
adjusted to the light. mr. lisbon's la-z-boy rolled forward, its
footrest raised like a snow shovel. the brown vinyl sofa slunk back

against the wall. as they moved apart, the floor seemed to rise like a
hydraulic stage, and in the room's only light, coming from a small
shaded lamp, we saw lux. she was lying back in a beanbag chair, her
knees lifted and spread apart, her upper half sunk into the bag, which
closed over her like a straitjacket. she was wearing blue jeans and
suede clogs. her long hair fell over her shoulders. s
 
 ___________________________
 
m the window but unseen, as though
looking in at lux from another plane of existence. the faint glow of the
window flickered against our faces. our trunks and legs descended into
darkness. on the lake a freighter sounded its horn, on a fogless night.
another freighter responded at a deeper pitch. that halter could have
come undone with one quick yank.

tom faheem went first, disproving his shy reputation. he climbed onto
the back porch, quietly opened the door, and let us, at last, back into
the lisbon house. "we're here" was all he said.

lux looked up, but didn't rise from the chair. her sleepy eyes showed no
surprise that we were there, but at the base of her white neck a
lobstery blush spread. "about time," she said. "we've been waiting for
you guys." she took another drag. "we've got a car," tom faheem
continued. "full tank. we'll take you wherever you want to go."

"it's just a cougar," said chase buell, "but it's got a pretty big
trunk."

"can i sit in front?" lux asked, screwing her m
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and this time joe hill conley didn't run forward
to stick his finger in them. for the first time, we looked around the

house. the smell, now that we were inside, was stronger than ever. it
was the smell of wet plaster, drains clogged with the endless tangle of
the girls' hair, mildewed cabinets, leaking pipes. paint cans were still
stationed under leaks, each full of a weak solution of other times. the
living room had a plundered look. the television sat at an angle, its
screen removed, mr. lisbon's toolbox open in front of it. chairs were
missing arms or legs, as though the lisbons had been using them for
firewood.

where are your parents?" asleep. ,:what about your sisters?"

they're coming." something thudded downstairs. we retreated to the back
door. "come on," chase buell said. "we better get out of here. it's
getting late." but lux only exhaled again, shaking her head. she pulled
a halter strap away from her skin, where it left a red mark. everything
was quiet again. "wait," she sa
 
 ___________________________
 
 house we heard the pants
unsnap. the zipper opened all the way down our spines. none of us moved.
chase buell didn't move. lux's eyes, burning and velvet, glowed in the
dim room. a vein on her neck was softly pulsing, the one you're supposed
to put perfume on for that reason. even though she was doing it to chase
buell, we could all feel lux undoing us, reaching out for us and taking
us as she knew we could be taken. just at the last second, another soft
thud came from downstairs. upstairs, mr. lisbon coughed in his sleep.
lux stopped. she looked away, consulting with herself, and then she

said, "we can't do this now."

she let go of chase buell's belt and crossed to the back door. "i've got
to get some fresh air. you guys have got me all worked up." she smiled
then, a loose, clumsy smile, genuine, unpretty. "i'll go wait in the
car. you guys wait here for my sisters. we've got a lot of stuff." she
fished in a bowl by the back door for the car keys. she made to leave,
but stopped again. "w
 
 ___________________________
 
inese checkers-then
moving again into thickets of eggbeaters and rubber boots. we entered
the kitchen. it was too dark to see, but we heard a small hiss, like
someone sighing. a trapezoid of light projected up from the basement. we
went to the stairs and listened. then we started down to the rec room.

chase buell led the way, and as we descended, holding on to one
another's belt loops, we traveled back to the day a year earlier when we
had descended those same steps to attend the only party the lisbon girls
were ever allowed to throw. by the time we reached bottom, we felt we'd
literally traveled back in time. for despite the inch of floodwater
covering the floor, the room was just as we had left it: cecilia's party
had never been cleaned up. the paper tablecloth, spotted with mice
droppings, still covered the card table. a brownish scum of punch lay
caked in the cut-glass bowl, sprinkled with flies. the sherbet had
melted long ago, but a ladle still protruded from the gummy silt, and
cups, 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd, we forgot to stop at the garage, from which music was still
playing. they found her in the front seat, gray-faced and serene,
holding a cigarette lighter that had burned its coils into her palm. she
had escaped in the car just as we expected. but she had unbuckled us, it
turned out, only to stall us, so that she and her sisters could die in
peace.

we knew them now. knew the way the skinny one drove, with his bursts of
acceleration mid-block, his cautious turning, his habit of misjudging
the lisbons' driveway so that he ran over the lawn. we knew the bending
sound a siren made as it passed, a phenomenon therese identified
correctly as the doppler effect the third time the ems truck came, but
not the fourth because she was bent herself by then, winding down and
away in slow spirals, a feeling akin to being sucked through your own
intestines. we knew that the fat one had sensitive skin and was plagued
with razor bumps, that.he wore a metal wedge on the heel of his shoe
because his left leg 
 
 ___________________________
 
ssion of limp bodies wearing charm bracelets and gold
lockets in the shape of a heart.

when they came the fourth time they were losing faith. the truck made
the same jolting stop, tires skidded, doors flew open, but as they
jumped out the paramedics had lost their valiant appearance and were
clearly two men afraid of being humiliated. "it's those two guys again,"
said zachary larson, five. the fat one gave the skinny one a look and
they started for the house, this time taking no equipment. mrs. lisbon,
face white, answered the door. she pointed inside, saying nothing. when
the paramedics entered, she remained in the doorway, tightening the belt
of her robe. she straightened the welcome mat with her toe, twice. soon
the paramedics ran out again, changed and electrified, and got the
stretcher. a minute later they were carrying therese out, facedown. her
dress, hiked up around her waist, revealed her unbecoming underwear, the
color of an athletic bandage. the buttons in back had popped open to

 
 ___________________________
 
reveal a slice of mushroom-colored back. her hand kept falling off the
stretcher, though each time mrs. lisbon replaced it. "stay," she
commanded, to the hand apparently. but the hand flopped out again. mrs.
lisbon stopped, her shoulders sagged, she seemed to give up. in the next
second she was running, holding on to therese's arm and murmuring what
some people heard as, "not you, too," and mrs. o'connor, who had acted
in college, as, "but too cruel."

by this time we were back in our beds, shamming sleep. outside, sheriff
wore an oxygen mask to enter the garage and raise the automatic door.
when it ope
 
 ___________________________
 
ing one chair on another like a circus performer. they found mary
in the kitchen, not dead but nearly so, her head and torso thrust into
the oven as though she were scrubbing it. a second ems truck came (the
only time this happened) bringing two paramedics more efficient than
sheriff and the fat one. they rushed inside and saved mary's life. for a
while. for what it was worth.

technically, mary survived for more than a month, though everyone felt
otherwise. after that night, people spoke of the lisbon girls in the
past tense, and if they mentioned mary at all it was with the veiled
wish that she would hurry up and get it over with. in fact, the final
suicides surprised few people. even we who had tried to save the girls
came to consider ourselves temporarily insane. in hindsight, bonnie's
battered trunk lost its associations with travel and flight and became
only what it was: a drop weight for a hanging, like sandbags in old
westerns. still, while everyone agreed the suicides came as predict
 
 ___________________________
 
 of serotonin. she was put on medication, and

after two weeks of psychological tests and intensive therapy, her blood
was tested again. at that time her serotonin level appeared normal.

as for the other girls, autopsies were performed on each of them, in
accordance with a state law requiring investigation in all deaths by
suicide. as written, the law gave the police leeway in such cases, and
their prior failure to order an autopsy on cecilia led many to believe
they now suspected mr. and mrs. lisbon of foul play, or wished to put
pressure on them to move. a single coroner, brought in from the city
with two fatigued assistants, opened up the girls' brains and body
cavities, peering inside at the mystery of their despair. they used an
assembly-line approach, the assistants rolling each girl past the doctor
as he used his table saw, his hose, his vacuum. photographs were taken,
but never released, though we wouldn't have had the stomach to look at
them. we did, however, read the coroner's rep
 
 ___________________________
 
he spoke of the
incredible cleanliness of the girls' bodies, the youngest he had ever
worked on, showing no signs of wastage or alcoholism. their smooth blue
hearts looked like water balloons, and the rest of their organs
possessed a similar textbook clarity. in older people, or the
chronically ill, the organs tend to lose their shape, to distend, change
color, grow connections with organs they have nothing to do with, so
that most entrails look, as the coroner put it, "like a rubbish dump."
the lisbon girls, on the other hand, were "like something behind glass.
like an exhibit." nevertheless, it saddened the coroner to pierce and
shred those unblemished bodies, and a few times he was overcome with
emotion. in one margin he scrawled a note to himself. "seventeen years
in this business and i'm a basket case." he persevered in his function,
however, finding the mass of half digested pills trapped in therese's
ileum, the strangulated section of bonnie's esophagus, the riot of
carbon monoxide in 
 
 ___________________________
 
ined access to the girls' very bedrooms, given all the intimate
treasures they brought back. one reporter held up a wedding dress made
the same year as cecilia's, and except for the unshorn hem, we couldn't
tell them apart. another reporter ended his broadcast by reading a
letter therese had written to the brown admissions office -"ironically,"
as he put it, "only three days before she put an end to any dreams of
college .. . or of anything else."

gradually, the reporters began referring to the lisbon girls by first
names, and neglected to interview medical experts in favor of collecting
reminiscences. like us, they became custodians of the girls' lives, and
had they completed the job to our satisfaction, we might never have been
forced to wander endlessly down the paths of hypothesis and memory. for
less and less did the reporters ask why the girls had killed themselves.
instead, they talked about the girls' hobbies and academic awards. wanda
brown, on channel 7, unearthed a photo of a biki
 
 ___________________________
 
," because they hadn't earned their
shorthand by a long distillation of firsthand knowledge. for the first
time ever we sympathized with the president because we saw how wildly
our sphere of influence was misrepresented by those in no position to
know what was going on. even our parents seemed to agree more and more
with the television version of things, listening to the reporters'
inanities as though they could tell us the truth about our own lives.

after the suicide free-for-all, mr. and mrs. lisbon gave up the attempt
to lead a normal life. mrs. lisbon stopped attending church, and when
father moody went to the house to console her, no one answered the door.
"i kept ringing the bell," he told us. "no dice." during mary's entire
stay in the hospital, mrs. lisbon appeared only once. herb pitzenberger
saw her come out onto the back porch with a stack of manuscript pages.
putting them into a pile, she lit them. we never learned what they were.

about this time, ms. carmina d'angelo received a
 
 ___________________________
 
 call from mr. lisbon,
asking her to put the house back on the market (he'd taken it off
shortly after cecilia's suicide). ms. d'angelo tactfully pointed out
that the present condition of the house would not facilitate the sale,

but mr. lisbon responded, "i realize. i've got a guy coming in."

it turned out to be mr. hedlie, the english teacher from school.

out of work for the summer, he arrived in his vw bug, its bumper sticker
still supporting the last failed democratic candidate for president.
when he got out, he was wearing not his former schoolmaster's blazer and
trousers, but a bright green-andyellow dashiki and a pair of lizard
sandals. his hair covered his ears and he moved with the bohemian slouch
of teachers during vacatio
 
 ___________________________
 
n, resuming unruly lives. despite his look of
a commune leader, he set to work in earnest, carting out over three days
a mountain of refuse from the lisbon house. while mr. and mrs. lisbon
went to stay in a motel, mr. hedlie took charge of the house, throwing
away snow skis, watercolor paints, bags of clothes, a hula hoop. he
dragged the worn-out brown sofa outside, cutting it in two when it
wouldn't fit through the doorway. he filled trash bags with potholders,
old coupons, heaps of accumulated twist-ties, superseded keys. we saw
him attacking the overgrowth of each room, hacking away with his
dustpan, and on the third day he began wearing a surgical mask because
of the dust. he
 
 ___________________________
 
 never spoke to us anymore in obscure greek phrases, or
took interest in our sandlot baseball games, but arrived every morning
with the hopeless expression of a man draining a swamp with a kitchen
sponge. as he lifted rugs and threw out towels, he unleashed the odors
of the house in waves, and many people thought he wore the surgical mask
to protect himself not from dust but from the exhalations of the lisbon
girls that still lived in bedding and drapes, in peeling wallpaper, in
patches of carpet preserved brand-new beneath dressers and nightstands.
the first day mr. hedlie restricted himself to the first floor, but the
second day he ventured into the sacked seraglio of the lisbon girls'
bedrooms, wading ankledeep in garments that gave off the music of a past
time. pulling cecilia's nepalese scarf from behind a headboard, he was
greeted, at each fringy end, with the tinkling of green corroded bells.
 
 ___________________________
 
ure of inflamed skin, a
midnight-blue jar of vicks vaporub fingerprinted inside, a shoe box full
of ointments for ringworm and conjunctivitis, salves applied to nether
regions, aluminum tubes dented, squeezed, or rolled up like party
favors. also: orange baby aspirin the girls had chewed as candy, an old
thermometer (oral, alas) in its black plastic case, along with a variety
of other implements pressed, inserted, applied into or onto the girls'
bodies; in short, all the earthly concoctions mrs. lisbon had used over
the years to keep the girls alive and well.

this was when we found the albums of the grand rapids gospelers, tyrone
little and the believers, and the rest. every evening when mr. hedlie
left, coated with a white film that aged him thirty years, we went
through the mixture of treasure and junk he set out at the curb. the
extraordinary latitude mr. lisbon had given him surprised us, for mr.
hedlie disposed of not only replaceable items such as shoe polish tins
(gouged to silver cen
 
 ___________________________
 
ters) but family photographs, a working water pik,
and a strip of butcher paper marking the growth of each lisbon daughter
at one-year intervals. the last thing mr. hedlie threw out was the empty
television set, which jim crotte'r took up to his bedroom, only to find
inside the stuffed iguana therese had taught biology with, its tail torn
off and the trapdoor in its abdomen missing, exposing various numbered
plastic organs. we, of course, took the family photographs and, after
organizing a permanent collection in our tree house, divided the rest by
choosing straws. most of the photographs had been taken ye
 
 ___________________________
 
to the outflow, however. three days
after mr. hedlie forged into the house, he came out, opening the front
door for the first time and proceeding down the front steps to place
beside the for sale sign another, smaller sign that read, garage sale.
that day, and for two days following, mr. hedlie offered up an inventory
that encompassed not only the chipped dishware of a garage sale but the
heavy durable goods offered at the liquidation of an estate. everyone
went, not to buy but just to enter the lisbon house, which had been
transformed into a clean spacious area smelling of pine cleaner. mr.
hedlie had thrown out all the linens, anything that had belonged to the
girls, anything broken, leaving only furniture, tables polished with
linseed oil, kitchen chairs, mirrors, beds, each item bearing a neat
white tag showing the price in his effeminate handwriting. the prices
were final; he did not haggle. we roamed the house, upstairs and down,
touching beds the girls would never sleep on again or mir
 
 ___________________________
 
n, bought it back for three dollars. the last thing we saw was a man
with a paintbrush mustache loading the sailing ship model into the trunk
of his eldorado.

though the exterior of the house remained in disrepair, the interior was
presentable once again, and within the next few weeks ms. d'angelo
managed to sell the house to the young couple who live there now, though
they can no longer be called young. back then, however, in the first
flush of having money to burn, they made an offer that mr. lisbon
accepted, despite its being far below what he had paid. the house was
almost completely empty at that point, the only thing left being
cecilia's shrine, a woolly mass of candle drippings fused to the
windowsill, which mr. hedlie had superstitiously neglected to touch. we
thought we might never see mr. and mrs. lisbon again, and even then we
began the impossible process of trying to forget about them. our parents
seemed better able to do this, returning to their tennis foursomes and
cocktail cru
 
 ___________________________
 
t it had to do with
our music, our godlessness, or the loosening of morals regarding sex we
hadn't even had. mr. hedlie mentioned that fin-de-sikle vienna witnessed
a similar outbreak of suicides on the part of the young, and put the
whole thing down to the misfortune of living in a dying empire. it had
to do with the way the mail wasn't delivered on time, and how potholes
never got fixed, or the thievery at city hall, or the race riots, or the
801 fires set around the city on devil's night. the lisbon girls became
a symbol of what was wrong with the country, the pain it inflicted on

even its most innocent citizens, and in order to make things better a
parents' group donated a bench in the girls' memory to our school.
originally slated to commemorate just cecilia (the project had been put
in motion eight months earlier, after the day of grieving), the bench
was rededicated just in time to include the other girls as well. it was
a small bench, made from a tree from the upper peninsula. "virg
 
 ___________________________
 
in
timber," mr. krieger said, who had retooled the machinery at his
air-filter factory in order to make the bench. the plaque bore the
simple inscription in memory of the lisbon girls, daughters of this
community.

mary was still alive at this point, of course, but the plaque did not
acknowledge that fact. she returned from the hospital a few days later,
after a two-week stay. knowing they wouldn't have come, dr. hornicker
hadn't even asked mr. and mrs. lisbon to attend the therapy sessions. he
ran mary through the same battery of tests cecilia had taken, but found
no evidence of a psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia or
manic-depression. "her scores showed her to be a relatively well
adjusted adolescent. her future wasn't bright, of course. i recommended
ongoing therapy to deal with the trauma. but we had her serotonin up,
and she looked good." she came back to a house without furniture. mr.
and mrs. lisbon, back from the motel, were camping ou
 
 ___________________________
 
t in the master
bedroom. mary was also given a sleeping bag. mr. lisbon, understandably
reticent about the days following the triple suicide, told us little
about the condition mary returned home in. eleven years before, when the
girls were just children, the family had arrived at the house one week
before the moving van. they had had to camp out then, too, sleeping on
the floor and reading bedtime stories by a kerosene lantern, and, oddly,
that memory came back to mr. lisbon during his last days in the house.
"sometimes, in the middle of the night, i'd forget everything that had
happened. i'd go down the hall, and for a moment, we'd just moved in
again. the girls were asleep in their tent in the living room."

left alone on the other end of those days, mary lay in her sleeping bag,

on the hard floor of the bedroom she no longer had to share. the
sleeping bag was the old kind, with pilled flannel lining picturing dead
ducks above red-capped hunters and a trout lea
 
 ___________________________
 
ping with a hook in its
mouth. she zipped the bag up so that only the top of her face showed,
even though it was summer. she slept late, spoke little, and took six
showers a day.

from our viewpoint, the lisbons' sadness was beyond comprehension, and
when we saw them in those last days, we were amazed at anything they
did. how could they actually sit down to eat? or come out to the back
porch in the evening to enjoy the breeze? how could mrs. lisbon, as she
did one afternoon, stagger outside, and across her uncut lawn, to pick
one of mrs. bates's snapdragons? she held it to her nose, seemed
dissatisfied with its fragrance, tucked it into her pocket like a used
kleenex, and walked to the street, squinting at the neighborhood without
her glasses. mr. lisbon, too, every afternoon, parked the station wagon
in the shade, opening the hood to pore over the engine. "you have to
keep busy," mr. eugene said, commenting on his behavior. "what else ca
 
 ___________________________
 
 tuxedos and gas masks, evening gowns and astronaut helmets,
and mr. o'connor himself wore a deep-sea diver's suit, opening the glass
face mask to guzzle his bourbon and water. at the party's zenith, when
alice was rolled out in an artificial lung rented for the night from
henry ford hospital (mr. o'connor was on the board), the rotting smell
pervading the air seemed only a crowning touch of festive atmosphere.

like everyone else, we went to alice o'connor's coming-out party to
forget about the lisbon girls. the black bartenders in red vests served
us alcohol without asking for i. d., and in turn, around 3 a.m., we said
nothing when we saw them loading leftover cases of whiskey into the
trunk of a sagging cadillac. inside, we got to know girls who had never
considered taking their own lives. we fed them drinks, danced with them
until they became unsteady, and led them out to the screened-in veranda.
they lost their high heels on the way, kissed us in the humid darkness,
and then slipped away
 
 ___________________________
 
uests strolled outside beneath venetian
lanterns that led down to the lake. under moonlight, the algae scum
looked like shag carpeting, the entire lake a sunken living room.
someone fell in, was rescued, and laid on the pier. "i've had it," he
said, laughing. "goodbye, cruel world!" he tried to roll into the lake
again, but his friends stopped him. "you don't understand me," he said.
"i'm a teenager. i've got problems!"

"be quiet," a woman's voice scolded. "they'll hear 99 you.

the back of the lisbon house was visible through clumped trees, but no
lights showed, probably because the electricity had been turned off by
then. we went back inside, where people were having a good time. the
waiters were serving small silver bowls of green ice cream. a tear-gas
canister was set off on the dance floor, propelling a harmless mist. mr.
o'connor danced with alice. everyone toasted her future.

we stayed until daybreak. as we came out into the first alcoholic dawn
of our lives (a bleachy fade-in, overu
 
 ___________________________
 
e taste of girls. already we had been married and
divorced, in a sense, and tom faheem found a love letter left in his
pants pocket by the last person to rent the tux. the fish flies that had
hatched during the night were still quivering on trees and streetlights,
and made the sidewalk squishy under our feet, like walking through yams.
the day threatened to be muggy. we took off our jackets and shuffled
along, up the o'connors' street, around the corner, and down our own. in
the distance, at the lisbon house, the ems truck sat, flashing its
lights. they hadn't bothered to use the siren.

that was the morning the paramedics appeared for the last time, moving

much too slowly in our opinion, and the fat one made the crack about its
not being tv. by this time they'd been to the house so often they didn't
even knock, just walked right in, past the fence that was no longer
there, into the kitchen to see if the gas oven was on, then down to the
basement where they found the beam clean, and finally
 
 ___________________________
 
 upstairs where the
second bedroom they checked contained what they were looking for: the
last lisbon daughter, in a sleeping bag, and full of sleeping pills.

she had on so much makeup that the paramedics had the odd feeling she
had already been prepared for viewing by an undertaker, and this
impression lasted until they saw that her lipstick and eyeshadow were
smudged. she had clawed herself a little, at the end. she was dressed in
a black dress and veil, which reminded some people of jackie kennedy's
widow's weeds, and it was true: the final procession out the front door,
with the two parame
 
 ___________________________
 
dics like uniformed pallbearers, and the sound of
post-holiday firecrackers going off on the next block over, did call to
mind the solemnity of a national figure being laid to rest. neither mr.
nor mrs. lisbon appeared, so it was up to us to send her off, and, for
the last time, we came and stood at attention. vince fusilli held up his
lighter as though at a rock concert. it was the best we could do for an
eternal flame.

for a while we tried to accept the general explanations, which qualified
the lisbon girls' pain as merely historic, springing from the same
source as other teenage suicides, every death part of a trend. we tried
to go back to our old lives, to let the girls rest in peace, but a
haun
 
 ___________________________
 
ted quality persisted about the lisbon house, making us see,
whenever we looked, a flame shape arcing from the roof, or swinging in
an upstairs window. many of us continued to have dreams in which the
lisbon girls appeared to us more real than they had been in life, and we
awoke certain that their scent of the next world remained on our
pillows. almost daily we met to go over the evidence once again,
reciting portions of cecilia's journal (the description of lux testing a
chilly sea, one knee up, flamingo-like, was popular with us t
 
 ___________________________
 
 409 days of arbitration. the strike's
length had caused mortuaries to fill up months ago, and the many bodies
awaiting burial now came back from out of state, in refrigerated trucks,
or by airplane, depending on the wealth of the deceased. on the chrysler
freeway one truck got into an accident, flipping over, and the front
page of the newspaper ran a photo showing metal caskets spilling from
the truck like ingots. no one attended the final mass burial of the
lisbon girls other than mr. and mrs. lisbon; mr. calvin hormicutt, a
cemetery worker just back on the job; and father moody. because of
limited available space, the girls' graves did not lie side by side but
widely separated, so that the funeral party had to make the rounds,
going from grave to grave at the excruciatingly slow speed of cemetery
traffic. father moody claimed the constant getting into and out of the
limousine made him lose track of which girl lay at which grave. "i had
to keep the eulogies sort of general," he said. "there
 
 ___________________________
 
 was a lot of
confusion at the cemetery that day. you're talking a year's worth of
departed. the place was pretty well dug up." as for mr. and mrs. lisbon,
tragedy had beaten them into mindless submission. they followed the
priest from graveside to greiveside, saying little. mrs. lisbon, under
sedation, kept looking up into the sky, as though at birds. mr.
honnicutt told us, "i'd been working seventeen hours straight by that
point, wired on no doz. i'd buried over fifty people that shift alone.
still, when i saw that lady, it broke me up." we saw mr. and mrs. lisbon
when they returned from the cemetery. with dignity, they got out of the
limousine and walked toward their house, each one parting the front
shrubs to find access to the porch steps. they picked their way amid the
b
 
 ___________________________
 
roken pieces of slate. for the first time ever, we noticed a similarity
between mrs. lisbon's face and the faces of her daughters, but that may
have been due to the black veil some people recall her as wearing. we

ourselves don't remember a veil, and think that detail only an
elaboration of romantic memory. still, we do have the image of mrs.
lisbon turning toward the street and showing her face as never before,
to those of us kneeling at dining room windows or peering through gauzy
curtains, those of us sweating in pitzenberger's attic, the rest of us
looking over car hoods or from
 
 ___________________________
 
 troughs serving as first, second, and
third base, from behind barbecues or from the apex of a swing's arcshe
turned, she sent her blue gaze out in every direction, the same color
gaze the girls had had, icy and spectral and unknowable, and then she
turned back and followed her husband into the house.

because no furniture remained, we didn't think the lisbons would be
long. nevertheless, three hours went by and they did not reappear. with
a fungo bat, chase buell hit a wiffle ball into their yard, but came
back saying he didn't see a single living soul inside. later he tried to
hit another wiffle ball, but it got stuck in the trees. we didn't see
mr. and mrs. lisbon come out the rest of that day, or evening. it was in
the middle of the night that they finally left. nobody saw them go
except uncle tucker. years later, when we interviewed him, he was
 
 ___________________________
 

completely sober and recovered from his decades of abuse, and in
contrast to everyone else, including ourselves, who looked much the
worse for wear, uncle tucker looked much better. we asked him if he
remembered seeing the lisbons leave and he said he did.

"i was outside, having a smoke. it was about two in the morning. i heard
the door open across the street and then they came out. the mother
looked bombed. the husband sort of helped her in. and then they drove
away. fast. got the hell out."

when we awoke the next morning, the lisbon house was empty. it looked
even more run-down than ever and seemed to have collapsed from the
inside, like a lung. once the new young couple took possession of the
house, we had time, am
 
 ___________________________
 
ill bearing our finger-
and noseprints) and installed sliding plateglass windows with airtight
seals. a team of men in white overalls and caps sandblasted the house,
then over the next two weeks sprayed it with a thick white paste. the
foreman, whose tag said "mike," told us that "the new kenitex method"
would eliminate the need to repaint once and for all. "pretty soon
everybody's going to be kenitexing," he said as the men moved about with
spray guns, coating the house. when they finished, the lisbon house was
transformed into a giant wedding cake dripping frosting, but it took
less than a year, for chunks of kenitex to begin falling off like gobs
of bird shit. we thought it just revenge on the new young couple who had
set themselves so purposefully to removing signs of the lisbon girls we
still held dear- the slate roof, where lux had made love, covered with
sandpapery shingles; the back flower bed, whose soil therese had
analyzed for lead content, laid with red bricks so that the young wi
 
 ___________________________
 
se's old
room, a loom in mary and bonnie's. the bathtub where our naiads once
floated, lux poking cigarettes above the water like reeds to breathe
through, was ripped out to make room for a fiberglass jacuzzi. at
curbside, we examined the tub, fighting the urge to lie down in it. the
little kids who did jump in couldn't appreciate the significance. the
new young couple turned the house into a sleek empty space for
meditation and serenity, covering with japanese screens the shaggy
memories of the lisbon girls.

it wasn't only the lisbon house that changed but the street itself. the
parks department continued to cut down trees, removing a sick elm to
save the remaining twenty, then removing another to save the remaining
nineteen, and so on and so on until only the half-tree remained in front
of the lisbons' old house. nobody could bear to watch when they came for
it (tim winer compared the tree to the last speaker of manx), but they

buzz-sawed it down like the rest, saving trees farther away,
 
 ___________________________
 
 on other
streets. everyone stayed inside during the execution of the lisbons'
tree, but even in our dens we could feel how blinding the outside was
becoming, our entire neighborhood like an overexposed photograph. we got
to see how truly unimaginative our suburb was, everything laid out on a
grid whose bland uniformity the trees had hidden, and the old ruses of
differentiated architectural styles lost their power to make us feel
unique. the kriegers' tudor, the buells' french colonial, the bucks'
imitation frank lloyd wright-all just baking roofs.

not long after, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
egan to
look like any other fat boy with rings around his eyes, and one day he
slipped, or was pushed, in the showers at school, and we saw him lying
on the tiles, nursing his foot. the convictions of other family members
followed, and finally the baldinos moved, too, carting their renaissance
art and three pool tables away in three trucks. an obscure millionaire
bought the house. he made the fence a foot higher.

everyone we spoke to dated the demise of our neighborhood from the
suicides of the lisbon girls. though at first people blamed them,
gradually a sea change took place, so that the girls were seen not as
scapegoats but as seers. more and more, people forgot about the
individual reasons why the girls may have killed themselves, the stress
disorders and insufficient neurotransmitters, and instead put the deaths
down to the girls' foresight in predicting decadence. people saw their
clairvoyance in the wiped-out elms, the harsh sunlight, the continuing
decline of our auto industry. this 
 
 ___________________________
 
transformation in thinking went

largely unnoticed, however, because we rarely ran into one another
anymore. without trees, there were no leaves to rake, no piles of leaves
to bum. winter snows continued to disappoint. we had no lisbon girls to
spy on. now and then, of course, as we were slowly carted into the
melancholic remainder of our lives (a place the lisbon girls, wisely, it
began to seem, never cared to see), we would stop, mostly alone, to gaze
up at the whited sepulchre of the former lisbon house.

the lisbon girls made suicide familiar. later, when other acquaintances
chose to end their lives-sometimes even borrowing a book the day
before-we always pictured them as taking off cumbersome boots to enter
the highly associative mustiness of a family cottage on a dune
overlooking the sea. every one of them had read the signs of misery old
mrs. karafilis had written, in greek, in the clouds. on different paths,
with differentcolored eyes or jerkings of the head, they had deciphered
the
 
 ___________________________
 
 secret to cowardice or bravery, whichever it was. and the lisbon
girls were always there before them. they had killed themselves over our
dying forests, over manatees maimed by propellers as they surfaced to
drink from garden hoses; they had killed themselves at the sight of used
tires stacked higher than the pyramids; they had killed themselves over
the failure to find a love none of us could ever be. in the end, the
tortures tearing the lisbon girls pointed to a simple reasoned refusal
to accept the world as it was handed down to them, so full of flaws.

but this came later. immediately following the suicides, when our suburb
enjoyed its fleeting infamy, the subject of the lisbon girls became
almost taboo. "it was like picking over a corpse after a while," mr.
eugene said. "and the liberal media distortion didn't help either. save
the lisbon girls. save the snail darter. bullshit!" families moved away,
or splintered, everybody trying
 
 ___________________________
 
tive mansion was razed to put up a subdivision. the italian
marble lining the entrance hall-a rare rose shade found only in one
quarry in the world-was cut into blocks and sold piecemeal, as were the
gold-plated plumbing fixtures and ceiling frescoes. with the elms gone,
too, only the runt replacements remain. and us. we aren't even allowed
to barbecue any longer (city air-pollution ordinance), but if we were
allowed, we might still gather, who knows, a few of us at least, to
reminisce about the lisbon house and the girls whose hair, clotted on
brushes we still faithfully keep, has begun to lookmore and more like
artificial animal fur in a natural museum exhibit. all of it is
going-exhibits #1 through #97, arranged in five separate suitcases, each
bearing a photograph of the deceased like a coptic headstone, and kept
in our refurbished tree house in one of our last trees: (#i) ms.
d'angelo's polaroid of the house, scummed by a greenish patina that
looks like moss; (#18) mary's old cosmetics d
 
 ___________________________
 
for suicide, too." unlike mr. hedlie, he
didn't see the suicides as a response to our historical moment. "shit,"
he said, "what have kids got to be worried about now? if they want
trouble, they should,go live in bangladesh,"

"it was the combination of many factors," dr. hornicker said in his last
report, written for no medical reason but just because he couldn't get
the girls out of his head. "with most people," he said, "suicide is like
russian roulette. only one chamber has a bullet. with the lisbon girls,
the gun was loaded. a bullet for family abuse. a bullet for genetic
predisposition. a bullet for historical malaise. a bullet for inevitable
momentum. the other two bullets are impossible to name, but that doesn't
mean the chambers were empty." but this is all a chasing after the wind.
the essence of the suicides consisted not of sadness or mystery but
simple selfishness. the girls took into their own hands decisions better
left to god. they became too powerful to live among us, too
self