ind the goal, listlessly calling out the score, and when practice
finished, wandered the chalk-dusted field, collecting soccer balls in a
soiled canvas bag.

he drove to school alone, an hour earlier than his late-sleeping,
bused-in daughters. entering the main door, past the suit of armor (our
athletic teams were called the knights), he went straight into his

classroom where the nine planets of our solar system hung from
perforated ceiling panels (sixty-six holes in each square, according to
joe hill conley, who counted them during class). nearly invisible white
strings attached the planets to a track. each day they rotated and
revolved, the whole cosmos controlled by mr. lisbon, who consulted an
astronomy chart and turned a crank next to the pencil sharpener. beneath
the planets hung black-and-white triangles, orange helices, blue cones
with detachable noses. on his desk mr. lisbon displayed a soma cube,
solved for all time in a ribbon of scotch tape. beside the blackboard a
wire clamp held five 
 
 ___________________________
 
eath the tide of the recession, men found in garages with
cars running, or twisted in the shower, still wearing work clothes. only
murder-suicides made the papers, and then only on page 3 or 4, stories
of fathers shotgunning families before turning the guns on themselves,
descriptions of men setting fire to their own houses after securing the
doors. mr. larkin, publisher of the city's largest newspaper, lived only
a half mile from the lisbons, and there was no doubt he knew what had
transpired. joe hill conley, who fooled around with missy larkin every
so often (she'd had a yearlong crush on him despite his frequent shaving
cuts), testified to us that missy and her mother had discussed the
suicide within mr. larkins hearing, but that he showed no interest as he
lay on his chaise in the sun with a wet cloth over his eyes.
nevertheless, on october 15, over three months later, a letter to the
editor was published describing in the sketchiest manner possible the
particulars of cecilia's suicide, and call
 
 ___________________________
 
nce
trip fontaine to pick us. jerry burden offered three free joints. parkie
denton said they could take his father's cadillac. we all said
something. buzz romano, nicknamed "rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "i'm dying! i'm dying! you
got to pick me, tripster!"

in the end, parkie denton won because of the cadillac, kevin head
because he'd helped trip fontaine tune up his car, and joe hill conley
because he won all the school prizes, which trip thought would impress
mr. and mrs. lisbon. the next day trip presented the slate to mr.
lisbon, and by the end of the week mr. lisbon announced his and his
wife's decision. the girls could go under the following conditions: (1)
they would go in a group; (2) they would go to the dance and nowhere
else; (3) they would be home by eleven. mr. lisbon told trip it would be
impossible to get around these conditions. "i'm going to be one of the
chaperons
 
 ___________________________
 
st sight of
them at the door, but they told us the beginning of the date was like
any other. the girls had gone upstairs, pretending not to be ready, and
mr. lisbon took the boys into the living room.

"the girls'll be down in just a minute," he said, looking at his watch.
"jeez. i better get going myself." mrs. lisbon came to the archway. she
was holding her temple as though she had a headache, but her smile was
polite. "hello, boys."

"hello, mrs. lisbon" (in unison).

she had the rectitude, joe hill conley later said, of someone who had
just come from weeping in the next room. he had sensed (this said many
years later, of course, when joe hill conley claimed to tap at will the
energy of his chakras) an ancient pain arising from mrs. lisbon, the sum
of her people's griefs. "she came from a sad race," he said. "it wasn't
only cecilia. the sadness had started long before. before america. the
girls had it, too." he had never noticed her bifocals before. "they cut
her eyes in half"

"which one of you 
 
 ___________________________
 
. "i want a cig before we go
in."

"dad'll smell it on you," bonnie said from the back seat.

"nah, i've got mints." she shook them. "he'll smell it on our clothes."

"just tell him some kids were smoking in the bathroom. " parkie denton
lowered the front window while lux smoked. she took her time, exhaling
through her nose.

at one point she jutted out her chin at trip fontaine, rounded her lips,
and, with a chimpanzee profile, sent forth three perfect smoke rings.
"don't let it die a virgin," joe hill conley said. he leaned into the
front seat and poked one.

"that's gross," said therese. "yeah, conley," trip fontaine said. "grow
up."

on the way into the dance, the couples separated.

one of bonnie's high heels got stuck in the gravel and she leaned on joe
hill conley while she detached it. trip fontaine and lux moved on
together, already an item. kevin head walked in with therese, while
parkie denton gave mary his arm.

the light rain had stopped for a moment and the stars were out, in
patches. a
 
 ___________________________
 
s bonnie's shoe came loose, she looked up and called attention
to the sky. "it's always the big dipper," she said. "you look at those
charts and they have stars all over the place, but if you look up, all
you see is the big dipper."

"it's because of the lights," joe hill conley said. "from the city."

"duh," bonnie said.

the girls were smiling as they entered the gymnasium amid the glowing
pumpkins and scarecrows dressed in school colors. the dance committee
had decided on a harvest theme. straw was scattered over the basketball
court and cornucopias spewed tumorous gourds on the cider table. mr.
lisbon had already arrived, wearing an orange tie reserved for festive
occasions. he was talking with mr. tonover, the chemistry teacher. mr.
lisbon didn't acknowledge the g
 
 ___________________________
 
in her mind of what pattern
their feet should make over the floor, of how they should look together,
and she concentrated fiercely to realize it. "her face was calm, but
inside she was tense," parkie denton said. "her back muscles were like
piano strings." when a fast song came on, mary danced less well. "like
old people at weddings trying it out."

lux and trip didn't dance until later, and instead moved about the
gymnasium looking for a place to be alone. bonnie followed. "so i
followed her," joe hill conley said. "she pretended she was just walking
around, but she kept track of lux from the corner of her eye." they went
in one side of the dance mob and out the other. they hugged the far wall
of the gym, passing beneath the decorated basketball net, and ended up
by the bleachers. between songs, mr. durid . dean of students. opened

the voting for homecoming king and queen, and while everyone was looking
toward the glass ballot jar on the cider table, trip fontaine and lux
lisbon slipped underneath
 
 ___________________________
 
 the bleachers.

bonnie pursued them. "it was like she was afraid of being left alone,"
joe hill conley said. though she hadn't asked him to, he followed her.
underneath, in the stripes of light coming through the slats, he saw
trip fontaine holding a bottle up to lux's face so she could read the
label. "did anybody see you come in?" lux asked her sister. "no."

"what about you?"

"no," joe hill conley said.

then no one spoke. everyone's attention returned to the bottle trip
fontaine held in his hand. reflections from the disco ball glittered on
the bottle's surface, illuminating the inflamed fruit on the label.
"peach schnapps," trip fontaine explained years later, in the desert,
drying out from that and everything else. "babes love it."

he had purchased the liqueur with a fake 1. d. that afternoon, and had
carried it in the lining of his jacket all evening. now, as the other
three watched
 
 ___________________________
 
ectar or honey. "you have to taste it with a kiss," he said. he
held the bottle to lux's lips, saying, "don't swallow." then, taking
another swig, he brought his mouth to lux's in a peach-flavored kiss.
her throat gurgled with captive mirth. she laughed, a trickle of
schnapps dripped down her chin where she caught it with one ringed hand,
but then they grew solemn, faces pressed together, swallowing and
kissing. when they stopped, lux said, "that stuff's really good."

trip handed the bottle to joe hill conley. he held it to bonnie's mouth,
but she turned away. i don't want any," she said. "come on," trip said.
"just a taste."

"don't be a goody-goody," said lux.

only the strip of bonnie's eyes was visible, and in the silver light
they filled with tears. below, in the dark where her mouth was, joe hill
conley thrust the bottle. her moist eyes widened. her cheeks filled.
"don't swallow it," lux commanded. and then joe hill conley spilled the
contents of his own mouth into bonnie's. he said she kept 
 
 ___________________________
 
her teeth
together throughout the kiss, grinning like a skull. the peach schnapps
passed back and forth between his mouth and hers, but then he felt her
swallowing, relaxing. years later, joe hill conley boasted that he could
analyze a woman's emotional makeup by the taste of her mouth, and
insisted he'd stumbled on this insight that night under the bleachers
with bonnie. he could sense her whole being through the kiss, he said,
as though her soul escaped through her lips, as the renaissance
believed. he tasted first the grease of her chap stick, then the sad
brussels-sprout flavor of her last meal, and past that the dust of lost
afternoons and the salt of tear ducts. the peach schnapps faded a
 
 ___________________________
 
way as
he sampled the juices of her inner organs, all slightly acidic with woe.
sometimes her lips grew strangely cold, and, peeking, he saw she kissed
with her frightened eyes wide open. after that, the schnapps went back
and forth. we asked the boys if they had talked intimately with the
girls, or asked them about cecilia, but they said no. "i didn't want to
ruin a good thing," trip fontaine said. and joe hill conley: "there's a
time for talk and a time for silence." even though he tasted mysterious
depths in bonnie's mouth, he didn't search them out because he didn't
want her to stop kissing him.

we saw the girls come out from underneath the bleachers, dragging their
dresses and wiping their mouths. lux moved sassily to the music. it was
then trip fontaine finally got to dance with her, and years later he
told us the baggy dress had only increased his desire. "you could feel
how slim she was under all tho
 
 ___________________________
 
dance, while
therese and kevin head got some cool air in the doorway, therese asked,
"what made you guys ask us out?"

"what do you mean?"

"i mean, do you feel sorry for us?"

"no way."

"liar."

"i think you're pretty. that's why. "do we seem as crazy as everyone
thinks9"

"who thinks that?"

she didn't reply, only stuck her hand out the door to test for rain.
"cecilia was weird, but we're not." and then: "we just want to live. if
anyone would let us.

later, going to the car, bonnie stopped joe hill conley to look for the
stars again. everything was clouded over. as they gazed up at the dull
sky, she asked, "do you think there's a god?"

"yeah."

"me too."

by that time it was ten-thirty and the girls had only a half hour to get
back home. the dance was breaking up, and mr. lisbon's car emerged from
the faculty parking lot, heading home. kevin head and therese, joe hill
conley and bonnie, parkie denton and mary all converged at the cadillac,
but lux and trip didn't follow. bonnie ran back into th
 
 ___________________________
 
out their dates. they
moved in a pack, separating and coming back together. they searched over
near the theater, behind the science wing, and even in the courtyard
where the small statue of a girl stood, donated in memory of laura

white, her bronze skirt just beginning to oxidize. sears crossed her
welded wrists, symbolically, but the lisbon girls didn't notice, or say
anything when they returned to the car at 10:50 p.m. they got in to be
taken home.

the ride back happened mostly in silence. joe hill conley and bonnie sat
in back beside kevin head and therese. parkie denton drove, later
complaining that this afforded him no chance to make his move on mary.
mary, however, spent the ride fixing her hair in the sun-visor mirror.
therese said to her, "forget it. we're cooked."

"luxie is. not us."

"anyone have some mints or some gum?" bonnie asked. no one did, and she
turned to joe hill conley. she scrutinized him a moment, then, using her
fingers, combed his part over to the left side. "that looks b
 
 ___________________________
 
etter," she
said. nearly two decades later, the little hair he has left remains
parted by bonnie's invisible hand.

outside the lisbon house, joe hill conley kissed bonnie for the last
time and she let him. therese gave kevin head her cheek. through steamed
windows the boys looked up at the house. mr. lisbon had already returned
and a light was on in the master bedroom. "we'll walk you to the door,"
parkie denton said. "no, don't," said mary. "why not?"

"just don't." she got out without so much as a handshake. "we had a
really good time," therese said in back. bonnie whispered into joe hill
conley's ear, "will you call me?"

"absolutely.

the car d
 
 ___________________________
 
apparently lux held up
album after album, appealing for mrs. lisbon's mercy. the smell quickly
grew overpowering, and the plastic melted over the andirons, so that
mrs. lisbon told lux to stop. (she threw out the rest of the albums with
that week's trash.) still, will timber, who was getting a grape pop,
said he could smell burning plastic all the way to mr. z's, the party
store on kercheval.

for the next few weeks we hardly saw the girls at all. lux never spoke
to trip fontaine again, nor did joe hill conley call bonnie, as he had

promised. mrs. lisbon took the girls to their grandmother's house to get
advice from an old woman who had lived through everything. when we
called her in roswell, new mexico, where she had moved after living
forty-three years in the same single-story house, the old lady (mrs.
lema crawford) did not respond to questions about her involvement in the
punishment, either out of stubbornness or because of the feedback her
hearing aid picked up over the phone. she did refer, h
 
 ___________________________
 
it," he said. we wandered back to the lot,
then walked down to the street, putting our palms against the asphalt
still warm from the day's sun. the sodden smell of the lisbon house
reached us, then faded, so that we thought we'd imagined it. joe hill
conley began climbing trees, as usual, though the rest of us had
outgrown it. we watched him shinny up a young maple. he couldn't climb
far because the thin limbs wouldn't support his weight. still, chase
buell called up to him, "see anything?" and joe hill conley squinted,
then pulled the skin at the corners of his eyes taut, which he thought
worked better than squinting, but finally shook his head. it gave us an
idea, however, and we moved to the old tree house. gazing up through
foliage, we determined its condition. part of the roof had been blown
off in a storm years ago, and our crowning touch, the doorknob, was
missing, but the structure still looked habitable.

we climbed up to the tree house the way we always had, stepping in the
knothole, then o
 
 ___________________________
 
groping for an ashtray. finding none within reach, she
flicked her ash onto her blue jeans, rubbing it in with her hand. as she
moved, she rose out of the beanbag, and we saw that she was wearing a
halter top. tied behind her neck in a bow, the halter descended on two
thin straps over her pale shoulders and sculpted collarbones, swelling
finally into two yellow slings. the halter was slightly askew on the
right side, revealing a soft white plumpness as she stretched. "july,
two years ago," said joe hill conley, identifying the last time we'd
seen the halter. on a very hot day, lux had worn it outside for five
minutes before her mother had called her back in to change. now the
halter spoke of all the time in between, of everything that had
happened. most of all, it said that the girls were leaving, that from
now on they'd wear whatever they liked. "maybe we should knock," kevin
head whispered, but none of us did. lux settled back in the beanbag
chair. she ground out her cigarette on the floor. behind 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing for
you guys." she took another drag. "we've got a car," tom faheem
continued. "full tank. we'll take you wherever you want to go."

"it's just a cougar," said chase buell, "but it's got a pretty big
trunk."

"can i sit in front?" lux asked, screwing her mouth up to exhale to one
side, politely away from us.

"sure can."

"which one of you studs is going to sit up front next to me?"

she tilted her head toward the ceiling and blew a series of smoke rings.
we watched them rise, and this time joe hill conley didn't run forward
to stick his finger in them. for the first time, we looked around the

house. the smell, now that we were inside, was stronger than ever. it
was the smell of wet plaster, drains clogged with the endless tangle of
the girls' hair, mildewed cabinets, leaking pipes. paint cans were still
stationed under leaks, each full of a weak solution of other times. the
living room had a plundered look. the television sat at an angle, its
screen removed, mr. lisbon's toolbox open in front 