
the virgin suicides

on the morning the last lisbon daughter took her turn at suicide-it was

mary this time, and sleeping pills, like therese, the two paramedics
arrived at the house knowing exactly where the knife drawer was, and the
gas oven, and the beam in the basement from which it was possible to tie
a rope. they got out of the ems truck, as usual moving much too slowly
in our opinion, and the fat one said under his breath, "this ain't tv,
folks, this is how fast we go." he was carrying the heavy respirator and
cardiac unit past the bushes that had grown monstrous and over the
erupting lawn, tame and immaculate thirteen months earlier when the
tro
 
 ___________________________
 
uble began.

cecilia, the youngest, only thirteen, had gone first, slitting her
wrists like a stoic while taking a bath, and when they found her, afloat
in her pink pool, with the yellow eyes of someone possessed and her
small body giving off the odor of a mature woman, the paramedics had
been so frightened by her tranquillity that they had stood mesmerized.
but then mrs. lisbon lunged in, screaming, and the reality of the room
reasserted itself: blood on the bath mat; mr. lisbon's razor sunk in the
toilet bowl, marbling the water. the paramedics fetched cecilia out of
the warm water because it quickened the bleeding, and put a tourniquet
on her arm. her wet hair hung down her back and already her extremities
were blue. she didn't say a word, but when they parted her hands t
 
 ___________________________
 
masking tape. a comfortable suburban home. the upper-right second-story
window contains a blur that mrs. lisbon identified as mary lisbon. "she
used to tease her hair because she thought it was limp," she said years
later, recalling how her daughter had looked for her brief time on
earth. in the photograph mary is caught in the act of blow-drying her
hair. her head appears to be on fire but that is only a trick of the
light. it was june 13, eighty-three degrees out, under sunny skies.

when the paramedics were satisfied they had reduced the bleeding to a
trickle, they put cecilia on a stretcher and carried her out of the
house to the truck in the driveway. she looked like a tiny cleopatra on
an imperial litter. we saw the gangly paramedic with the wyatt earp
mustache come out first-the one we'd call "sheriff " when we got to know
him better through these domestic tragedies-and then the fat one
appeared, carrying the back end of the stretcher and stepping daintily
across the lawn, peering at his 
 
 ___________________________
 
uncut grass that butch, the brawny boy who mowed it
on saturdays, had missed. across the street, a truckful of men from the
parks department attended to some of our dying elms. the ems siren
shrieked, going away, and the botanist and his crew withdrew their
insecticide pumps to watch the truck. when it was gone, they began
spraying again. the stately elm tree, also visible in the foreground of
exhibit #i, has since succumbed to the fungus spread by dutch elm
beetles, and has been cut down.

the paramedics took cecilia to bon secours hospital on kercheval and
maumee. in the emergency room cecilia watched the attempt to save her

life with an eerie detachment. her yellow eyes didn't blink, nor did she
flinch when they stuck a needle in her arm. dr. armonson stitched up her
wrist wounds. within five minutes of the transfusion he declared her out
of danger. chucking her under her chin, he said, "what are you doing
here, honey? you're not even old enough to know how bad life gets."

and it was then 
 
 ___________________________
 
r, but no one
was home. he called out again and again, moving through the rooms. he
climbed the stairs to the second floor. down the hall, he heard water
running. he approached the bathroom door. he insisted that he had
knocked. and then paul baldino told how he had stepped into the bathroom
and found cecilia, naked, her wrists oozing blood, and how after
overcoming his shock he had run downstairs to call the police first
thing, because that was what his father had always taught him to do.

the paramedics found the laminated picture first, of course, and in the
crisis the fat one put it in his pocket. only at the hospital did he
think to give it to mr. and mrs. lisbon. cecilia was out of danger by
that point, and her parents were sitting in the waiting room, relieved
but confused. mr. lisbon thanked the paramedic for saving his daughter's
life. then he turned the picture over and saw the message printed on the
back: the virgin mary has been appearing in our city, bringing her
message of peace to
 
 ___________________________
 
 with golden hair
dripped sea-blue tears into the book's spine. grape-colored whales
spouted blood around a newspaper item (pasted in) listing arrivals to
the endangered species list. six hatchlings cried from shattered shells
near an entry made on easter. cecilia had filled the pages with a
profusion of colors and curlicues, candyland ladders and striped
shamrocks, but the entry about dominic read, "palazzolo jumped off the
roof today over that rich bitch, porter. how stupid can you be?"

the paramedics came back again, the same two, though it took us a while
to recognize them. out of fear and politeness we had moved across the
street to sit on the hood of mr. larson's oldsmobile. as we made our
exit, none of us had said a word except for valentine stamarowski, who
called across the lawn, "thank you for the party, mr. and mrs. lisbon."
mr. lisbon was still sunk in bushes up to his waist, his back jerking as
though he were trying to pull cecilia up and off, or as though he were
sobbing. on the 
 
 ___________________________
 
porch mrs. lisbon made the other girls face the house.
the sprinkler system, timed to go on at 8:15 p.m., spurted into life
just as the ems truck appeared at the end of the block, moving at about
fifteen miles an hour, without flashing lights or siren, as though the
paramedics already knew it was hopeless. the skinny one with the
mustache climbed out first, then the fat one. they got the stretcher
immediately, instead of first checking on the victim, a lapse which we
later learned from medical professionals violated procedure. we didn't
know who had called the paramedics or how they knew they were no more
than undertakers that day. tom faheem said therese had gone inside and
called, but the rest of us remember the remaining four lisbon girls
immobile on the porch unt
 
 ___________________________
 
il after the ems truck arrived. no one else on
our street was aware of what had happened. the identical lawns down the
block  were  empty.  someone  was  barbecuing  somewhere.  behind  joe
larson's
house we could hear a birdie being batted back and forth, endlessly, by
the two greatest badminton players in the world.

the paramedics moved mr. lisbon aside so they could examine cecilia.
they found no pulse, but went ahead trying to save her anyway. the fat
one hacksawed the fence stake while the skinny one got ready to catch
her, because it was more dangerous to pull cecilia off the barbed end
than to leave it piercing her. when the stake snapped loose, the skinny
one fell back under cecilia's released weight. then he regained his
footing, pivoted, and slipped her onto the stretcher. as they carried
her away, the sawedoff s
 
 ___________________________
 
 effort we could remember in our neighborhood,
all those lawyers, doctors, and mortgage bankers locked arm in arm in
the trench, with our mothers bringing out orange kool-aid, and for a
moment our century was noble again. even the sparrows on the telephone
lines seemed to be watching. no cars passed. the industrial fog of our

city made the men resemble figures hammered into pewter, but by late
afternoon they still couldn't uproot the fence. mr. hutch got the idea
of hacksawing the bars as the paramedics had, and for a while the men
took turns sawing, but their paper-pushing arms gave out quickly.
finally they tied the fence to the back of uncle tucker's
four-wheel-drive bronco. nobody cared that uncle tucker didn't have a
license (driving examiners always smelled booze on him, even if he quit
drinking three days before the test they still smelled it evaporating
from his pores). our fathers just cried, "hit it!" and uncle tucker
floored his accelerator, but the fence didn't budge. by midafterno
 
 ___________________________
 
yet again. by this,
its third rescue, the truck had become as familiar as mrs. buell's
hysterical voice calling chase home. when it rocketed up the drive,
familiarity blinded us to its new snow tires, the rings of salt
encrusting each fender. we saw sheriff-the skinny one with the
mustache-leaping from the driver's seat even before he did so, and after
that every sight had deja vu written all over it. we were prepared for
the nightgowned girls to streak past the windows, for lights to chart
the paramedics' progress toward the victim, first the foyer light going
on, then the hall light, the upstairs hall, the bedroom on the right,
until the pinballmachine house was lit up in sectors. it was after 9
p.m. and no moon showed. birds had built nests in the old streetlamps,
so that light filtered down through straw and moulted feathers. the
birds had flown south long ago, but in dappled beams sheriff and the fat
one appeared once again in the doorway of the lisbon house. they were
carrying the stretche
 
 ___________________________
 
, the smell of bandages and oxygen
masks, the taste of pre-calamity dinners on resuscitated mouths, the
flavor of life ebbing away on the other side of their own puffing faces,
the blood, brain spatter, blue cheeks, bulging eyes, and-on our own
block-the succession of limp bodies wearing charm bracelets and gold
lockets in the shape of a heart.

when they came the fourth time they were losing faith. the truck made
the same jolting stop, tires skidded, doors flew open, but as they
jumped out the paramedics had lost their valiant appearance and were
clearly two men afraid of being humiliated. "it's those two guys again,"
said zachary larson, five. the fat one gave the skinny one a look and
they started for the house, this time taking no equipment. mrs. lisbon,
face white, answered the door. she pointed inside, saying nothing. when
the paramedics entered, she remained in the doorway, tightening the belt
of her robe. she straightened the welcome mat with her toe, twice. soon
the paramedics ran out a
 
 ___________________________
 
e of gas that made things shimmer like

a mirage-the station wagon sat vibrating, and because sheriff had
brushed another switch accidentally, the windshield wipers were going
like mad. the fat one went inside to get bonnie down from the rafters,
balancing one chair on another like a circus performer. they found mary
in the kitchen, not dead but nearly so, her head and torso thrust into
the oven as though she were scrubbing it. a second ems truck came (the
only time this happened) bringing two paramedics more efficient than
sheriff and the fat one. they rushed inside and saved mary's life. for a
while. for what it was worth.

technically, mary survived for more than a month, though everyone felt
otherwise. after that night, people spoke of the lisbon girls in the
past tense, and if they mentioned mary at all it was with the veiled
wish that she would hurry up and get it over with. in fact, the final
suicides surprised few people. even we who had tried to save the girls
came to consider ourselve
 
 ___________________________
 
ants pocket by the last person to rent the tux. the fish flies that had
hatched during the night were still quivering on trees and streetlights,
and made the sidewalk squishy under our feet, like walking through yams.
the day threatened to be muggy. we took off our jackets and shuffled
along, up the o'connors' street, around the corner, and down our own. in
the distance, at the lisbon house, the ems truck sat, flashing its
lights. they hadn't bothered to use the siren.

that was the morning the paramedics appeared for the last time, moving

much too slowly in our opinion, and the fat one made the crack about its
not being tv. by this time they'd been to the house so often they didn't
even knock, just walked right in, past the fence that was no longer
there, into the kitchen to see if the gas oven was on, then down to the
basement where they found the beam clean, and finally upstairs where the
second bedroom they checked contained what they were looking for: the
last lisbon daughter, in a sleepi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng bag, and full of sleeping pills.

she had on so much makeup that the paramedics had the odd feeling she
had already been prepared for viewing by an undertaker, and this
impression lasted until they saw that her lipstick and eyeshadow were
smudged. she had clawed herself a little, at the end. she was dressed in
a black dress and veil, which reminded some people of jackie kennedy's
widow's weeds, and it was true: the final procession out the front door,
with the two paramedics like uniformed pallbearers, and the sound of
post-holiday firecrackers going off on the next block over, did call to
mind the solemnity of a national figure being laid to rest. neither mr.
nor mrs. lisbon appeared, so it was up to us to send her off, and, for
the last time, we came and stood at attention. vince fusilli held up his
lighter as though at a rock concert. it was the best we could do for an
eternal flame.

for a while we tried to accept the general explanations, which qualified
the l