red into his
eyes. then, laughing her hyena's laugh, she pushed past him, saying,
"you done hogging the bathroom? i need something."

she walked to the cupboard, then stopped and folded her hands behind
her. "it's private. do you mind?" she said, and peter sissen sped down
the stairs, blushing, and after thanking mr. and mrs. lisbon, hurried
off to tell us that lux lisbon was bleeding between the legs that very
instant, while the fish flies made the sky filthy and the streetlamps
came on.

when paul baldino heard peter sissen's story, he swore that he would get
inside the lisbons' house and see things even more unthinkable than
sissen had. "i'm going to watch those girls taking their showers," he
vowed. already, at the age of fourteen, paul baldino had the gangster
gut and hit-man face of his father, sammy "the shark" baldino, and of
all the men who entered and exited the big baldino house with the two
lions carved in stone beside the front steps. he moved with the sluggish
swagger of urban predat
 
 ___________________________
 
hat glided up the circular drive ringed with laurel trees
imported from italy, but because of the dark circles under his eyes and
his mammoth hips and his brightly polished black shoes which he wore
even playing baseball. he had also snuck into other forbidden places in
the past, and though the information he brought back wasn't always
reliable, we were still impressed with the bravery of his
reconnaissance. in sixth grade, when the girls went into the auditorium

to see a special film, it was paul baldino who had infiltrated the room,
hiding in the old voting booth, to tell us what it was about. out on the
playground we kicked gravel and waited for him, and when he finally
appeared, chewing a toothpick and playing with the gold ring on his
finger, we were breathless with anticipation. "i saw the movie," he
said. "i know what it's about. listen to this. when girls get to be
about twelve or so"-he leaned toward us-"their tits bleed."

despite the fact that we now knew better, paul i i baldino stil
 
 ___________________________
 
rolled by two identical white german shepherds,
a group of workmen had appeared one morning. they hung tarpaulins over
ladders to obscure what they did, and after three days, when they
whisked the tarps away, there, in the middle of the lawn, stood an
artificial tree trunk. it was made of cement, painted to look like bark,
complete with fake knothole and two lopped limbs pointing at the sky
with the fervor of amputee stubs. in the middle of the tree, a
chainsawed wedge contained a metal grill.

paul baldino said it was a barbecue, and we believed him. but, as time
passed, we noticed that no one ever used it. the papers said the
barbecue had cost $50,000 to install, but not one hamburger or hot dog
was ever grilled upon it. soon the rumor began to circulate that the
tree trunk was an escape tunnel, that it led to a hideaway along the
river where sammy the shark kept a speedboat, and that the workers had
hung tarps to conceal the digging. then, a few months after the rumors
began, paul baldino began
 
 ___________________________
 
 he had chosen tunnels at random, and how as he passed under
people's houses he could smell what they were cooking. finally he had
come up through the sewer grate in the lisbons' basement. after brushing
himself off, he went looking for someone on the first floor, but no one
was home. he called out again and again, moving through the rooms. he
climbed the stairs to the second floor. down the hall, he heard water
running. he approached the bathroom door. he insisted that he had
knocked. and then paul baldino told how he had stepped into the bathroom
and found cecilia, naked, her wrists oozing blood, and how after
overcoming his shock he had run downstairs to call the police first
thing, because that was what his father had always taught him to do.

the paramedics found the laminated picture first, of course, and in the
crisis the fat one put it in his pocket. only at the hospital did he
think to give it to mr. and mrs. lisbon. cecilia was out of danger by
that point, and her parents were sitting in
 
 ___________________________
 
article in that day's edition concerned the cemetery workers'
strike (bodies piling up, no agreement in sight), but that was on page 4
beneath the little league scores.

after they returned home, mr. and mrs. lisbon shut themselves and the
girls in the house, and didn't say a word about what had happened. only
when pressed by mrs. scheer did mrs. lisbon refer to "cecilia's
accident," acting as though she had cut herself in a fall. with
precision and objectivity, however, already bored by blood, paul baldino
described to us what he had seen, and left no doubt that cecilia had
done violence to herself.

mrs. buck found it odd that the razor ended up in the toilet. "if you
were cutting your wrists in the tub," she said, "wouldn't you just lay
the razor on the side?" this led to the question as to whether cecilia
had cut her wrists while already in the bath water, or while standing on
the bath mat, which was bloodstained. paul baldino had no doubts: "she
did it on the john," he said. "then she got int
 
 ___________________________
 
otorcycle gang outside hudson's. one biker asked
her to go for a ride, and after looking in the direction of her house

more than ten miles away, she accepted. she hugged his waist. he kicked
the machine into life. later, lux was seen walking home alone, carrying
her shoes.

in the kriegers' basement, we lay on a strip of leftover carpeting and
dreamed of all the ways we could soothe the lisbon girls. some of us
wanted to lie down in the grass with them, or play the guitar and sing
them songs. paul baldino wanted to take them to metro beach so they
could all get a tan. chase buell, more and more under the sway of his
father the christian scientist, said only that the girls needed "help
not of this world." but when we asked him what he meant, he shrugged and
said, "nothing." nevertheless, when the girls walked by, we often found
him crouching by a tree, moving his lips with his eyes closed.

not everyone thought about the girls, however. even before cecilia's
funeral, some people could talk of not
 
 ___________________________
 
 the street and not next
door. because mr. lisbon only had daughters, boys and men had gone over
in the past to help him drag away lightning-struck limbs, and as chase
approached, holding his broom over his head like a regimental banner,
nobody said a word. then, however, mr. krieger told kyle to go over and
sweep some, and mr. hutch sent ralph, and soon we were all over at the
lisbon house, brushing walls and scraping away bug husks. they had even
more than we did, the walls an inch thick, and paul baldino asked us the
riddle, "what smells like fish, is fun to eat, but isn't fish?"

once we got to the lisbons' windows, our new inexplicable feelings for
the girls came to the fore. as we slapped off bugs, we saw mary lisbon
in the kitchen, holding a box of kraft macaroni & cheese. she appeared
to be contemplating whether or not to open it. she read the directions,
turned the box over to look at the vivid picture of the noodles, and
then put the box back on the counter. anthony turkis, pressing his 
 
 ___________________________
 
and began
filling it with clothes and books. mary appeared and threw in her
climate mirror. they argued about the trunk's contents and, in a huff,
bonnie took out some of the clothes she'd put in, giving mary more room
for her things: a cassette player, a hair dryer, and the object we
didn't understand until later, a cast-iron doorstop. we had no idea what
the girls were doing, but we noticed the change in their demeanor at
once. they moved with a new purpose. their aimlessness was gone. it was
paul baldino who interpreted their actions: "looks like they're going to
make a break for it," he said, putting down the binoculars. he made this
conclusion with the confident air of someone who had seen relatives
disappear to sicily or south america, and we believed him at once. "five

dollars gets you ten those girls are out of here by the end of the
week."

he was right, though not in the way he intended. the last note, written
on the back of a laminated picture of the virgin, arrived in chase
buell's m
 
 ___________________________
 
 nearly touch the tree-house floor. our new
height astounded us, and later many said this contributed to our
resolve, because for the first time ever we felt like men.

we advanced on the house from different directions, hiding in shadows of
surviving trees. as we approached, some of us crawling army-style,
others still on two feet, the smell grew stronger. the air thickened.
soon we reached an invisible barrier: no one had gotten this close to
the lisbon house in months. we hesitated, and then paul baldino held his
hand in the air, giving the signal, and we went in closer. we grazed the
brick walls, crouching under windows and getting spider-web in our hair.
we came into the damp mess of the back yard. kevin head tripped on the
bird feeder, which was still lying there. it cracked in half, the
remaining seed spilling out onto the ground. we froze, but no lights
came on.

after a minute, we inched in closer. mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, but we paid no attention. we were too busy gazing up i
 
 ___________________________
 
ldino, who never made
it to his escape tunnel, and after a long trial, he went to prison. he
reportedly continued to run his crime operation from behind bars, and
the baldino family remained in the house, though the men in bulletproof
limousines ceased to pay their respects on sunday afternoons. the laurel
trees, untrimmed, burst into odd inharmonious shapes, and the terror the
family inspired decreased day by day until someone had the courage to
deface the stone lions beside their front steps. paul baldino began to
look like any other fat boy with rings around his eyes, and one day he
slipped, or was pushed, in the showers at school, and we saw him lying
on the tiles, nursing his foot. the convictions of other family members
followed, and finally the baldinos moved, too, carting their renaissance
art and three pool tables away in three trucks. an obscure millionaire
bought the house. he made the fence a foot higher.

everyone we spoke to dated the demise of our neighborhood from the
suicides of t