ush and cup of ivory liquid.

cecilia's diary begins a year and a half before her suicide. many people

felt the illuminated pages constituted a hieroglyphics of unreadable
despair, though the pictures looked cheerful for the most part. the
diary had a lock, but david barker, who got it from skip ortega, the
plumber's assistant, told us that skip had found the diary next to the
toilet in the master bathroom, its lock already jimmied as though mr.
and mrs. lisbon had been reading it themselves. tim winer, the brain,
insisted on examining the diary. we carried it to the study his parents
had built for him, with its green desk lamps, contour globe, and
gilt-edged encyclopedias. "emotional instability," he said, analyzing
the handwriting. "look at the dots on these i's. all over the place."
and then, leaning forward, showing the blue veins beneath his weakling's
skin, he added: "basically, what we have here is a dreamer. somebody out
of touch with reality. when she jumped, she probably thought she
 
 ___________________________
 
ehavior
strange during the party. "she was always quiet with company," mrs.
lisbon said. and perhaps because of their lack of socializing, mr. and
mrs. lisbon remembered the party as a successful event. mrs. lisbon, in
fact, was surprised when cecilia asked to be excused. "i thought she was
having a nice time." even at this point, the other girls didn't act as
though they knew what was about to happen. tom faheem recalls mary
telling him about a jumper she wanted to buy at penney's. therese and
tim winer discussed their anxiety over getting into an ivy league
college.

from clues later discovered, it appears cecilia's ascent to her bedroom

was not as quick as we remember it. she took time, for instance, between
leaving us and reaching the upstairs to drink juice from a can of pears
(she left the can on the counter, punctured with only one hole in
disregard of mrs. lisbon's prescribed method). either before or after
drinking the juice, she went to the back door. "i thought they were
sending he
 
 ___________________________
 
h a tiny green feather, while their schnauzer sniffed at
the end, of his leash. grapes burst above their heads. mrs. hessen's
humped back dove and surfaced amid her swelling rosebushes as she
sprayed.

at some point, we looked up into the sky to see that all the fish flies
had died. the air was no longer brown but blue. using kitchen brooms, we
swept bugs from poles and windows and electrical lines. we stuffed them
into bags, thousands upon thousands of insect bodies with wings of raw
silk, and tim winer, the brain, pointed out how the fish flies' tails
resembled those of lobsters. "they're smaller," he said, "but possess
the same basic design. lobsters are classified in the phylum arthropoda,
same as insects. they're bugs. and bugs are only lobsters that have
learned to fly."

no one ever understood what got into us that year, or why we hated so
intensely the crust of dead bugs over our lives. suddenly, however, we
couldn't bear the fish flies carpeting our swimming pools, filling our
mailboxe
 
 ___________________________
 
m all and can't find the
culprit. i hate blinking lights." perhaps he did, but they stayed
blinking, whenever he remembered to plug them in at night.

all winter, the girls remained elusive. sometimes one or another would
come outside, hugging herself in the cold, her breath clouding her face,
and after a minute would go back in. at night, therese continued to use
her ham radio, tapping out messages that took her away from her house,
to warm southern states and even to the tip of south america. tim winer
searched the radio waves for therese's frequency and a few times claimed
to have found it. once she was talking to a man in georgia about his dog

(arthritic hips, operate or not?), and another time she spoke, in that
genderless, nationless medium, to a human being whose few responses
winer managed to record. it was all dots and dashes, but we made him put
it into english. the exchange went something like this: "you too?"

"my brother. "how old?"

"twenty-one. handsome. beautiful on violin."


 
 ___________________________
 
e brought
it to us the picture was burned in three spots. still, we could see
right away that it was identical to the picture of the virgin cecilia
had clutched in the bathtub, and when we wiped off the soot, the

telephone number emerged on the back.

hutch wasn't the only one to find a picture. mrs. hessen found one
pierced among her rose bushes. joey thompson heard an unfamiliar
whirring in his bicycle tires one day, and looked down to see a virgin
picture taped between the spokes. finally, tim winer found a picture
stuck into the grout of his study windows, facing in at him. the picture
had been there for some time, he told us, because moisture had penion
etrated the laminated surface, giving the virgin's face a touch of
gangrene. otherwise she looked the same: dressed in a blue cloak with a
butterfly collar of gold lam6. on her head sat an imperial margarine
crown.

a rosary girded her waist, and, as usual, the holy mother had that
beatific expression of someone on lithium. no one ever sa
 
 ___________________________
 
w the girls
placing the cards, nor did anyone know why they would do so. even now,
though, so many years later, we can easily recall the tingling that
overtook us whenever someone came bearing a new find. the pictures were
invested with significance we couldn't quite fathom, and their sorry
staterips, mildew-made them seem ancient. "the feeling," tim winer wrote
in his own journal, "was akin to unearthing the anklet of some poor
smothered girl in pompeii. she had just put it on, and was dandling it
before the window, admiring how the jewels glittered, when they suddenly
lit up red with the volcano's eruption." (winer read mary renault a
lot.) in addition to the virgin cards, we became convinced the girls
were signaling to us in other ways. sometime in may, lux's chinese
lantern began to blink an indecipherable morse code. every night, as the
stre
 
 ___________________________
 
ing night table; therese's apollo 11 lamp casting light on lux's
life-size poster of billy jack in flatbrimmed black hat and navajo belt.
the viewing lasted only thirty seconds before lux and therese's room
went dark. then bonnie and mary's room lit up twice, as though in
response. no figures passed before the windows, nor did the length of
the illuminations correspond to any habitual activity. the girls' lights
went off and on for no reason we could see.

each night we tried to break the code. tim winer began recording the
girls' flashes with his mechanical pencil, but somehow we knew they
wouldn't correspond to any established mode of communication. some
nights, the lights hypnotized us so that we came back to consciousness
having forgotten where we were or what we were doing, only the bordello
glow of lux's chinese lantern lighting the back room of our brains.

it took us a while to notice the lights in cecilia's old room.
distracted by flashes at either end of the house, we failed to see th
 
 ___________________________
 
 the house into a sleek empty space for
meditation and serenity, covering with japanese screens the shaggy
memories of the lisbon girls.

it wasn't only the lisbon house that changed but the street itself. the
parks department continued to cut down trees, removing a sick elm to
save the remaining twenty, then removing another to save the remaining
nineteen, and so on and so on until only the half-tree remained in front
of the lisbons' old house. nobody could bear to watch when they came for
it (tim winer compared the tree to the last speaker of manx), but they

buzz-sawed it down like the rest, saving trees farther away, on other
streets. everyone stayed inside during the execution of the lisbons'
tree, but even in our dens we could feel how blinding the outside was
becoming, our entire neighborhood like an overexposed photograph. we got
to see how truly unimaginative our suburb was, everything laid out on a
grid whose bland uniformity the trees had hidden, and the old ruses of
differentiated 