ugh he was our only decent closer. i
forgot what i'd gone over there to do." mr. peters said, "the guy was
only half there. he kept turning the tint control up, so that the
infield was practically blue. then he'd sit back down. then he'd get up
again. one of the girls came in-can you tell them apart?-and brought us
a couple beers. took a swig from his before handing it over."

neither of the men mentioned the suicide. "i wanted to, i really did,"
said mr. hutch. "i just never got around to it." father moody showed
more perseverance. mr. lisbon welcomed the cleric as he had the other
men, ushering him to a seat before the baseball game. a few minutes
later, as though on cue, mary served beers. but father moody wasn't
deflected. during the second inning, he said, "how about we get the mrs.
down here?

have a little chat."

mr. lisbon hunched toward the screen. "afraid she's not seeing anybody
right now. under the weather."

"she'll see her priest," father moody said.

he stood up to go. mr. lisbon 
 
 ___________________________
 
held up two fingers. his eyes were
watering. "father," he said. "doubleplay ball, father."

paolo conelli, an altar boy, overheard father moody tell fred simpson,
the choirmaster, how he had left "that strange man, god forgive me for
saying so, but he made him that way," and climbed the front stairs.
already the house showed signs of uncleanliness, though they were
nothing compared to what was to come later. dust balls lined the steps.
a halfeaten sandwich sat atop the landing where someone had felt too sad
to finish it. because mrs. lisbon had stopped doing laundry or even
buying detergent, the girls had taken to washing clothes by ha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd in the
bathtub, and when father moody passed their bathroom, he saw shirts and
pants and underthings draped over the shower curtain. "it sounded quite
pleasant, actually," he said. "like rain." steam rose from the floor,
along with the smell of jasmine soap (weeks later, we asked the
cosmetics lady at jacobsen's for some jasmine soap we could smell).
father moody stood outside the bathroom, too bashful to enter that moist
cave that existed as a common room between the girls' two shared
bedrooms. inside, if he hadn't been a priest and had looked, he would
have seen the throne-like toilet where the lisbon girls defecated
publicly, the bathtub they used as a couch, filling it with pillows so
that two sisters could luxuriate while so another curled her hair. he
would have seen the radiator stacked with glasses and coke cans, the
clamshell soap dish employed
 
 ___________________________
 
 lux spent hours in the john smoking cigarettes, exhaling either
out the window or into a wet towel she then hung outside. but father
moody saw none of this. he only passed through the tropical air current
and that was all. behind him he felt the colder drafts of the house,
circulating dust motes and that particular family smell every house had,
you knew it when you came in-chase buell's house smelled like skin, joe
larson's like mayonnaise, the lisbons' like stale popcorn, we thought,

though father moody, going there after the deaths had begun, said, "it
was a mix between a funeral parlor and broom closet. all those flowers.
all that dust." he wanted to step back into the current of jasmine, but
as he stood, listening to rain beading bathroom tiles and washing away
the girls' footprints, he heard voices. he made a quick circuit of the
hallway, calling out for mrs. lisbon, but she didn't respond. returning
to the top of the stairs, he had started down when he saw the lisbon
girls through a partl
 
 ___________________________
 
y open doorway. "at that point, those girls had no
intention of repeating cecilia's mistake. i know everyone thinks it was
a plan, or that we handled it poorly, but they were just as shocked as i
was." father moody rapped softly on the door and asked for permission to
enter. "they were sitting on the floor together, and i could tell they'd
been crying. i think they were having some kind of slumber party. they
had pillows all over.

i hate to mention it, and i remember scolding myself for even thinking
it at the time, but it was unmistakable: they hadn't bathed."

we asked father moody whether he had discussed cecilia's death or the
girls' grief, but he said he hadn't. "i brought it up a few times, but
the
 
 ___________________________
 
he motown and rock and roll,
a beacon of light in a world of darkness, and totally shitty. choirs
sing in blond voices, scales ascend toward harmonic crescendos, like

marshmallow foaming into the ears. we'd always wondered who listened to
such music, picturing lonely widows in rest homes, or pastors' families
passing plates of ham. never once did we imagine those pious voices
drifting up through floorboards to churchify niches where the lisbon
girls knelt to pumice calluses on their big toes. father moody heard the
music the few times he visited for coffee on sunday afternoons. "it
wasn't my cup of tea," he said to us later. "i go in for the more august
stuff. handel's messiah. mozart's requiem. this was basically, if i may
say so, what you might expect to hear in a protestant household."

as the music played, mrs. lisbon stood in the doorway, unmoving.

mr. lisbon herded lux inside.

lux came up the steps and crossed the porch, but her mother did not let
her enter. mrs. lisbon said something un
 
 ___________________________
 
zzed them, trying to find inconsistencies in their stories, we never
succeeded. they said it was always too dark inside the house to see, the
only thing alive lux's hand, urgent and bored at once, tugging them
forward by their belt buckles. the floor was an obstacle course. dan
tyco, with his tackle's neck, stepped in something soft at the top of
the landing and picked it up. only after lux led him out the window and
up to the roof could he see by moonlight what he held: the half-eaten
sandwich father moody had encountered five months earlier. other kids
found congealed bowls of spaghetti, empty tin cans, as though mrs.
lisbon had stopped cooking for the girls and they lived by foraging.

according to the boys' descriptions, lux had lost weight, though we
couldn't tell through the binoculars. all sixteen mentioned her jutting
ribs, the insubstantiality of her thighs, and one, who went up to the
roof with lux during a warm winter rain, told us how the basins of her
collarbones collected water. a fe
 
 ___________________________
 
he first
time ever we sympathized with the president because we saw how wildly
our sphere of influence was misrepresented by those in no position to
know what was going on. even our parents seemed to agree more and more
with the television version of things, listening to the reporters'
inanities as though they could tell us the truth about our own lives.

after the suicide free-for-all, mr. and mrs. lisbon gave up the attempt
to lead a normal life. mrs. lisbon stopped attending church, and when
father moody went to the house to console her, no one answered the door.
"i kept ringing the bell," he told us. "no dice." during mary's entire
stay in the hospital, mrs. lisbon appeared only once. herb pitzenberger
saw her come out onto the back porch with a stack of manuscript pages.
putting them into a pile, she lit them. we never learned what they were.

about this time, ms. carmina d'angelo received a call from mr. lisbon,
asking her to put the house back on the market (he'd taken it off
shortly after 
 
 ___________________________
 
 up months ago, and the many bodies
awaiting burial now came back from out of state, in refrigerated trucks,
or by airplane, depending on the wealth of the deceased. on the chrysler
freeway one truck got into an accident, flipping over, and the front
page of the newspaper ran a photo showing metal caskets spilling from
the truck like ingots. no one attended the final mass burial of the
lisbon girls other than mr. and mrs. lisbon; mr. calvin hormicutt, a
cemetery worker just back on the job; and father moody. because of
limited available space, the girls' graves did not lie side by side but
widely separated, so that the funeral party had to make the rounds,
going from grave to grave at the excruciatingly slow speed of cemetery
traffic. father moody claimed the constant getting into and out of the
limousine made him lose track of which girl lay at which grave. "i had
to keep the eulogies sort of general," he said. "there was a lot of
confusion at the cemetery that day. you're talking a year's worth 