sbon house shortly before cecilia's
suicide attempt. it was taken by a real estate agent, ms. carmina
d'angelo, whom mr. lisbon had hired to sell the house his large family
had long outgrown. as the snapshot shows, the slate roof had not yet
begun to shed its shingles, the porch was still visible above the
bushes, and the windows were not yet held together with strips of
masking tape. a comfortable suburban home. the upper-right second-story
window contains a blur that mrs. lisbon identified as mary lisbon. "she
used to tease her hair because she thought it was limp," she said years
later, recalling how her daughter had looked for her brief time on
earth. in the photograph mary is caught in the act of blow-drying her
hair. her head appears to be on fire but that is only a trick of the
light. it was june 13, eighty-three degrees out, under sunny skies.

when the paramedics were satisfied they had reduced the bleeding to a
trickle, they put cecilia on a stretcher and carried her out of the
house to
 
 ___________________________
 
and mary were both in the downstairs one,
giggling and whispering, he had to use the girls', upstairs. he came
back to us with stories of bedrooms filled with crumpled panties, of
stuffed animals hugged to death by the passion of the girls, of a
crucifix draped with a brassiere, of gauzy chambers of canopied beds,
and of the effluvia of so many young girls becoming women together in
the same cramped space. in the bathroom, running the faucet to cloak the
sounds of his search, peter sissen found mary lisbon's secret cache of
cosmetics tied up in a sock under the sink: tubes of red lipstick and
the second skin of blush and base, and the depilatory wax that informed
us she had a mustache we had never seen. in fact, we didn't know whose
makeup peter sissen had found until we saw mary lisbon two weeks later
on the pier with a crimson mouth that matched the shade of his
descriptions.

he inventoried deodorants and perfumes and scouring pads for rubbing
away dead skin, and we were surprised to learn tha
 
 ___________________________
 
e demonstration for nothing. the front door was

always left open, because one of the girls was always running in or out.

once, outside jeff maldrum's house, playing catch, we saw a group of
girls dancing to rock and roll in his living room. they were very
serious about learning the right ways to move, and we were amazed to
learn that girls danced together for fun, while jeff maldrum only rapped
the glass and made kissing noises until they pulled down the shade.
before they disappeared we saw mary lisbon in the back near the
bookcase, wearing bell-bottomed blue jeans with a heart embroidered on
the seat.

there were other miraculous changes. butch, who cut the lisbon grass,
was now allowed inside for a glass of water, no longer having to drink
from the outside faucet. sweaty, shirtless, and tattooed, he walked
right into the kitchen where the lisbon girls lived and breathed, but we
never asked him what he saw because we were scared of his muscles and
his poverty.

we assumed mr. and mrs. lisbon
 
 ___________________________
 
istinct beings, their
personalities beginning to transform their faces and reroute their
expressions. we saw at once that bonnie, who introduced herself now as
bonaventure, had the sallow complexion and sharp nose of a nun. her eyes
watered and she was a foot taller than any of her sisters, mostly
because of the length of her neck which would one day hang from the end
of a rope. therese lisbon had a heavier face, the cheeks and eyes of a

cow, and she came forward to greet us on two left feet. mary lisbon's
hair was darker; she had a widow's peak and fuzz above her upper lip
that suggested her mother had found her depilatory wax. lux lisbon was
the only one who accorded with our image of the lisbon girls. she
radiated health and mischief. her dress fit tightly, and when she came
for-ward to shake our hands, she secretly moved one finger to tickle our
palms, giving off at the same time a strange gruff laugh. cecilia was
wearing, as usual, the wedding dress with the shorn hem. the dress was
vintag
 
 ___________________________
 
gimental banner,
nobody said a word. then, however, mr. krieger told kyle to go over and
sweep some, and mr. hutch sent ralph, and soon we were all over at the
lisbon house, brushing walls and scraping away bug husks. they had even
more than we did, the walls an inch thick, and paul baldino asked us the
riddle, "what smells like fish, is fun to eat, but isn't fish?"

once we got to the lisbons' windows, our new inexplicable feelings for
the girls came to the fore. as we slapped off bugs, we saw mary lisbon
in the kitchen, holding a box of kraft macaroni & cheese. she appeared
to be contemplating whether or not to open it. she read the directions,
turned the box over to look at the vivid picture of the noodles, and
then put the box back on the counter. anthony turkis, pressing his face
to the window, said, "she should eat something." she picked up the box
again. hopefully, we watched. but then she turned and disappeared.

outside it grew dark. lights came on down the block, but not in the
lisbon h
 
 ___________________________
 
gether with rubber
bands. our tongues searched out pockets of scar tissue left by jutting
back braces, and even fifteen years later the fissures still seemed
sweet with blood. but dr. becker was saying, "i remember mary because
she came in without her parents. no kid had ever done that before. when
i asked her what she wanted, she put two fingers in her mouth and pulled
up her front lip. then she said, "how mucht she was worried her parents
wouldn't be able to pay."

dr. becker declined to give mary lisbon an estimate. "bring your mother
in and we'll talk about it," he said. in fact, the process would have
been extensive, as mary, like her sisters, appeared to have two extra
canine teeth. disappointed, she lay back in the dentist's chair, her
feet raised, while a silver tube chirred water into a sucking cup. "i
had to leave her sitting in the chair," dr. becker said. "i had five
other kids waiting. later my nurse told me she heard the girl crying."

the girls didn't appear as a group until convoc
 
 ___________________________
 
 cube,
solved for all time in a ribbon of scotch tape. beside the blackboard a
wire clamp held five sticks of chalk so that he could draw sheet music
for his male singing group. he had been a teacher so long he had a sink
in his room.

the girls, on the other hand, entered through the side door, past the
bed of dormant daffodils tended each spring by the headmaster's slim,
industrious wife. scattering to separate lockers, they reunited in the
cafeteria during juice break. julie freeman had been mary lisbon's best
friend, but after the suicide they stopped talking. "she was a neat kid,
but i just couldn't deal with it. she sort of freaked me out. also i was
starting to go out with todd by then." the sisters walked with poise
down the halls, carrying books over their chests and staring at a fixed
point in space we couldn't see. they were like aeneas, who (as we
translated him into existence amid the cloud of dr. timmerman's b. 0.)
had gone down to the underworld, seen the dead, and returned, weepin