
THE VIRGIN SUICIDES

On the morning the last Lisbon daughter took her turn at suicide-it was

Mary this time, and sleeping pills, like Therese, the two paramedics
arrived at the house knowing exactly where the knife drawer was, and the
gas oven, and the beam in the basement from which it was possible to tie
a rope. They got out of the EMS truck, as usual moving much too slowly
in our opinion, and the fat one said under his breath, "This ain't TV,
folks, this is how fast we go." He was carrying the heavy respirator and
cardiac unit past the bushes that had grown monstrous and over the
erupting lawn, tame and immaculate thirteen months earlier when the
trouble began.

Cecilia, the youngest, only thirteen, had gone first, slitting her
wrists like a Stoic while taking a bath, and when they found her, afloat
in her pink pool, with the yellow eyes of someone possessed and her
small body giving off the odor of a mature woman, the paramedics had
been so frightened by her tranquillity that they had stood mesmerized.
But then Mrs. Lisbon lunged in, screaming, and the reality of the room
reasserted itself: blood on the bath mat; Mr. Lisbon's razor sunk in the
toilet bowl, marbling the water. The paramedics fetched Cecilia out of
the warm water because it quickened the bleeding, and put a tourniquet
on her arm. Her wet hair hung down her back and already her extremities
were blue. She didn't say a word, but when they parted her hands they
found the laminated picture of the Virgin Mary she held against her
budding chest.

That was in June, fish-fly season, when each year our town is covered by
the flotsam of those ephemeral insects. Rising in clouds from the algae
in the polluted lake, they blacken windows, coat cars and streetlamps,
plaster the municipal docks and festoon the rigging of sailboats, always

in the same brown ubiquity of flying scum. Mrs. Scheer, who lives down
the street, told us she saw Cecilia the day before she attempted
suicide. She was standing by the curb, in the antique wedding dress with
the shorn hem she always wore, looking at a Thunderbird encased in fish
flies. "You better get a broom, honey," Mrs. Scheer advised. But Cecilia
fixed her with her spiritualist's gaze. "They're dead," she said. "They
only live twenty-four hours. They hatch, they reproduce, and then they
croak. They don't even get to eat." And with that she stuck her hand
into the foamy layer of bugs and cleared her initials: C. L. We've tried
to arrange the photographs chronologically, though the passage of so
many years has made it difficult. A few are fuzzy but revealing
nonetheless. Exhibit #1 shows the Lisbon house shortly before Cecilia's
suicide attempt. It was taken by a real estate agent, Ms. Carmina
D'Angelo, whom Mr. Lisbon had hired to sell the house his large family
had long outgrown. As the snapshot shows, the slate roof had not yet
begun to shed its shingles, the porch was still visible above the
bushes, and the windows were not yet held together with strips of
masking tape. A comfortable suburban home. The upper-right second-story
window contains a blur that Mrs. Lisbon identified as Mary Lisbon. "She
used to tease her hair because she thought it was limp," she said years
later, recalling how her daughter had looked for her brief time on
earth. In the photograph Mary is caught in the act of blow-drying her
hair. Her head appears to be on fire but that is only a trick of the
light. It was June 13, eighty-three degrees out, under sunny skies.

When the paramedics were satisfied they had reduced the bleeding to a
trickle, they put Cecilia on a stretcher and carried her out of the
house to the truck in the driveway. She looked like a tiny Cleopatra on
an imperial litter. We saw the gangly paramedic with the Wyatt Earp
mustache come out first-the one we'd call "Sheriff " when we got to know
him better through these domestic tragedies-and then the fat one
appeared, carrying the back end of the stretcher and stepping daintily
across the lawn, peering at his police-issue shoes as though looking out
for dog shit, though later, when we were better acquainted with the

machinery, we knew he was checking the blood pressure gauge. Sweating
and fumbling, they moved toward the shuddering, blinking truck. The fat
one tripped on a lone croquet wicket. In revenge he kicked it; the
wicket sprang loose, plucking up a spray of dirt, and fell with a ping
on the driveway. Meanwhile, Mrs. Lisbon burst onto the porch, trailing
Cecilia's flannel nightgown, and let out a long wail that stopped time.
Under the molting trees and above the blazing, overexposed grass those
four figures paused in tableau: the two slaves offering the victim to
the altar (lifting the stretcher into the truck), the priestess
brandishing the torch (waving the flannel nightgown), and the drugged
virgin rising up on her elbows, with an otherworldly smile on her pale
lips.

Mrs. Lisbon rode in the back of the EMS truck, but Mr. Lisbon followed
in the station wagon, observing the speed limit. Two of the Lisbon
daughters were away from home, Therese in Pittsburgh at a science
convention, and Bonnie at music camp, trying to learn the flute after
giving up the piano (her hands were too small), the violin (her chin
hurt), the guitar (her fingertips bled), and the trumpet (her upper lip
swelled). Mary and Lux, hearing the siren, had run home from their voice
lesson across the street with Mr. Jessup. Barging into that crowded
bathroom, they registered the same shock as their parents at the sight
of Cecilia with her spattered forearms and pagan nudity. Outside, they
hugged on a patch of uncut grass that Butch, the brawny boy who mowed it
on Saturdays, had missed. Across the street, a truckful of men from the
Parks Department attended to some of our dying elms. The EMS siren
shrieked, going away, and the botanist and his crew withdrew their
insecticide pumps to watch the truck. When it was gone, they began
spraying again. The stately elm tree, also visible in the foreground of
Exhibit #I, has since succumbed to the fungus spread by Dutch elm
beetles, and has been cut down.

The paramedics took Cecilia to Bon Secours Hospital on Kercheval and
Maumee. In the emergency room Cecilia watched the attempt to save her

life with an eerie detachment. Her yellow eyes didn't blink, nor did she
flinch when they stuck a needle in her arm. Dr. Armonson stitched up her
wrist wounds. Within five minutes of the transfusion he declared her out
of danger. Chucking her under her chin, he said, "What are you doing
here, honey? You're not even old enough to know how bad life gets."

And it was then Cecilia gave orally what was to be her only form of
suicide note, and a useless one at that, because she was going to live:
"Obviously, Doctor," she said, "you've never been a thirteen-year-old
girl." The Lisbon girls were thirteen (Cecilia), and fourteen (Lux), and
fifteen (Bonnie), and sixteen (Mary), and seventeen (Therese). They were
short, roundbuttocked in denim, with roundish cheeks that recalled that
same dorsal softness. Whenever we got a glimpse, their faces looked
indecently revealed, as though we were used to seeing women in veils. No
one could understand how Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon had produced such beautiful
children. Mr. Lisbon taught high-school math. He was thin, boyish,
stunned by his own gray hair. He had a high voice, and when Joe Larson
told us how Mr. Lisbon had cried when Lux was later rushed to the
hospital during her own suicide scare, we could easily imagine the sound
of his girlish weeping.

Whenever we saw Mrs. Lisbon we looked in vain for some sign of the
beauty that must have once been hers. But the plump arms, the brutally
cut steel-wool hair, and the librarian's glasses foiled us every time.
We saw her only rarely, in the morning, fully dressed though the sun
hadn't come up, stepping out to snatch up the dewy milk cartons, or on
Sundays when the family drove in their paneled station wagon to St.
Paul's Catholic Church on the Lake. On those mornings Mrs. Lisbon
assumed a queenly iciness. Clutching her good purse, she checked each
daughter for signs of makeup before allowing her to get in the car, and
it was not unusual for her to send Lux back inside to put on a less
revealing top. None of us went to church, so we had a lot of time to
watch them, the two parents leached of color, like photographic
negatives, and then the five glittering daughters in their homemade

dresses, all lace and ruffle, bursting with their fructifying flesh.

Only one boy had ever been allowed in the house. Peter Sissen had helped
Mr. Lisbon install a working model of the solar system in his classroom
at school, and in return Mr. Lisbon had invited him for dinner. He told
us the girls had kicked him continually under the table, from every
direction, so that he couldn't tell who was doing it. They gazed at him
with their blue febrile eyes and smiled, showing their crowded teeth,
the only feature of the Lisbon girls we could ever find fault with.
Bonnie was the only one who didn't give Peter Sissen a secret look or
kick. She only said grace and ate her food silently, lost in the piety
of a fifteen-yearold. After the meal Peter Sissen asked to go to the
bathroom, and because Therese and Mary were both in the downstairs one,
giggling and whispering, he had to use the girls', upstairs. He came
back to us with stories of bedrooms filled with crumpled panties, of
stuffed animals hugged to death by the passion of the girls, of a
crucifix draped with a brassiere, of gauzy chambers of canopied beds,
and of the effluvia of so many young girls becoming women together in
the same cramped space. In the bathroom, running the faucet to cloak the
sounds of his search, Peter Sissen found Mary Lisbon's secret cache of
cosmetics tied up in a sock under the sink: tubes of red lipstick and
the second skin of blush and base, and the depilatory wax that informed
us she had a mustache we had never seen. In fact, we didn't know whose
makeup Peter Sissen had found until we saw Mary Lisbon two weeks later
on the pier with a crimson mouth that matched the shade of his
descriptions.

He inventoried deodorants and perfumes and scouring pads for rubbing
away dead skin, and we were surprised to learn that there were no
douches anywhere because we had thought girls douched every night like
brushing their teeth. But our disappointment was forgotten in the next
second when Sissen told us of a discovery that went beyond our wildest
imaginings. In the trash can was one Tampax, spotted, still fresh from
the insides of one of the Lisbon girls. Sissen said that he wanted to

bring it to us, that it wasn't gross but a beautiful thing, you had to
see it, like a modern painting or something, and then he told us he had
counted twelve boxes of Tampax in the cupboard. It was only then that
Lux knocked on the door, asking if he had died in there, and he sprang
to open it. Her hair, held up by a barrette at dinner, fell over her
shoulders now. She didn't move into the bathroom but stared into his
eyes. Then, laughing her hyena's laugh, she pushed past him, saying,
"You done hogging the bathroom? I need something."

She walked to the cupboard, then stopped and folded her hands behind
her. "It's private. Do you mind?" she said, and Peter Sissen sped down
the stairs, blushing, and after thanking Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon, hurried
off to tell us that Lux Lisbon was bleeding between the legs that very
instant, while the fish flies made the sky filthy and the streetlamps
came on.

When Paul Baldino heard Peter Sissen's story, he swore that he would get
inside the Lisbons' house and see things even more unthinkable than
Sissen had. "I'm going to watch those girls taking their showers," he
vowed. Already, at the age of fourteen, Paul Baldino had the gangster
gut and hit-man face of his father, Sammy "the Shark" Baldino, and of
all the men who entered and exited the big Baldino house with the two
lions carved in stone beside the front steps. He moved with the sluggish
swagger of urban predators who smelled of cologne and had manicured
nails. We were frightened of him, and of his imposing doughy cousins,
Rico Manollo and Vince Fusilli, and not only because his house appeared
in the paper every so often, or because of the bulletproof black
limousines that glided up the circular drive ringed with laurel trees
imported from Italy, but because of the dark circles under his eyes and
his mammoth hips and his brightly polished black shoes which he wore
even playing baseball. He had also snuck into other forbidden places in
the past, and though the information he brought back wasn't always
reliable, we were still impressed with the bravery of his
reconnaissance. In sixth grade, when the girls went into the auditorium

to see a special film, it was Paul Baldino who had infiltrated the room,
hiding in the old voting booth, to tell us what it was about. Out on the
playground we kicked gravel and waited for him, and when he finally
appeared, chewing a toothpick and playing with the gold ring on his
finger, we were breathless with anticipation. "I saw the movie," he
said. "I know what it's about. Listen to this. When girls get to be
about twelve or so"-he leaned toward us-"their tits bleed."

Despite the fact that we now knew better, Paul I I Baldino still
commanded our fear and respect. His rhino's hips had gotten even larger
and the circles under his eyes had deepened to a cigar-ash-and-mud color
that made him look acquainted with death. This was about the time the
rumors began about the escape tunnel. A few years earlier, behind the
spiked Baldino fence patrolled by two identical white German shepherds,
a group of workmen had appeared one morning. They hung tarpaulins over
ladders to obscure what they did, and after three days, when they
whisked the tarps away, there, in the middle of the lawn, stood an
artificial tree trunk. It was made of cement, painted to look like bark,
complete with fake knothole and two lopped limbs pointing at the sky
with the fervor of amputee stubs. In the middle of the tree, a
chainsawed wedge contained a metal grill.

Paul Baldino said it was a barbecue, and we believed him. But, as time
passed, we noticed that no one ever used it. The papers said the
barbecue had cost $50,000 to install, but not one hamburger or hot dog
was ever grilled upon it. Soon the rumor began to circulate that the
tree trunk was an escape tunnel, that it led to a hideaway along the
river where Sammy the Shark kept a speedboat, and that the workers had
hung tarps to conceal the digging. Then, a few months after the rumors
began, Paul Baldino began emerging in people's basements, through the
storm sewers. He came up in Chase Buell's house, covered with a gray
dust that smelled like friendly shit; he squeezed up into Danny Zinn's
cellar, this time with a flashlight, baseball bat, and a bag containing
two dead rats; and finally he ended up on the other side of Tom Faheem's

boiler, which he clanged three times.

He always explained to us that he had been exploring the storm sewer
underneath his own house and had gotten lost, but we began to suspect he
was playing in his father's escape tunnel. When he boasted that he would
see the Lisbon girls taking their showers, we all believed he was going
to enter the Lisbon house the same way he had entered the others. We
never learned exactly what happened, though the police interrogated Paul
Baldino for over an hour. He told them only what he told us. He said he
had crawled into the sewer duct underneath his own basement and had
started walking, a few feet at a time. He described the surprising size
of the pipes, the coffee cups and cigarette butts left by workmen, and
the charcoal drawings of naked women that resembled cave paintings. He
told how he had chosen tunnels at random, and how as he passed under
people's houses he could smell what they were cooking. Finally he had
come up through the sewer grate in the Lisbons' basement. After brushing
himself off, he went looking for someone on the first floor, but no one
was home. He called out again and again, moving through the rooms. He
climbed the stairs to the second floor. Down the hall, he heard water
running. He approached the bathroom door. He insisted that he had
knocked. And then Paul Baldino told how he had stepped into the bathroom
and found Cecilia, naked, her wrists oozing blood, and how after
overcoming his shock he had run downstairs to call the police first
thing, because that was what his father had always taught him to do.

The paramedics found the laminated picture first, of course, and in the
crisis the fat one put it in his pocket. Only at the hospital did he
think to give it to Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon. Cecilia was out of danger by
that point, and her parents were sitting in the waiting room, relieved
but confused. Mr. Lisbon thanked the paramedic for saving his daughter's
life. Then he turned the picture over and saw the message printed on the
back: The Virgin Mary has been appearing in our city, bringing her
message of peace to a crumbling world. As in Lourdes and Fatima, Our
Lady has granted her presence to people just like you. For information

call 555- MARY Mr. Lisbon read the words three times. Then he said in a
defeated voice, "We baptized her, we confirmed her, and now she believes
this crap."

It was his only blasphemy during the entire ordeal. Mrs. Lisbon reacted
by crumpling the picture in her fist (it survived; we have a photocopy
here).

Our local newspaper neglected to run an article on the suicide attempt,
because the editor, Mr. Baubee, felt such depressing information
wouldn't fit between the front-page article on the Junior League Flower
Show and the back-page photographs of grinning brides. The only
newsworthy article in that day's edition concerned the cemetery workers'
strike (bodies piling up, no agreement in sight), but that was on page 4
beneath the Little League scores.

After they returned home, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon shut themselves and the
girls in the house, and didn't say a word about what had happened. Only
when pressed by Mrs. Scheer did Mrs. Lisbon refer to "Cecilia's
accident," acting as though she had cut herself in a fall. With
precision and objectivity, however, already bored by blood, Paul Baldino
described to us what he had seen, and left no doubt that Cecilia had
done violence to herself.

Mrs. Buck found it odd that the razor ended up in the toilet. "If you
were cutting your wrists in the tub," she said, "wouldn't you just lay
the razor on the side?" This led to the question as to whether Cecilia
had cut her wrists while already in the bath water, or while standing on
the bath mat, which was bloodstained. Paul Baldino had no doubts: "She
did it on the john," he said. "Then she got into the tub. She sprayed
the place, man."

Cecilia was kept under observation for a week. The hospital records show
that the artery in her right wrist was completely severed, because she

was left-handed, but the gash in her left wrist didn't go as deep,
leaving the underside of the artery intact. She received twenty-four
stitches in each wrist.

She came back still wearing the wedding dress. Mrs. Patz, whose sister
was a nurse at Bon Secours, is said that Cecilia had refused to put on a
hospital gown, demanding that her wedding dress be brought to her, and
Dr. Hornicker, the staff psychiatrist, thought it best to humor her. She
returned home during a thunderstorm. We were in Joe Larson's house,
right across the street, when the first clap of thunder hit. Downstairs
Joe's mother shouted to close all the windows, and we ran to ours.
Outside a deep vacuum stilled the air. A gust of wind stirred a paper
bag, which lifted, rolling, into the lower branches of the trees. Then
the vacuum broke with the downpour, the sky grew black, and the Lisbons'
station wagon tried to sneak by in the darkness.

We called Joe's mother to come see. In a few seconds we heard her quick
feet on the carpeted stairs and she joined us by the window. It was
Tuesday and she smelled of furniture polish. Together we watched Mrs.
Lisbon push open her car door with one foot, then climb out, holding her
purse over her head to keep dry. Crouching and frowning, she opened the
rear door. Rain fell. Mrs. Lisbon's hair fell into her face. At last
Cecilia's small head came into view, hazy in the rain, swimming up with
odd thrusting movements because of the double slings that impeded her
arms. It took her a while to get up enough steam to roll to her feet.
When she finally tumbled out she lifted both slings like canvas wings
and Mrs. Lisbon took hold of her left elbow and led her into the house.
By that time the rain had found total release and we couldn't see across
the street.

In the following days we saw Cecilia a lot. She would sit on her front
steps, picking red berries off the bushes and eating them, or staining
her palms with the juice. She always wore the wedding dress and her bare
feet were dirty. In the afternoons, when sun lit the front yard, she

would watch ants swarming in sidewalk cracks or lie on her back in
fertilized grass staring up at clouds. One of her sisters always
accompanied her. Therese brought science books onto the front steps,
studying photographs of deep space and looking up whenever Cecilia
strayed to the edge of the yard. Lux spread out beach towels and lay
suntanning while Cecilia scratched Arabic designs on her own leg with a
stick. At other times Cecilia would accost her guard, hugging her neck
and whispering in her ear.

Everyone had a theory as to why she had tried to kill herself. Mrs.
Buell said the parents were to blame. "That girl didn't want to die,"
she told us. "She just wanted out of that house."

Mrs. Scheer added, "She wanted out of that decorating scheme."

On the day Cecilia returned from the hospital, those two women brought
over a Bundt cake in sympathy, but Mrs. Lisbon refused to acknowledge
any calamity. We found Mrs. Buell much aged and hugely fat, still
sleeping in a separate bedroom from her husband, the Christian
Scientist. Propped up in bed, she still wore pearled cat's-eye
sunglasses during the daytime, and still rattled ice cubes in the tall
glass she claimed contained only water; but there was a new odor of
afternoon indolence to her, a soap-opera smell. "As soon as Lily and I
took over that Bundt cake, that woman told the girls to go upstairs. We
said, "It's still warm, let's all have a piece,' but she took the cake
and put it in the refrigerator. Right in front of us." Mrs. Scheer
remembered it differently. "I hate to say it, but Joan's been potted for
years. The truth is, Mrs. Lisbon thanked us quite graciously. Nothing
seemed wrong at all. I started to wonder if maybe it was true that the
girl had only fallen and cut herself. Mrs. Lisbon invited us out to the
sun room and we each had a piece of cake. Joan disappeared at one point.
Maybe she went back home to have another belt. It wouldn't surprise me."

We found Mr. Buell just down the hall from his wife, in a bedroom with a

sporting theme. On the shelf stood a photograph of his first wife, whom
he had loved ever since divorcing her, and when he rose from his desk to
greet us, he was still stooped from the shoulder injury faith had never
quite healed. "It was like anything else in this sad society," he told
us.

"They didn't have a relationship with God." When we reminded him about
the laminated picture of the Virgin Mary, he said, "Jesus is the one she
should have had a picture of." Through the wrinkles and unruly white
eyebrows we could discern the handsome face of the man who had taught us
to pass a football so many years ago. Mr. Buell had been a pilot in the
Second  World  War.  Shot  down  over  Burma,  he  led  his  men  on  a
hundred-mile
hike through the jungle to safety. He never accepted any kind of
medicine after that, not even aspirin. One winter he broke his shoulder
skiing, and could only be convinced to get is an X ray, nothing more.
From that time on he winced when we tried to tackle him, and raked
leaves one-handed, and no longer flipped daredevil pancakes on Sunday
mornings. Otherwise he persevered, and always gently corrected us when
we took the Lord's name in vain. In his bedroom, the shoulder had fused
into a graceful humpback. "It's sad to think about those girls," he
said. "What a waste of life."

The most popular theory at the time held Dominic Palazzolo to blame.
Dominic was the immigrant kid staying with relatives until his family
got settled in New Mexico. He was the first boy in our neighborhood to
wear sunglasses, and within a week of arriving, he had fallen in love.
The object of his desire wasn't Cecilia but Diana Porter, a girl with
chestnut hair and a horsey though pretty face who lived in an
ivy-covered house on the lake. Unfortunately, she didn't notice Dominic
peering through the fence as she played fierce tennis on the clay court,
nor as she lay, sweating nectar, on the poolside recliner. On our
corner, in our group, Dominic Palazzolo didn't join in conversations
about baseball or busing, because he could speak only a few words of

English, but every now and then he would tilt his head back so that his
sunglasses reflected sky, and would say, "I love her." Every time he
said it he seemed delivered of a profundity that amazed him, as though
he had coughed up a pearl. At the beginning of June, when Diana Porter
left on vacation to Switzerland, Dominic was stricken. "Fuck the Holy
Mother," he said, despondent. "Fuck God." And to show his desperation
and the validity of his love, he climbed onto the roof of his relatives'
house and jumped off.

We watched him. We watched Cecilia Lisbon watching from her front yard.
Dominic Palazzolo, with his tight pants, his Dingo boots, his pompadour,
went into the house, we saw him passing the plate-glass picture windows
downstairs; and then he appeared at an upstairs window, with a silk
handkerchief around his neck. Climbing onto the ledge, he swung himself
up to the flat roof. Aloft, he looked frail, diseased, and
temperamental, as we expected a European to look. He toed the roof's
edge like a high diver, and whispered, "I love her," to himself as he
dropped past the windows and into the yard's calculated shrubbery.

He didn't hurt himself. He stood up after the fall, having proved his
love, and down the block, some maintained, Cecilia Lisbon developed her
own. Amy Schraff, who knew Cecilia in school, said that Dominic had been
all she could talk about for the final week before commencement. Instead
of studying for exams, she spent study halls looking up ITALY in the
encyclopedia. She started saying "Ciao," and began slipping into St.
Paul's Catholic Church on the Lake to sprinkle her forehead with holy
water. In the cafeteria, even on hot days when the place was thick with
the fumes of institutional food, Cecilia always chose the spaghetti and
meatballs, as though by eating the same food as Dominic Palazzolo she
could be closer to him. At the height of her crush she purchased the
crucifix Peter Sissen had seen decorated with the brassiere.

The supporters of this theory always pointed to one central fact: the
week before Cecilia's suicide attempt, Dominic Palazzolo's family had

called him to New Mexico. He went telling God to fuck Himself all over
again because New Mexico was even farther from Switzerland, where, right
that minute, Diana Porter strolled under summer trees, moving
unstoppably away from the world he was going to inherit as the owner of
a carpet cleaning service. Cecilia had unleashed her blood in the bath,
Amy Schraff said, because the ancient Romans had done that when life
became unbearable, and she thought when Dominic heard about it, on the
highway, amid the cactus, he would realize that it was she who loved
him.

The psychiatrist's report takes up most of the hospital record. After
talking with Cecilia, Dr. Hornicker made the diagnosis that her suicide
was an act of aggression inspired by the repression of adolescent
libidinal urges. To each of three wildly different ink blots, she had
responded, "A banana." She also saw "prison bars,"

"a swamp,"

"an Afro," and "the earth after an atomic bomb." When asked why she had
tried to kill herself, she said only, "It was a mistake," and clammed up
when Dr. Hornicker persisted. "Despite the severity of her wounds," he
wrote, "I do not think the patient truly meant to end her life. Her act
was a cry for help." He met with Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon and recommended
that they relax their rules. He thought Cecilia would benefit by "having
a social outlet, outside the codification of school, where she can
interact with males her own age. At thirteen, Cecilia should be allowed
to wear the sort of makeup popular among girls her age, in order to bond
with them. The aping of shared customs is an indispensable step in the
process of individuation."

From that time on, the Lisbon house began to change. Almost every day,
and even when she wasn't keeping an eye on Cecilia, Lux would suntan on
her towel, wearing the swimsuit that caused the knife sharpener to give
her a fifteen-minute demonstration for nothing. The front door was

always left open, because one of the girls was always running in or out.

Once, outside Jeff Maldrum's house, playing catch, we saw a group of
girls dancing to rock and roll in his living room. They were very
serious about learning the right ways to move, and we were amazed to
learn that girls danced together for fun, while Jeff Maldrum only rapped
the glass and made kissing noises until they pulled down the shade.
Before they disappeared we saw Mary Lisbon in the back near the
bookcase, wearing bell-bottomed blue jeans with a heart embroidered on
the seat.

There were other miraculous changes. Butch, who cut the Lisbon grass,
was now allowed inside for a glass of water, no longer having to drink
from the outside faucet. Sweaty, shirtless, and tattooed, he walked
right into the kitchen where the Lisbon girls lived and breathed, but we
never asked him what he saw because we were scared of his muscles and
his poverty.

We assumed Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon were in agreement about the new leniency,
but when we met with Mr. Lisbon years later, he told us his wife had
never agreed with the psychiatrist. "She just gave in for a while," he
said. Divorced by that time, he lived alone in an efficiency apartment,
the floor of which was covered with shavings from his wood carvings.
Whittled birds and frogs crowded the shelves. According to Mr. Lisbon,
he had long harbored doubts about his wife's strictness, knowing in his
heart that girls forbidden to dance would only attract husbands with bad
complexions and sunken chests. Also, the odor of all those cooped-up
girls had begun to annoy him. He felt at times as though he were living
in the bird house at the zoo. Everywhere he looked he found hairpins and
fuzzy combs, and because so many females roamed the house they forgot he
was a male and discussed their menstruation openly in front of him.
Cecilia had just gotten her period, on the same day of the month as the
other girls, who were all synchronized in their lunar rhythms. Those
five days of each month were the worst for Mr. Lisbon, who had to

dispense aspirin as though feeding the ducks and comfort crying jags
that arose because a dog was killed on TV. He said the girls also
displayed a dramatic womanliness during their "monthly time." They were
more languorous, descended the stairs in an actressy way, and kept
saying with a wink, "Cousin Herbie's come for a visit." On some nights
they sent him out to buy more Tampax, not just one box but four or five,
and the young store clerks with their thin mustaches would smirk. He
loved his daughters, they were precious to him, but he longed for the
presence of a few boys.

That was why, two weeks after Cecilia returned home, Mr. Lisbon
persuaded his wife to allow the girls to throw the first and only party
of their short lives. We all received invitations, made by hand from
construction paper, with balloons containing our names in Magic Marker.
Our amazement at being formally invited to a house we had only visited
in our bathroom fantasies was so great that we had to compare one
another's invitations before we believed it. It was thrilling to know
that the Lisbon girls knew our names, that their delicate vocal cords
had pronounced their syllables, and that they meant something in their
lives. They had had to labor over proper spellings and to check our
addresses in the phone book or by the metal numbers nailed to the trees.

As the night of the party approached, we watched the house for signs of
decorating or other preparations, but saw none. The yellow bricks
retained their look of a church-run orphanage and the silence of the
lawn was absolute. The curtains didn't rustle, nor did a van deliver
six-foot submarine sandwiches or drums of potato chips.

Then the night arrived. In blue blazers, with khaki trousers and clip-on
neckties, we walked along the sidewalk in front of the Lisbon house as
we had so many times before, but this time we turned up the walk, and
climbed the front steps between the pots of red geraniums, and rang the
doorbell. Peter Sissen acted as our leader, and even looked slightly
bored, saying again and again, "Wait'll you see this." The door opened.

Above us, the face of Mrs. Lisbon took form in the dimness. She told us
to come in, we bumped against each other getting through the doorway,
and as soon as we set foot on the hooked rug in the foyer we saw that
Peter Sissen's descriptions of the house had been all wrong. Instead of
a heady atmosphere of feminine chaos, we found the house to be a tidy,
dry-looking place that smelled faintly of stale popcorn. A piece of
needlepoint saying "Bless This Home" was framed over the arch, and to
the right, on a shelf above the radiator, five pairs of bronzed baby
shoes preserved for all time the unstimulating stage of the Lisbon
girls' infancy. The dining room was full of stark colonial furniture.
One wall had a painting of Pilgrims plucking a turkey. The living room
revealed orange carpeting and a brown vinyl sofa. Mr. Lisbon's La-Z-Boy
flanked a small table on which sat the partially completed model of a
sailing ship, without rigging and with the busty mermaid on the prow
painted over.

We were directed downstairs to the rec room. The steps were metal-tipped
and steep, and as we descended, the light at the bottom grew brighter
and brighter, as though we were approaching the molten core of the
earth. By the time we reached the last step it was blinding. Fluorescent
lights buzzed overhead; table lamps burned on every surface. The green
and red linoleum checkerboard flamed beneath our buckled shoes. On a
card table, the punch bowl erupted lava. The paneled walls gleamed, and
for the first few seconds the Lisbon girls were only a patch of glare
like a congregation of angels. Then, however, our eyes got used to the
light and informed us of something we had never realized: the Lisbon
girls were all different people. Instead of five replicas with the same
blond hair and puffy cheeks we saw that they were distinct beings, their
personalities beginning to transform their faces and reroute their
expressions. We saw at once that Bonnie, who introduced herself now as
Bonaventure, had the sallow complexion and sharp nose of a nun. Her eyes
watered and she was a foot taller than any of her sisters, mostly
because of the length of her neck which would one day hang from the end
of a rope. Therese Lisbon had a heavier face, the cheeks and eyes of a

cow, and she came forward to greet us on two left feet. Mary Lisbon's
hair was darker; she had a widow's peak and fuzz above her upper lip
that suggested her mother had found her depilatory wax. Lux Lisbon was
the only one who accorded with our image of the Lisbon girls. She
radiated health and mischief. Her dress fit tightly, and when she came
for-ward to shake our hands, she secretly moved one finger to tickle our
palms, giving off at the same time a strange gruff laugh. Cecilia was
wearing, as usual, the wedding dress with the shorn hem. The dress was
vintage 1920s. It had sequins on the bust she didn't fill out, and
someone, either Cecilia herself or the owner of the used clothing store,
had cut off the bottom of the dress with a jagged stroke so that it
ended above Cecilia's chafed knees. She sat on a barstool, staring into
her punch glass, and the shapeless bag of a dress fell over her. She had
colored her lips with red crayon, which gave her face a deranged harlot
look, but she acted as though no one were there.

We knew to stay away from her. The bandages had been removed, but she
was wearing a collection of bracelets to hide the scars. None of the
other girls had any bracelets on, and we assumed they'd given Cecilia
all they had. Scotch tape held the undersides of the bracelets to
Cecilia's skin, so they wouldn't slide. The wedding dress bore spots of
hospital food, stewed carrots and beets. We got our punch and stood on
one side of the room while the Lisbon girls stood on the other.

We had never been to a chaperoned party. We were used to the parties our
older brothers threw with our parents out of town, to dark rooms
vibrating with heaps of bodies, musical vomiting, beer kegs beached on
ice in the bathtub, riots in the hallways, and the destruction of living
room sculpture. This was all different. Mrs. Lisbon ladled out more
glasses of punch while we watched Therese and Mary play dominoes, and
across the room Mr. Lisbon opened his tool kit. He showed us his
ratchets, spinning them in his hand so that they whirred, and a long
sharp tube he called his router, and another covered with putty he
called his scraper, and one more with a pronged end he said was his

gouger. His voice was hushed as he spoke about these implements, but he
never looked at us, only at the tools themselves, running his fingers
over their lengths or testing their sharpness with the tender bulb of
his thumb. A single vertical crease deepened in his forehead, and in the
middle of his dry face his lips grew moist.

Through all this Cecilia remained on her stool. We were happy when Joe
the Retard showed up. He arrived on his mother's arm, wearing his baggy
Bermuda shorts and his blue baseball cap, and as usual he was grinning
with the face he shared with every other mongoloid. He had his
invitation tied with a red ribbon around his wrist, which meant that the
Lisbon girls had spelled out his name as well as our own, and he came
murmuring with his oversize jaw and loose lips, his tiny Japanese eyes,
his smooth cheeks shaved by his brothers. Nobody knew exactly how old
Joe the Retard was, but for as long as we could remember he had had
whiskers. His brothers used to take him onto the porch with a bucket to
shave him, yelling for him to keep still, saying if they slit his throat
it wouldn't be their fault, while Joe turned white and became as
motionless as a lizard. We also knew that retards didn't live long and
aged faster than other people, which explained the gray hairs peeking
out from under Joe's baseball cap. As children we had expected that Joe
the Retard would be dead by the time we became adolescents, but now we
were adolescents and Joe was still a child.

Now that he had arrived we were able to show the Lisbon girls all the
things we knew about him, how his ears wiggled if you scratched his
chin, how he could only say "Heads" when you flipped a coin, never
"Tails," because that was too complicated, even if we said, "Joe, try
tails," he would say, "Heads!" thinking he won every time because we let
him. We had him sing the song he always sang, the one Mr. Eugene taught
him. He sang, "Oh, the monkeys have no tails in Sambo Wango, oh, the
monkeys have no tails in Sambo Wango, oh, the monkeys have no tails,
they were bitten off by whales," and we clapped, and the Lisbon girls
clapped, Lux clapped, and leaned against Joe the Retard, who was too

dense to appreciate it.

The party was just beginning to get fun when Cecilia slipped off her
stool and made her way to her mother. Playing with the bracelets on her
left wrist, she asked if she could be excused. It was the only time we
ever heard her speak, and we were surprised by the maturity of her
voice. More than anything she sounded old and tired. She kept pulling on
the bracelets, until Mrs. Lisbon said, "If that's what you want,
Cecilia. But we've gone to all this trouble to have a party for you."
Cecilia tugged the bracelets until the tape came unstuck. Then she
froze. Mrs. Lisbon said, "All right. Go up, then. We'll have fun without
you." As soon as she had permission, Cecilia made for the stairs. She
kept her face to the floor, moving in her personal oblivion, her
sunflower eyes fixed on the predicament of her life we would never
understand. She climbed the steps to the kitchen, closed the door behind
her, and proceeded through the upstairs hallway. We could hear her feet
right above us. Halfway up the staircase to the second floor her steps
made no more noise, but it was only thirty seconds later that we heard
the wet sound of her body falling onto the fence that ran alongside the
house. First came the sound of wind, a rushing we decided later must
have been caused by her wedding dress filling with air. This was brief.
A human body falls fast. The main thing was just that: the fact of a
person taking on completely physical properties, falling at the speed of
a rock. It didn't matter whether her brain continued to flash on the way
down, or if she regretted what she'd done, or if she had time to focus
on the fence spikes shooting toward her. Her mind no longer existed in
any way that mattered. The wind sound huffed, once, and then the moist
thud jolted us, the sound of a watermelon breaking open, and for that
moment everyone remained still and composed, as though listening to an
orchestra, heads tilted to allow the ears to work and no belief coming
in yet. Then Mrs. Lisbon, as though alone, said, "Oh, my God."

Mr. Lisbon ran upstairs. Mrs. Lisbon ran to the top and stood holding
the banister. In the stairwell we could see her silhouette, the thick

legs, the great sloping back, the big head stilled with panic, the
eyeglasses jutting into space and filled with light. She took up most of
the stairs and we were hesitant to go around her until the Lisbon girls
did. Then we squeezed by. We reached the kitchen. Through a side window
we could see Mr. Lisbon standing in the shrubbery. When we came out the
front door we saw that he was holding Cecilia, one hand under her neck
and the other under her knees. He was trying to lift her off the spike
that had punctured her left breast, traveled through her inexplicable
heart, separated two vertebrae without shattering either, and come out
her back, ripping the dress and finding the air again. The spike had
gone through so fast there was no blood on it. It was perfectly clean
and Cecilia merely seemed balanced on the pole like a gymnast. The
fluttering wedding dress added to this circusy effect. Mr. Lisbon kept
trying to lift her off, gently, but even in our ignorance we knew it was
hopeless and that despite Cecilia's open eyes and the way her mouth kept
contracting like that of a fish on a stringer it was just nerves and she
had succeeded, on the second try, in hurling herself out of the world.

We didn't understand why Cecilia had killed herself the first time and
we understood even less when she did it twice. Her diary, which the
police inspected as part of the customary investigation, didn't confirm
the supposition of unrequited love. Dominic Palazzolo was mentioned only
once in that tiny rice-paper journal illuminated with colored Magic
Markers to look like a Book of Hours or a medieval Bible. Miniature
designs crowded the pages. Bubblegum angels swooped from top margins, or
scraped their wings between teeming paragraphs. Maidens with golden hair
dripped sea-blue tears into the book's spine. Grape-colored whales
spouted blood around a newspaper item (pasted in) listing arrivals to
the endangered species list. Six hatchlings cried from shattered shells
near an entry made on Easter. Cecilia had filled the pages with a
profusion of colors and curlicues, Candyland ladders and striped
shamrocks, but the entry about Dominic read, "Palazzolo jumped off the
roof today over that rich bitch, Porter. How stupid can you be?"

The paramedics came back again, the same two, though it took us a while
to recognize them. Out of fear and politeness we had moved across the
street to sit on the hood of Mr. Larson's Oldsmobile. As we made our
exit, none of us had said a word except for Valentine Stamarowski, who
called across the lawn, "Thank you for the party, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon."
Mr. Lisbon was still sunk in bushes up to his waist, his back jerking as
though he were trying to pull Cecilia up and off, or as though he were
sobbing. On the porch Mrs. Lisbon made the other girls face the house.
The sprinkler system, timed to go on at 8:15 p.m., spurted into life
just as the EMS truck appeared at the end of the block, moving at about
fifteen miles an hour, without flashing lights or siren, as though the
paramedics already knew it was hopeless. The skinny one with the
mustache climbed out first, then the fat one. They got the stretcher
immediately, instead of first checking on the victim, a lapse which we
later learned from medical professionals violated procedure. We didn't
know who had called the paramedics or how they knew they were no more
than undertakers that day. Tom Faheem said Therese had gone inside and
called, but the rest of us remember the remaining four Lisbon girls
immobile on the porch until after the EMS truck arrived. No one else on
our street was aware of what had happened. The identical lawns down the
block  were  empty.  Someone  was  barbecuing  somewhere.  Behind  Joe
Larson's
house we could hear a birdie being batted back and forth, endlessly, by
the two greatest badminton players in the world.

The paramedics moved Mr. Lisbon aside so they could examine Cecilia.
They found no pulse, but went ahead trying to save her anyway. The fat
one hacksawed the fence stake while the skinny one got ready to catch
her, because it was more dangerous to pull Cecilia off the barbed end
than to leave it piercing her. When the stake snapped loose, the skinny
one fell back under Cecilia's released weight. Then he regained his
footing, pivoted, and slipped her onto the stretcher. As they carried
her away, the sawedoff stake lifted the sheet like a tent post.

By this time it was nearly nine o'clock. From the roof of Chase Buell's
house where we congregated after getting out of our dress-up clothes to
watch what would happen next, we could see, over the heaps of trees
throwing themselves into the air, the abrupt demarcation where the trees
ended and the city began. The sun was falling in the haze of distant
factories, and in the adjoining slums the scatter of glass picked up the
raw glow of the smoggy sunset. Sounds we usually couldn't hear reached
us now that we were up high, and crouching on the tarred shingles,
resting chins in hands, we made out, faintly, an indecipherable
backward-playing tape of city life, cries and shouts, the barking of a
chained dog, car horns, the voices of girls calling out numbers in an
obscure tenacious game-sounds of the impoverished city we never visited,
all mixed and muted, without sense, carried on a wind from that place.
Then: darkness. Car lights moving in the distance. Up close, yellow
house lights coming on, revealing families around televisions. One by
one, we all went home.

There had never been a funeral in our town before, at least not during
our lifetimes. The majority of dying had happened during the Second
World War when we didn't exist and our fathers were impossibly skinny
young men in black-and-white photographs-dads on jungle airstrips, dads
with pimples and tattoos, dads with pinups, dads who wrote love letters
to the girls who would become our mothers, dads inspired by K rations,
loneliness and glandular riot in malarial air into poetic reveries that
ceased entirely once they got back home. Now our dads were middleaged,
with paunches, and shins rubbed hairless from years of wearing pants,
but they were still a long way from death. Their own parents, who spoke
foreign languages and lived in converted attics like buzzards, had the
finest medical care available and were threatening to live on until the
next century. Nobody's grandfather had died, nobody's grandmother,
nobody's parents, only a few dogs: Tom Burke's beagle, Muffin, who
choked on Bazooka Joe bubble gum, and then that summer, a creature who
in dog years was still a puppy-Cecilia Lisbon.

The cemetery workers' strike hit its sixth week the day she died.

Nobody had given much thought to the strike, nor to the cemetery
workers' grievances, because most of us had never been to a cemetery.
Occasionally we heard gunshots coming from the ghetto, but our fathers
insisted it was only cars backfiring. Therefore, when the newspapers
reported that burials in the city had completely stopped, we didn't
think it affected us. Likewise, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon, only in their
forties, with a crop of young daughters, had given little thought to the
strike, until those same daughters began killing themselves.

Funerals continued, but without the consummation of burial. Caskets were
carted out beside undug plots; priests performed eulogies; tears were
shed; after which the caskets were taken back to the deep freeze of the
mortuary to await a settlement. Cremation enjoyed a rise in popularity.
Mrs. Lisbon, however, objected to this idea, fearing it was heathen, and
even pointed to a biblical passage that suggested the dead will rise
bodily at the Second Coming, no ashes allowed.

Only one cemetery existed in our suburb, a drowsy field owned by various
denominations over the years, from Lutheran through Episcopalian to
Catholic. It contained three French Canadian-fur trappers, a line of
bakers named Kropp, and J. B. Milbank, who invented a local soft drink
resembling root beer. With its leaning headstones, its red gravel drive
in the shape of a horseshoe, and its many trees nourished by well-fed
carcasses, the cemetery had filled up long ago in the time of the last
deaths. Because of this, the funeral director, Mr. Alton, was forced to
take Mr. Lisbon on a tour of possible alternatives.

He remembered the trip well. The days of the cemetery strike weren't
easily forgotten, but Mr. Alton also confessed, "It was my first
suicide. A young kid, too. You couldn't use the same sort of
condolences. I was kind of sweating it out, to tell you the truth." On
the West Side they visited a quiet cemetery in the Palestinian section,

but Mr. Lisbon didn't like the foreign sound of the muezzin calling the
people to prayer, and had heard that the neighbors still ritually
slaughtered goats in their bathtubs. "Not here," he said, "not here."
Next they toured a small Catholic cemetery that looked perfect, until,
coming to the back, Mr. Lisbon saw two miles of leveled land that
reminded him of photographs of Hiroshima. "It was Poletown," Mr. Alton
told us. "GM bought out like twenty-five thousand Polacks to build this
huge automotive plant. They knocked down twenty-four city blocks, then
ran out of money. So the place was all rubble and weeds. It was
desolate, sure, but only if you were looking out the back fence."
Finally they arrived at a public nondenominational cemetery located
between two freeways, and it was here that Cecilia Lisbon was given all
the final funerary rites of the Catholic Church except interment.
Officially, Cecilia's death was listed in church records as an
"accident," as were the other girls' a year later. When we asked Father
Moody about this, he said, "We didn't want to quibble. How do you know
she didn't slip?" When we brought up the sleeping pills, and the noose,
and the rest of it, he said, "Suicide, as a mortal sin, is a matter of
intent. It's very difficult to know what was in those girls' hearts.
What they were really trying to do."

Most of our parents attended the funeral, leaving us home to protect us
from the contamination of tragedy. They all agreed the cemetery was the
flattest they had ever seen. There were no headstones or monuments, only
granite tablets sunk into the earth, and, on V.F.W. graves, plastic
American flags abused by rain, or wire garlands holding dead flowers.
The hearse had trouble getting through the gate because of the
picketing, but when the strikers learned the deceased's age, they
parted, and even lowered their angry placards. Inside, neglect resulting
from the strike was obvious. Dirt was piled around some graves. A
digging machine stood frozen with its jaws piercing the sod, as though
the union's call had come in the middle of burying someone. Family
members acting as caretakers had made touching attempts to spruce up
loved ones' final resting places. Excessive fertilizer had scorched one

plot a blazing yellow. Excessive watering had turned another into a
marsh. Because water had to be carried in by hand (the sprinkler system
had been sabotaged), a trail of deep footprints from grave to grave made
it appear the dead were walking around at night.

The grass hadn't been cut in nearly seven weeks. Mourners stood
ankle-deep as the pallbearers carried out the coffin. Because of the low
teenage mortality rate, mortuary suppliers built few caskets to their
middling size. They manufactured a small quantity of infant caskets,
little bigger than bread boxes. The next size up was full-size, more
than Cecilia required. When they had opened her casket at the Funeral
Home, all anyone had seen was the satin pillow and the ruffled
cushioning of the casket's lid. Mrs. Turner said, "For a minute I
thought the thing was empty." But then, making only a shallow imprint
because of her eighty-six pounds, pale skin and hair blending with white
satin, Cecilia emerged from the background like a figure in an optical
illusion. She was dressed not in the wedding gown, which Mrs. Lisbon had
thrown away, but in a beige dress with a lace collar, a Christmas gift
from her grandmother which she had refused to wear in life. The open
section of lid revealed not only her face and shoulders, but her hands
with their bitten nails, her rough elbows, the twin prongs of her hips,
and even her knees.

Only the family filed past the coffin. First the girls walked past, each
dazed and expressionless, and, later, people said we should have known
by their faces. "It was like they were giving her a wink," Mrs.
Carruthers said. "They should have been bawling, but what did they do?
Up to the coffin, peek in, and away. Why didn't we see it?" Curt Van
Osdol, the only kid at the Funeral Home, said he would have copped a
last feel, right there in front of the priest and everybody, if only we
had been there to appreciate it. After the girls passed by, Mrs. Lisbon,
on her husband's arm, took ten stricken steps to dangle her weak head
over Cecilia's face, rouged for the first and last time ever. "Look at
her nails," Mr. Burton thought he heard her say. "Couldn't they do

something about her nails?"

And then Mr. Lisbon replied: "They'll grow out. Fingernails keep
growing. She can't bite them now, dear." Our own knowledge of Cecilia
kept growing after her death, too, with the same unnatural persistence.
Though she had spoken only rarely and had had no real friends, everybody
possessed his own vivid memories of Cecilia. Some of us had held her for
five minutes as a baby while Mrs. Lisbon ran back into the house to get
her purse. Some of us had played in the sandbox with her, fighting over
a shovel, or had exposed ourselves to her behind the mulberry tree that
grew like deformed flesh through the chain link fence. We had stood in
line with her for smallpox vaccinations, had held polio sugar cubes
under our tongues with her, had taught her to jump rope, to light
snakes, had stopped her from picking her scabs on numerous occasions,
and had cautioned her against touching her mouth to the drinking
fountain at Three Mile Park. A few of us had fallen in love with her,
but had kept it to ourselves, knowing that she was the weird sister.

Cecilia's bedroom-when we finally obtained a description from Lucy
Brock-confirmed this assessment of her character. In addition to a
zodiac mobile, Lucy found a collection of potent amethysts, as well as a
pack of Tarot cards under Cecilia's pillow that still smelled of her
incense and hair. Lucy checked -because we asked her to-to see if the
sheets had been cleaned, but she said they hadn't. The room had been
left intact as an exhibit. The window from which Cecilia jumped was
still open. In the top bureau drawer, Lucy found seven pairs of
underpants, each dyed black with Rit. She also found two pairs of
immaculate high-tops in the closet. Neither of these things surprised
us. We had long known about Cecilia's black underwear because whenever
she'd stood up on her bicycle pedals to gain speed we had looked up her
dress. We'd also often seen her on the back steps, scrubbing her
high-tops with a toothbrush and cup of Ivory Liquid.

Cecilia's diary begins a year and a half before her suicide. Many people

felt the illuminated pages constituted a hieroglyphics of unreadable
despair, though the pictures looked cheerful for the most part. The
diary had a lock, but David Barker, who got it from Skip Ortega, the
plumber's assistant, told us that Skip had found the diary next to the
toilet in the master bathroom, its lock already jimmied as though Mr.
and Mrs. Lisbon had been reading it themselves. Tim Winer, the brain,
insisted on examining the diary. We carried it to the study his parents
had built for him, with its green desk lamps, contour globe, and
gilt-edged encyclopedias. "Emotional instability," he said, analyzing
the handwriting. "Look at the dots on these i's. All over the place."
And then, leaning forward, showing the blue veins beneath his weakling's
skin, he added: "Basically, what we have here is a dreamer. Somebody out
of touch with reality. When she jumped, she probably thought she'd fly."

We know portions of the diary by heart now. After we got it up to Chase
Buell's attic, we read portions out loud. We passed the diary around,
fingering pages and looking anxiously for our names. Gradually, however,
we learned that although Cecilia had stared at everybody all the time,
she hadn't thought about any of us. Nor did she think about herself. The
diary is an unusual document of adolescence in that it rarely depicts
the emergence of an unformed ego. The standard insecurities, laments,
crushes, and daydreams are nowhere in evidence. Instead, Cecilia writes
of her sisters and herself as a single entity. It's often difficult to
identify which sister she's talking about, and many strange sentences
conjure in the reader's mind an image of a mythical creature with ten
legs and five heads, lying in bed eating junk food, or suffering visits
from affectionate aunts. Most of the diary told us more about how the
girls came to be than why they killed themselves. We got tired of
hearing about what they ate ("Monday, February 13. Today we had frozen
pizza .. ."), or what they wore, or which colors they favored. They all
detested creamed corn. Mary had chipped her tooth on the monkey bars and
had a cap. ("I told you," Kevin Head said, reading that.) And so we
learned about their lives, came to hold collective memories of times we
hadn't experienced, harbored private images of Lux leaning over the side

of a ship to stroke her first whale, and saying, "I didn't think they
would stink so much," while Therese answered, "It's the kelp in their
baleens rotting." We became acquainted with starry skies the girls had
gazed at while camping years before, and the boredom of summers
traipsing from back yard to front to back again, and even a certain
indefinable smell that arose from toilets on rainy nights, which the
girls called "sewery." We knew what it felt like to see a boy with his
shirt off, and why it made Lux write the name Kevin in purple Magic
Marker all over her three-ring binder and even on her bras and panties,
and we understood her rage coming home one day to find that Mrs. Lisbon
had soaked her things in Clorox, bleaching all the "Kevins" out. We knew
the pain of winter wind rushing up your skirt, and the ache of keeping
your knees together in class, and how drab and infuriating it was to
jump rope while the boys played baseball. We could never understand why
the girls cared so much about being mature, or why they felt compelled
to compliment each other, but sometimes, after one of us had read a long
portion of the diary out loud, we had to fight back the urge to hug one
another or to tell each other how pretty we were. We felt the
imprisonment of being a girl, the way it made your mind active and
dreamy,  and  how  you  ended  up  knowing  which  colors  went  together.  We
knew
that the girls were our twins, that we all existed in space like animals
with identical skins, and that they knew everything about us though we
couldn't fathom them at all. We knew, finally, that the girls were
really women in disguise, that they understood love and even death, and
that our job was merely to create the noise that seemed to fascinate
them.

As the diary progresses, Cecilia begins to recede from her sisters and,
in fact, from personal narrative of any kind. The first person singular
ceases almost entirely, the effect akin to a camera's pulling away from
the characters at the end of a movie, to show, in a series of dissolves,
their house, street, city, country, and finally planet, which not only
dwarfs but obliterates them. Her precocious prose turns to imersonal

subjects, the commercial of the weeping Indian paddling his canoe along
a polluted stream, or the body counts from the evening war. In its last
third the diary shows two rotating moods. In romantic passages Cecilia
despairs over the demise of our elm trees. In cynical entries she
suggests the trees aren't sick at all, and that the deforesting is a
plot "to make everything flat." Occasional references to this or that
conspiracy theory crop up-the Illuminati, the Militaryindustrial
complex-but she only feints in that direction, as though the names are
so many vague chemical pollutants. From invective she shifts without
pause into her poetic reveries again. A couplet about summer from a poem
she never finished, is quite nice, we think: The trees like lungsfilling
with air My sister, the mean one, pulling my hair The fragment is dated
June 26, three days after she returned from the hospital, when we used
to see her lying in the front-yard grass.

Little is known of Cecilia's state of mind on the last day of her life.
According to Mr. Lisbon, she seemed pleased about her party. When he
went downstairs to check on the preparations, he found Cecilia standing
on a chair, tying balloons to the ceiling with red and blue ribbons. "I
told her to get down. The doctor said she shouldn't hold her hands over
her head. Because of the stitches." She did as commanded, and spent the
rest of the day lying on the rug in her bedroom, staring up at her
zodiac mobile and listening to the odd Celtic records she'd gotten
through a mail-order house. "It was always some soprano singing about
marshes and dead roses." The melancholic music alarmed Mr. Lisbon,
comparing it as he did to the optimistic tunes of his own youth, but,
passing down the hall, he realized that it was certainly no worse than
Lux's howling rock music or even the inhuman screech of Therese's ham
radio.

From two in the afternoon on, Cecilia soaked in the bathtub. It wasn't
unusual for her to take marathon baths, but after what had happened the
last time, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon took no chances. "We made her leave the
door open a crack," Mrs. Lisbon said. "She didn't like it, of course.

And now she had new ammunition. That psychiatrist had said Ceel was at
the age where she needed a lot of privacy." Throughout the afternoon,
Mr. Lisbon kept coming up with excuses to pass by the bathroom. "I'd
wait to hear a splash, then I'd go on past. We'd taken everything sharp
out of there, of course."

At four-thirty, Mrs. Lisbon sent Lux up to check on Cecilia. When she
came back downstairs, she seemed unconcerned, and nothing about her
demeanor suggested she had an inkling about what her sister would do
later that day. "She's fine," Lux said. "She's stinking up the place
with those bath salts."

At five-thirty, Cecilia got out of the bath and dressed for the party.
Mrs. Lisbon heard her going back and forth between her sisters' two
bedrooms (Bonnie shared with Mary, Therese with Lux). The rattling of
her bracelets comforted her parents because it allowed them to keep
track of her movements like an animal with a bell on its collar. From
time to time during the hours before we arrived, Mr. Lisbon heard the
tinkling of Cecilia's bracelets as she went up and down the stairs,
trying on different shoes.

According to what they told us later on separate occasions and in
separate states, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon didn't find Cecilia's behavior
strange during the party. "She was always quiet with company," Mrs.
Lisbon said. And perhaps because of their lack of socializing, Mr. and
Mrs. Lisbon remembered the party as a successful event. Mrs. Lisbon, in
fact, was surprised when Cecilia asked to be excused. "I thought she was
having a nice time." Even at this point, the other girls didn't act as
though they knew what was about to happen. Tom Faheem recalls Mary
telling him about a jumper she wanted to buy at Penney's. Therese and
Tim Winer discussed their anxiety over getting into an Ivy League
college.

From clues later discovered, it appears Cecilia's ascent to her bedroom

was not as quick as we remember it. She took time, for instance, between
leaving us and reaching the upstairs to drink juice from a can of pears
(she left the can on the counter, punctured with only one hole in
disregard of Mrs. Lisbon's prescribed method). Either before or after
drinking the juice, she went to the back door. "I thought they were
sending her on a trip," Mrs. Pitzenberger said. "She was carrying a
suitcase."

No suitcase was ever found. We can only explain Mrs. Pitzenberger's
testimony as the hallucination of a bifocal wearer, or a prophecy of the
later suicides where luggage played such a central motif. Whatever the
truth, Mrs. Pitzenberger saw Cecilia close the back door, and it was
only seconds later that she climbed the stairs, as we so distinctly
heard from below. She flipped on the lights in her bedroom as she
entered, though it was still light out. Across the street, Mr. Buell saw
her open her bedroom window. "I waved to her, but she didn't see me," he
told us.

Just then his wife groaned from the other room. He didn't hear about
Cecilia until after the EMS truck had come and gone. "Unfortunately, we
had problems of our own," he said. He went to check on his sick spouse
just as Cecilia stuck her head out the window, into the pink, humid,
pillowing air.

Flower arrangements arrived at the Lisbon house later than was
customary. Because of the nature of the death, most people decided not
to send flowers to the Funeral Home, and in general everybody put off
placing their orders, unsure whether to let the catastrophe pass in
silence or to act as though the death were natural. In the end, however,
everybody sent something, white roses in wreaths, clusters of orchids,
weeping peonies. Peter Loomis, who delivered for FTD, said flowers
crammed the Lisbons' entire living room. Bouquets exploded from chairs
and lay scattered across the floor. "They didn't even put them in
vases," he said. Most people opted for generic cards that said "With

Sympathy" or "Our Condolences," but some of the Waspier types,
accustomed to writing notes for all occasions, labored over personal
responses. Mrs. Beards used a quote from Walt Whitman we took to
murmuring to one another: "All goes onward and outward, nothing
collapses, / and to die is different from what any one supposed, and
luckier." Chase Buell peeked at his own mother's card as he slipped it
under the Lisbons' door. It read: "I don't know what you're feeling. I
won't even pretend."

A few people braved personal calls. Mr. Hutch and Mr. Peters walked over
to the Lisbon house on separate occasions, but their reports differed
little. Mr. Lisbon invited them in, but before they could broach the
painful subject, he sat them down in front of the baseball game. "He
kept talking about the bullpen," Mr. Hutch said. "Hell, I pitched in
college. I had to straighten him out on a few essentials. First of all,
he wanted to trade Miller, though he was our only decent closer. I
forgot what I'd gone over there to do." Mr. Peters said, "The guy was
only half there. He kept turning the tint control up, so that the
infield was practically blue. Then he'd sit back down. Then he'd get up
again. One of the girls came in-can you tell them apart?-and brought us
a couple beers. Took a swig from his before handing it over."

Neither of the men mentioned the suicide. "I wanted to, I really did,"
said Mr. Hutch. "I just never got around to it." Father Moody showed
more perseverance. Mr. Lisbon welcomed the cleric as he had the other
men, ushering him to a seat before the baseball game. A few minutes
later, as though on cue, Mary served beers. But Father Moody wasn't
deflected. During the second inning, he said, "How about we get the Mrs.
down here?

Have a little chat."

Mr. Lisbon hunched toward the screen. "Afraid she's not seeing anybody
right now. Under the weather."

"She'll see her priest," Father Moody said.

He stood up to go. Mr. Lisbon held up two fingers. His eyes were
watering. "Father," he said. "Doubleplay ball, Father."

Paolo Conelli, an altar boy, overheard Father Moody tell Fred Simpson,
the choirmaster, how he had left "that strange man, God forgive me for
saying so, but He made him that way," and climbed the front stairs.
Already the house showed signs of uncleanliness, though they were
nothing compared to what was to come later. Dust balls lined the steps.
A halfeaten sandwich sat atop the landing where someone had felt too sad
to finish it. Because Mrs. Lisbon had stopped doing laundry or even
buying detergent, the girls had taken to washing clothes by hand in the
bathtub, and when Father Moody passed their bathroom, he saw shirts and
pants and underthings draped over the shower curtain. "It sounded quite
pleasant, actually," he said. "Like rain." Steam rose from the floor,
along with the smell of jasmine soap (weeks later, we asked the
cosmetics lady at Jacobsen's for some jasmine soap we could smell).
Father Moody stood outside the bathroom, too bashful to enter that moist
cave that existed as a common room between the girls' two shared
bedrooms. Inside, if he hadn't been a priest and had looked, he would
have seen the throne-like toilet where the Lisbon girls defecated
publicly, the bathtub they used as a couch, filling it with pillows so
that two sisters could luxuriate while so another curled her hair. He
would have seen the radiator stacked with glasses and Coke cans, the
clamshell soap dish employed, in a pinch, as an ashtray. From the age of
twelve Lux spent hours in the john smoking cigarettes, exhaling either
out the window or into a wet towel she then hung outside. But Father
Moody saw none of this. He only passed through the tropical air current
and that was all. Behind him he felt the colder drafts of the house,
circulating dust motes and that particular family smell every house had,
you knew it when you came in-Chase Buell's house smelled like skin, Joe
Larson's like mayonnaise, the Lisbons' like stale popcorn, we thought,

though Father Moody, going there after the deaths had begun, said, "It
was a mix between a funeral parlor and broom closet. All those flowers.
All that dust." He wanted to step back into the current of jasmine, but
as he stood, listening to rain beading bathroom tiles and washing away
the girls' footprints, he heard voices. He made a quick circuit of the
hallway, calling out for Mrs. Lisbon, but she didn't respond. Returning
to the top of the stairs, he had started down when he saw the Lisbon
girls through a partly open doorway. "At that point, those girls had no
intention of repeating Cecilia's mistake. I know everyone thinks it was
a plan, or that we handled it poorly, but they were just as shocked as I
was." Father Moody rapped softly on the door and asked for permission to
enter. "They were sitting on the floor together, and I could tell they'd
been crying. I think they were having some kind of slumber party. They
had pillows all over.

I hate to mention it, and I remember scolding myself for even thinking
it at the time, but it was unmistakable: they hadn't bathed."

We asked Father Moody whether he had discussed Cecilia's death or the
girls' grief, but he said he hadn't. "I brought it up a few times, but
they didn't take up the subject. I've learned you can't force it. The
time has to be right and the heart willing." When we asked him to sum up
his impression of the girls' emotional state at that point, he said,
"Buffeted but not broken." In the first few days after the funeral, our
interest in the Lisbon girls only increased. Added to their loveliness
was a new mysterious suffering, perfectly silent, visible in the blue
puffiness beneath their eyes or the way they would sometimes stop in
mid-stride, look down, and shake their heads as though disagreeing with
life. Grief made them wander. We heard reports of the girls walking
aimlessly through Eastland, down the lighted mall with its timid
fountains and hot dogs impaled beneath heat lamps. Now and then they
fingered a blouse, or dress, but bought nothing. Woody Clabault saw Lux
Lisbon talking to a motorcycle gang outside Hudson's. One biker asked
her to go for a ride, and after looking in the direction of her house

more than ten miles away, she accepted. She hugged his waist. He kicked
the machine into life. Later, Lux was seen walking home alone, carrying
her shoes.

In the Kriegers' basement, we lay on a strip of leftover carpeting and
dreamed of all the ways we could soothe the Lisbon girls. Some of us
wanted to lie down in the grass with them, or play the guitar and sing
them songs. Paul Baldino wanted to take them to Metro Beach so they
could all get a tan. Chase Buell, more and more under the sway of his
father the Christian Scientist, said only that the girls needed "help
not of this world." But when we asked him what he meant, he shrugged and
said, "Nothing." Nevertheless, when the girls walked by, we often found
him crouching by a tree, moving his lips with his eyes closed.

Not everyone thought about the girls, however. Even before Cecilia's
funeral, some people could talk of nothing but the dangerousness of the
fence she'd jumped on. "It was an accident waiting to happen," said Mr.
Frank, who worked in insurance. "You couldn't get a policy to cover it."

"Our kids could jump on it, too," Mrs. Zaretti insisted during coffee
hour following Sunday Mass. Not long after, a group of fathers began
digging the fence out free of charge. It turned out the fence stood on
the Bateses' property. Mr. Buck, a lawyer, negotiated with Mr. Bates
about the fence's removal and didn't speak to Mr. Lisbon at all.
Everyone assumed, of course, that the Lisbons would be grateful.

We had rarely seen our fathers in work boots before, toiling in the
earth and wielding brand-new root clippers. They struggled with the
fence, bent over like Marines hoisting the flag on Iwo Jima. It was the
greatest show of common effort we could remember in our neighborhood,
all those lawyers, doctors, and mortgage bankers locked arm in arm in
the trench, with our mothers bringing out orange Kool-Aid, and for a
moment our century was noble again. Even the sparrows on the telephone
lines seemed to be watching. No cars passed. The industrial fog of our

city made the men resemble figures hammered into pewter, but by late
afternoon they still couldn't uproot the fence. Mr. Hutch got the idea
of hacksawing the bars as the paramedics had, and for a while the men
took turns sawing, but their paper-pushing arms gave out quickly.
Finally they tied the fence to the back of Uncle Tucker's
four-wheel-drive Bronco. Nobody cared that Uncle Tucker didn't have a
license (driving examiners always smelled booze on him, even if he quit
drinking three days before the test they still smelled it evaporating
from his pores). Our fathers just cried, "Hit it!" and Uncle Tucker
floored his accelerator, but the fence didn't budge. By midafternoon
they abandoned the effort and took up a collection to hire a
professional hauling service. An hour later, a lone man showed up in a
tow truck, attached a hook to the fence, pressed a button to make his
giant winch revolve, and with a deep earth sound, the murdering fence
came loose. "You can see blood," Anthony Turkis said, and we looked to
see if the blood that hadn't been there at the time of the suicide had
arrived after the fact. Some said it was on the third spike, some said
the fourth, but it was as impossible as finding the bloody shovel on the
back of Abbey Road where all the clues proclaimed that Paul was dead.

None of the Lisbons helped with the fence removal. From time to time,
however, we saw their faces blinking at the windows. Just after the
truck pulled the fence free, Mr. Lisbon himself came out the side door
and coiled up a garden hose. He didn't move to the trench. He raised one
hand in a neighborly salute and returned inside. The man lashed the
fence, in sections, to his truck and-getting paid for it-gave Mr. Bates
the worst lawn job we'd ever seen. We were amazed our parents permitted
this, when lawn jobs usually justified calling the cops. But now Mr.
Bates didn't scream or try to get the truck's license plate, nor did
Mrs. Bates, who had once wept when we set off firecrackers in her
state-fair tulips-they said nothing, and our parents said nothing, so
that we sensed how ancient they were, how accustomed to trauma,
depressions, and wars. We realized that the version of the world they
rendered for us was not the world they really believed in, and that for

all their caretaking and bitching about crabgrass they didn't give a
damn about lawns.

After the truck drove away, our fathers gathered around the hole once
more, staring down at wriggling earthworms, kitchen spoons, the one rock
Paul Little swore was an Indian arrowhead. They leaned on shovels,
mopping brows, even though they hadn't done anything. Everyone felt a
lot better, as though the lake had been cleaned up, or the air, or the
other side's bombs destroyed. There wasn't much you could do to save us,
but at least the fence was gone. Despite the devastation of his lawn,
Mr. Bates did some edging, and the old German couple appeared in their
grape arbor to drink dessert wine. As usual they wore their Alpine hats,
Mr. Hessen's with a tiny green feather, while their schnauzer sniffed at
the end, of his leash. Grapes burst above their heads. Mrs. Hessen's
humped back dove and surfaced amid her swelling rosebushes as she
sprayed.

At some point, we looked up into the sky to see that all the fish flies
had died. The air was no longer brown but blue. Using kitchen brooms, we
swept bugs from poles and windows and electrical lines. We stuffed them
into bags, thousands upon thousands of insect bodies with wings of raw
silk, and Tim Winer, the brain, pointed out how the fish flies' tails
resembled those of lobsters. "They're smaller," he said, "but possess
the same basic design. Lobsters are classified in the phylum Arthropoda,
same as insects. They're bugs. And bugs are only lobsters that have
learned to fly."

No one ever understood what got into us that year, or why we hated so
intensely the crust of dead bugs over our lives. Suddenly, however, we
couldn't bear the fish flies carpeting our swimming pools, filling our
mailboxes, blotting out stars on our flags. The collective action of
digging the trench led to cooperative sweeping, bag-carting,
patio-hosing. A score of brooms kept time in all directions as the pale
ghosts of fish flies dropped from walls like ash. We examined their tiny

wizards' faces, rubbing them between our fingers until they gave off the
scent of carp. We tried to light them but they wouldn't burn (which made
the fish flies seem deader than anything). We hit bushes, beat rugs,
turned on windshield wipers full blast. Fish flies clogged sewer grates
so that we had to stuff them down with sticks. Crouching over sewers, we
could hear the river under the city flowing away. We dropped rocks and
listened for the splash.

We didn't stop with our own houses. Once our walls were clean, Mr. Buell
told Chase to start cleaning bugs off the Lisbon house. Because of his
religious beliefs, Mr. Buell often went the extra mile, raking ten feet
into the Hessens' yard, or shoveling their walk and even throwing down
rock salt. It wasn't odd for him to tell Chase to start sweeping the
Lisbons' house, even though they lived across the street and not next
door. Because Mr. Lisbon only had daughters, boys and men had gone over
in the past to help him drag away lightning-struck limbs, and as Chase
approached, holding his broom over his head like a regimental banner,
nobody said a word. Then, however, Mr. Krieger told Kyle to go over and
sweep some, and Mr. Hutch sent Ralph, and soon we were all over at the
Lisbon house, brushing walls and scraping away bug husks. They had even
more than we did, the walls an inch thick, and Paul Baldino asked us the
riddle, "What smells like fish, is fun to eat, but isn't fish?"

Once we got to the Lisbons' windows, our new inexplicable feelings for
the girls came to the fore. As we slapped off bugs, we saw Mary Lisbon
in the kitchen, holding a box of Kraft MacAroni & Cheese. She appeared
to be contemplating whether or not to open it. She read the directions,
turned the box over to look at the vivid picture of the noodles, and
then put the box back on the counter. Anthony Turkis, pressing his face
to the window, said, "She should eat something." She picked up the box
again. Hopefully, we watched. But then she turned and disappeared.

Outside it grew dark. Lights came on down the block, but not in the
Lisbon house. We couldn't see in any better, and in fact the glass panes

began to reflect our own gaping faces. It was only nine o'clock, but
everything confirmed what people had been saying: that since Cecilia's
suicide the Lisbons could hardly wait for night to forget themselves in
sleep. Up in a bedroom window, Bonnie's three votive candles glimmered
in a reddish haze, but otherwise the house absorbed the shadows of
night. Insects started up in their hiding places all around, vibrating
the minute we turned our backs. Everyone called them crickets, but we
never found any in the sprayed bushes or aerated lawns, and had no idea
what they looked like. They were merely sound. Our parents had been more
intimate with crickets. For them the buzzing apparently didn't sound
mechanical. It came from every direction, always from a height just
above our heads, or just below, and always with the suggestion that the
insect world felt more than we did. As we stood charmed into stillness,
listening to the crickets, Mr. Lisbon came out the side door and thanked
us.

so His hair looked even grayer than usual, but grief hadn't altered the
highness of his voice. He had on overalls, one knee covered by sawdust.
"Feel free to use the hose," he said, and then he looked at the Good
Humor truck passing by, the jingle of the bell seemed to trigger a
memory, he smiled, or wincedwe couldn't tell which-and returned inside.

We went with him only later, invisibly, with the ghosts of our
questions. Apparently, as he stepped back inside, he saw Therese come
out of the dining room. She was stuffing her mouth with candym&M's, by
the colors-but stopped immediately on seeing him. She swallowed an
unchewed chunk. Her high forehead glowed in the light from the street
and her cupid's lips were redder, smaller, and more shapely than he
remembered, especially in contrast to her cheeks and chin, which had
gained weight. Her eyelashes were crusted, as though recently glued
shut. At that moment Mr. Lisbon had the feeling that he didn't know who
she was, that children were only strangers you agreed to live with, and
he reached out in order to meet her for the first time. He rested his
hands on her shoulders, then dropped them to his sides. Therese brushed

the hair out of her face, smiled, and began walking slowly up the
stairs.

Mr. Lisbon went on his usual nighttime rounds, checking to see that the
front door was locked (it wasn't), that the garage light was off (it
was), and that none of the burners on the stove had been left on (none
had). He turned off the light in the first-floor bathroom, where he
found Kyle Krieger's retainer in the sink, left from when he'd taken it
out during the party to eat cake. Mr. Lisbon ran the retainer under
water, examining the pink shell form-fitted to the roof of Kyle's mouth,
the crenellations in the plastic that encircled the turret of his teeth,
the looping front wire bent at key spots (you could see plier marks) to
provide modulated pressure. Mr. Lisbon knew his parental and neighborly
duty entailed putting the retainer in a Ziploc bag, calling the
Kriegers, and telling them their expensive orthodontal device was in
safe keeping. Acts like these-simple, humane, conscientious,
forgiving-held life together. Only a few days earlier he would have been
able to perform them. But now he took the retainer and dropped it in the
toilet. He pressed the handle. The retainer, jostled in the surge,
disappeared down the porcelain throat, and, when waters abated, floated
triumphantly, mockingly, out. Mr. Lisbon waited for the tank to refill
and flushed again, but the same thing happened. The replica of the boy's
mouth clung to the white slope.

At that point something flashed in the corner of his eye. "I thought I
saw somebody, but when I looked, there was nothing there." Nor did he
see anything as he came around the back hall into the foyer and up the
front stairs. On the second floor he listened at the girls' doors, but
heard only Mary coughing in her sleep, Lux playing a radio softly,
singing along. He stepped into the girls' bathroom. A beam of light from
the risen moon penetrated the window, lighting up a portion of mirror.
Amid smudged fingerprints, a small circle had been wiped clean where his
daughters contemplated their images, and above the mirror itself Bonnie
had taped a white construction-paper dove. Mr. Lisbon parted his lips in

a grimace and saw in the clean circle the one dead canine tooth
beginning to turn green on the left side of his mouth. The doors to the
girls' shared bedrooms were not completely closed. Breathings and
murmurings issued from them. He listened to the sounds as though they
could tell him what the girls were feeling and how to comfort them. Lux
switched her radio off, and everything was silent. "I couldn't go in,"
Mr. Lisbon confessed to us years later. "I didn't know what to say."
Only as he left the bathroom, heading for the oblivion of sleep himself,
did Mr. Lisbon see Cecilia's ghost. She was standing in her old bedroom,
dressed in the wedding dress again, having somehow shed the beige dress
with the lace collar she'd worn in her coffin. "The window was still
open," Mr. Lisbon said. "I don't think we'd ever remembered to shut it.
It was all clear to me. I knew I had to close that window or else she'd
go on jumping out of it forever."

According to his story, he didn't cry out. He didn't want to make
contact with the shade of his daughter, to learn why she had done
herself in, to ask forgiveness, or to rebuke her. He merely rushed
forward, brushing past, to close the window. As he did, however, the
ghost turned, and he saw that it was only Bonnie, wrapped in a bedsheet.
"Don't worry," she said, quietly. "They took the fence out."

In a handwritten note displaying the penmanship perfected during his
graduate school days in Zurich, Dr. Hornicker called Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon
in for a second consultation, but they didn't go. Instead, from what we
observed during the remainder of the summer, Mrs. Lisbon once more took
charge of the house while Mr. Lisbon receded into a mist. When we saw
him after that, he had the sheepish look of a poor relation. By late
August, in the weeks of preparation before school, he began leaving by
the back door as though sneaking out. His car would whine inside the
garage and, when the automatic door rose, would emerge tentatively,
lopsided like an animal missing a leg. Through the windshield we could
see Mr. Lisbon at the wheel, his hair still wet and his face sometimes
dabbed with shaving cream, but he made no expression when the tail pipe

hit the end of the driveway, sending up sparks, as it did every time. At
six o'clock he returned home. As he came up the drive, the garage door
shuddered to engulf him, and then we wouldn't see him until the next
morning, when the clanging tail pipe announced his departure.

The only extensive contact with the girls occurred late in August, when
Mary showed up without an appointment at Dr. Becker's orthodontal
office. We talked to him years later, while dozens of plaster dental
casts grinned crookedly down at us from glass cabinets. Each set of
teeth bore the name of the unfortunate child who'd been made to swallow
the cement, and the sight took us back to the medieval torture of our
own orthodontal histories. Dr. Becker spoke for some time before we paid
attention, for once again we could feel him hammering metal clasps over
our molars, or stringing our upper and lower teeth together with rubber
bands. Our tongues searched out pockets of scar tissue left by jutting
back braces, and even fifteen years later the fissures still seemed
sweet with blood. But Dr. Becker was saying, "I remember Mary because
she came in without her parents. No kid had ever done that before. When
I asked her what she wanted, she put two fingers in her mouth and pulled
up her front lip. Then she said, "How mucht She was worried her parents
wouldn't be able to pay."

Dr. Becker declined to give Mary Lisbon an estimate. "Bring your mother
in and we'll talk about it," he said. In fact, the process would have
been extensive, as Mary, like her sisters, appeared to have two extra
canine teeth. Disappointed, she lay back in the dentist's chair, her
feet raised, while a silver tube chirred water into a sucking cup. "I
had to leave her sitting in the chair," Dr. Becker said. "I had five
other kids waiting. Later my nurse told me she heard the girl crying."

The girls didn't appear as a group until Convocation. On September 7, a
day whose coolness dampened hopes for an Indian summer, Mary, Bonnie,
Lux and Therese came to school as though nothing had happened. Once
again, despite their closed ranks, we could see the new differences

among them, and we felt that if we kept looking hard enough we might
begin to understand what they were feeling and who they were. Mrs.
Lisbon hadn't taken the girls to buy new school clothes, so they wore
last year's. Their prim dresses were too tight (despite everything, the
girls had continued to develop) and they looked uncomfortable. Mary had
spruced up her outfit with accessories: a bracelet bunch of wooden
cherries the same bright red as her scarf. Lux's school tartan, too
short by now, exposed her naked knees and an inch of thigh. Bonnie wore
a tent-like something, with meandering trim. Therese had on a white
dress that looked like a lab coat. Nevertheless, the girls filed in with
an unexpected dignity as a hush fell over the auditorium. Bonnie had
picked a simple bouquet of late-season dandelions from the school green.
She held them under Lux's chin to see if she liked butter. Their recent
shock was undetectable, but sitting down they left a folding seat empty
as though saving it for Cecilia.

The girls didn't miss a single day of classes, nor did Mr. Lisbon, who
taught with his usual enthusiasm. He continued to pump students for
answers by pretending to strangle them, and scratched out equations in a
cloud of chalk dust. At lunchtime, however, rather than going to the
teachers' lounge, he began to eat in his classroom, bringing a cafeteria
apple and plate of cottage cheese back to his desk. He showed other odd
behavior. We saw him walking along the Science Wing, conversing with
spider plants hanging from the geodesic panes. After the first week, he
taught from his swivel chair, wheeling back and forth to the blackboard
and never standing up, explaining that this was because of his
blood-sugar level. After school, as assistant'soccer coach, he stood
behind the goal, listlessly calling out the score, and when practice
finished, wandered the chalk-dusted field, collecting soccer balls in a
soiled canvas bag.

He drove to school alone, an hour earlier than his late-sleeping,
bused-in daughters. Entering the main door, past the suit of armor (our
athletic teams were called the Knights), he went straight into his

classroom where the nine planets of our solar system hung from
perforated ceiling panels (sixty-six holes in each square, according to
Joe Hill Conley, who counted them during class). Nearly invisible white
strings attached the planets to a track. Each day they rotated and
revolved, the whole cosmos controlled by Mr. Lisbon, who consulted an
astronomy chart and turned a crank next to the pencil sharpener. Beneath
the planets hung black-and-white triangles, orange helices, blue cones
with detachable noses. On his desk Mr. Lisbon displayed a Soma cube,
solved for all time in a ribbon of Scotch tape. Beside the blackboard a
wire clamp held five sticks of chalk so that he could draw sheet music
for his male singing group. He had been a teacher so long he had a sink
in his room.

The girls, on the other hand, entered through the side door, past the
bed of dormant daffodils tended each spring by the headmaster's slim,
industrious wife. Scattering to separate lockers, they reunited in the
cafeteria during juice break. Julie Freeman had been Mary Lisbon's best
friend, but after the suicide they stopped talking. "She was a neat kid,
but I just couldn't deal with it. She sort of freaked me out. Also I was
starting to go out with Todd by then." The sisters walked with poise
down the halls, carrying books over their chests and staring at a fixed
point in space we couldn't see. They were like Aeneas, who (as we
translated him into existence amid the cloud of Dr. Timmerman's B. 0.)
had gone down to the underworld, seen the dead, and returned, weeping on
the inside.

Who knew what they were thinking or feeling? Lux still giggled stupidly,
Bonnie fingered the rosary deep in the pocket of her corduroy skirt,
Mary wore her suits that made her resemble the First Lady, Therese kept
her protective goggles on in the hallsbut they receded from us, from the
other girls, from their father, and we caught sight of them standing in
the courtyard, under drizzle, taking bites from the same doughnut,
looking up at the sky, letting themselves get slowly drenched.

We spoke to them in snatches, each of us adding a sentence to a communal
conversation. Mike Orriyo was first. His locker was next to Mary's, and
one day he peeked over its rim and said, "How's it going?" Her head was
bent forward, throwing her hair over her face, and he wasn't sure she'd
heard him until she mumbled, "Not bad." Without turning to meet his
eyes, she slammed the metal locker shut and moved away, clutching her
books. After a few steps she tugged down the back of her skirt.

The next day he waited for her and, when she opened her locker, added a
new phrase: "I'm Mike." This time Mary said something distinct through
her hair: "I know who you are. I've only been at this school for like my
whole life." Mike Orriyo wanted to say something more, but when she
finally turned to face him, he went mute. He stood staring at her,
opening his mouth uselessly, until she said, "You don't have to talk to
me."

Other guys were more successful. Chip Willard, the detention king,
walked up to Lux as she was sitting in a pool of sunshineit was one of
the last warm days of the year-and while we watched from a second-story
dormer, he sat down beside her. Lux was wearing her school tartan and
white knee socks. Her Topsiders looked new. Before Willard had walked
up, she'd been idly rubbing them in the dirt. Then she spread her legs
out, propped her hands behind her back, and turned her face toward the
last rays of the season. Willard moved into her sun and spoke. She
brought her legs together, scratched one knee, and drew them apart.
Willard settled his bulk on the soft ground. He leaned toward her,
grinning, and even though he had never said anything intelligent within
our  hearing,  he  made  Lux  laugh.  He  seemed  to  know  what  he was  doing,
and
we were astounded at the knowledge he had gained in the basements and
bleachers of his delinquency. He crumpled a dead leaf over Lux's head.
Bits fell down the back of her shirt and she hit him. The next thing we
knew, they were walking together around back of the school, out past the
tennis courts, through the row of memorial elms, and to the towering

fence that marked the property of the mansions on the private drive
beyond.

It wasn't only Willard. Paul Wanamaker, Kurt Siles, Peter McGuire, Tom
Sellers, and Jim Czeslawski all had their few days of going steady with
Lux. It was well known that Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon didn't allow their
daughters to date, and that Mrs. Lisbon in particular disapproved of
dances, proms, and the general expectation that teenagers should be
allowed to paw one another in back seats. Lux's brief unions were
clandestine. They sprouted in the dead time of study halls, bloomed on
the way to the drinking found- tain, and were consummated in the hot box
above the auditorium, amid uncomfortable theatrical lights and cables.
The boys met Lux in transit on sanctioned errands, in the aisle of the
pharmacy while Mrs. Lisbon waited outside in the car, and once, in the
most daring rendezvous, in the station wagon itself, for the fifteen
minutes Mrs. Lisbon stood in line at the bank. But the boys who snuck
off with Lux were always the stupidest boys, the most selfish and abused
at home, and they made terrible sources of information. No matter what
we asked, they responded with lewd assertions such as, "Squeezebox is
all right. Let me tell you," or, "You want to know what happened? Smell
my fingers, man." That Lux consented to meet them in the dells and
thickets of our school grounds only showed too well her disequilibrium.
We asked whether she spoke about Cecilia, but the boys always said
they'd hadn't exactly been talking if you know what I mean.

The only reliable boy who got to know Lux during that time was Trip
Fontaine, but his sense of honor kept us in the dark for years. Only
eighteen months before the suicides, Trip Fontaine had emerged from baby
fat to the delight of girls and women alike. Because we had known him as
a pudgy boy whose teeth slanted out of his open, trolling mouth like
those of a deep-sea fish, we had been slow to recognize his
transformation. In addition, our fathers and older brothers, our
decrepit uncles, had assured us that looks didn't matter if you were a
boy. We weren't on the lookout for handsomeness appearing in our midst,

and believed it counted for little until the girls we knew, along with
their mothers, fell in love with Trip Fontaine. Their desire was silent
yet magnificent, like a thousand daisies attuning their faces toward the
path of the sun. At first we hardly noticed the wadded notes dropped
through the grating of Trip's locker, nor the equatorial breezes
pursuing him down the hall from so much heated blood; but finally,
confronted with clusters of clever girls blushing at Trip's approach, or
yanking their braids to keep from smiling too much, we realized that our
fathers, brothers and uncles had been lying, and that no one was ever
going to love us because of our good grades. Years later, from the
onehorse detoxification ranch where Trip Fontaine had gone to dry out on
the last of his ex-wife's savings, he recalled the red-hot passions that
had erupted at a time when he was growing his first chest hair. It began
during a trip to Acapulco, when his father and his father's boyfriend
went for a stroll on the beach, leaving Trip to fend for himself on the
hotel grounds. (Exhibit #7, a snapshot taken during that trip, shows a
bronzed Mr. Fontaine posing with Donald, the two of them squeezed
thigh-to-thigh within the palmy Montezuma throne of a hotel patio
chair.) At the nodrinking-age bar, Trip met Gina Desander, recently
divorced, who ordered him his first pifia colada. Always a gentleman,
Trip Fontaine imparted to us upon his return only the most proper
details of Gina Desander's life, that she was a dealer in Las Vegas and
taught him to win at blackjack, that she wrote poetry and ate raw
coconut with a Swiss Army knife. Only years later, looking over the
desert with ruined eyes, his chivalry no longer able to protect a woman
by that time in her fifties, did Trip confess that Gina Desander had
been "my first lay."

It explained a lot. It explained why he never took off the puka-shell
necklace she'd given him. It explained the travel poster over his bed
showing a man soaring over Acapulco Bay on a kite pulled by a speedboat.
It explained why he changed his manner of dress the year before the
suicides, going from schoolboy shirts and pants to Western outfits,
shirts with pearl buttons, decorative pocket flaps and shoulder

stitching, every item chosen in order to resemble the Las Vegas men who
stood arm in arm with Gina Desander in the wallet photographs she showed
Trip during their seven-days-and-six-nights package tour together. At
thirty-seven, Gina Desander had envisioned the hunk of masculinity
latent in Trip Fontaine's chubby Speedoed form, and during her week with
him in Mexico, she chiseled him into the shape of a man. We could only
imagine what went on in her hotel room, with Trip drunk on spiked
pineapple juice, watching Gina Desander deal rapid-fire in the middle of
her stripped bed. The sliding door to the small concrete balcony had
come off its track. Trip, being the man, had tried to fix it. The
dressers and bedside tables were littered with the detritus of last
night's room party-empty glasses, tropical swizzle sticks, washed-up
orange rinds. With his vacation tan Trip must have looked much as he did
in late summer, circulating in his swimming pool, his nipples like two
pink cherries embedded in brown sugar. Gina Desander's reddish, slightly
creased skin flamed in age like leaves. Ace of hearts. Ten of clubs.
Twenty-one. You win. She stroked his hair, dealt again. He never told us
any details, not even later, when we were all adult enough to
understand. But we looked on it as a wonderful initiation by a merciful
mother, and though it remained a secret, the night conveyed on Trip the
mantle of a lover. When he returned we heard his new deep voice sounding
a foot above our heads, apprehended without understanding the tight seat
of his jeans, smelled his cologne and compared our own cheese-colored
skin to his. But his musky scent, the coconut-oil smoothness of his
face, the golden grains of intractable sand still glittering in his
eyebrows didn't affect us as it did the girls who, one by one, and then
in groups, swooned.

He received letters emblazoned with ten different sets of lips (the
lines of each pucker distinct as a fingerprint). He stopped studying for
tests because of all the girls who came over to cram with him in bed. He
spent his time keeping up his tan, floating on an air mattress around
his bathtub-size swimming pool. The girls were right in choosing to love
Trip, because he was the only boy who could keep his mouth shut. By

nature Trip Fontaine possessed the discretion of the world's great
lovers, seducers greater than Casanova because they didn't leave behind
twelve volumes of memoirs and we don't even know who they were. On the
football field, or naked in the locker room, Trip Fontaine never spoke
of the pieces of pie, carefully wrapped in tinfoil, that showed up
inside his locker, nor of the hair ribbons gartered to his car antenna,
nor even of the tennis sneaker dangling by one seamy lace from his
rearview mirror, in the toe of which a sweaty note read, "The score is
love: love. Your serve, Trip."

The halls began to reverberate with his whispered name. While we called
him "the Tripster" or "Fountainhead," the girls spoke only of Trip,
Trip, that was the whole conversation, and when he was chosen
"Best-looking,"

"Best dressed,"

"Best Personality," and "Best Athlete" (even though none of us had voted
for him out of spite and he wasn't even that coordinated), we realized
the extent of the girls' infatuation.

Even our own mothers spoke of his good looks, inviting him to stay for
dinner, disregarding his longish oily hair. Before long he lived like a
pasha, accepting tribute at the court of his synthetic coverlet: small
bills filched from mothers' purses, bags of dope, graduation rings, Rice
Krispie treats wrapped in wax paper, vials of amyl nitrite, Asti
Spumante bottles, assorted cheeses from the Netherlands, occasionally
the odd chunk of hash. The girls came bearing typed and footnoted term
papers, "Chick Notes" they'd compiled so that Trip could read a single
page on each book. Over time, from the bounty of their offerings he
compiled his museum display of "Great Reefers of the World," each sample
housed in an empty spice jar lined along his bookshelf, from "Blue
Hawaiian" to "Panama Red," with many stops in the brownish territories
between, one of which looked and smelled like carpet. We didn't know

much about the girls who went to Trip Fontaine's, only that they drove
their own cars and always took in something from the trunk. They were
the jangly-earring type, with hair bleached at the fringes and
cork-heeled shoes that tied around their ankles. Carrying salad bowls
covered with printed dish towels, they walked bowleggedly over the lawn,
snapping gum and smiling. Upstairs, in bed, they spoon-fed Trip, wiping
his mouth with the bedsheet before tossing the bowls onto the floor and
melting in his arms. From time to time Mr. Fontaine passed by, on his
way to or from Donald's room, but the iffiness of his own conduct
prevented him from questioning the susurrations coming from under his
son's door. The two of them, father and son, lived like roommates,
stumbling upon each other in their matching peacock robes, bitching over
who used up the coffee, but by afternoon they drifted in the pool
together, bumping the sides, compatriots in the search for a little
passion on earth.

They had the most lustrous father-and-son tans in the city. Even Italian
contractors, working in the sun day after day, couldn't achieve their
mahogany hue. At dusk, Mr. Fontaine's and Trip's skins appeared almost
bluish, and, putting on their towel turbans, they looked like twin
Krishnas. The small, circular, above-ground pool abutted the backyard
fence, its swells sometimes dousing the neighbors' dog. Marinated in
baby oil, Mr. Fontaine and Trip boarded their air mattresses equipped
with back rests and drink holders, and drifted beneath our tepid
northern sky as though it were the Costa del Sol. We watched them, in
stages, turning the color of shoe polish. We suspected Mr. Fontaine of
lightening his hair, and the brightness of their teeth grew painful to
look at. At parties, wild-eyed girls would clutch us just because we
knew Trip, and after a while we saw that they were as distraught at the
hands of love as we were. Mark Peters, going out to his car one night,
felt someone grab his leg. Looking down, he saw Sarah Sheed, who
confessed she had such a huge crush on Trip she couldn't walk. He still
remembers the panicstricken way she looked up at him, a big healthy girl
renowned for her chest size, lying lame as a cripple in the dewy grass.

No one knew how Trip and Lux had met, or what they had said to each
other, or whether the attraction was mutual. Even years later, Trip was
reticent on the subject, in accord with his vows of faithfulness to the
four hundred and eighteen girls and women he had made love to during his
long career. He would only tell us, "I've never gotten over that girl,
man.

Never." In the desert, with the shakes, he had sicklylooking wads of
yellow skin under his eyes, but the eyes themselves clearly looked back
to a verdant time. Gradually, through incessant coaxing, and owing in
large part to the recovering substance abuser's need to talk nonstop, we
managed to cobble together the story of their love.

It began on a day when Trip Fontaine attended the wrong history class.
During fifth-period study hall, as was his custom, Trip Fontaine had
gone out to his car to smoke the marijuana he took as regularly as Peter
Petrovich, the diabetic kid, took insulin. Three times a day Petrovich
showed up at the nurse's office for his injections, always using the
hypodermic needle himself like the most craven of junkies, though after
shooting up he would play the concert piano in the auditorium with
astounding artistry, as though insulin were the elixir of genius.
Likewise, Trip Fontaine went to his car three times a day, at
ten-fifteen, twelvefifteen, and three-fifteen, as though he wore a
wristwatch like Petrovich's that beeped at dose time. He always parked
his Trans Am at the lot's far end, facing the school to spot any
approaching teachers. The car's raked hood, sleek roof, and sloping rear
end gave it the look of an aerodynamic scarab. Though signs of age had
begun to mar its golden finish, Trip had repainted the black racing
stripes and shined the spiky hubcaps that looked like weapons. Inside,
the leather bucket seats retained idiosyncratic perspiration marksyou
could see where Mr. Fontaine had rested his head in traffic jams, the
chemicals in his hair spray turning the brown leather a light purple.
The faint aroma of his "Boots and Saddle" air freshener still clung to

the air, though by that time the car was permeated more with the smell
of Trip's musk and reefer. The racing-car doors shut with a hermetic
seal, and Trip used to say you could get higher in his car than anywhere
because you kept breathing in the captured smoke. Every juice break,
lunch, and study hall, Trip Fontaine sauntered out to his car and
submerged himself in the steam bath. Fifteen minutes later, when he
opened the door, the smoke would churn out as though from a chimney,
dispersing and curling to the music-usually Pink Floyd or Yeswhich Trip
kept playing as he went about checking his engine and polishing his hood
(the ostensible reasons for his trips to the parking lot). After
shutting up his car, Trip walked behind the school to air out his
clothes. He kept a spare box of mints hidden in the knothole of one
memorial tree (planted for Samuel 0. Hastings, graduate of the class of
1918). From classroom windows girls watched him, out under the trees,
alone and irresistible, sitting cross-legged like an Indian, and even
before he got up they could picture the light dirt stains on each
buttock. It was always the same: Trip Fontaine rose to full height,
adjusted the frames of his aviator sunglasses, flicked back his hair,
zipped the breast pocket of his brown leather jacket, and started
forward on the juggernaut of his boots. He came down the corridor of
memorial trees, across the back green, past the beds of ivy, and into
the school's rear door.

No boy was ever so cool and aloof. Fontaine gave off the sense of having
graduated to the next stage of life, of having his hands thrust into the
heart of the real world, whereas the rest of us were still memorizing
quotations and grade-grubbing. Though he retrieved his books from his
locker, we knew they were only props and that he was destined for
capitalism and not scholarship, as his drug deals already augured. On
that day he would always remember, however, a September afternoon when
the leaves had just begun turning, Trip Fontaine came in to see Mr.
Woodhouse the headmaster approaching down the hall. Trip was used to
running into figures of authority while stoned, and he told us he never
suffered from paranoia. He couldn't explain why the sight of our

headmaster, with his flood pants and canary yellow socks, caused his
pulse to rise and a light sweat to break out on the back of his neck
just then. Nevertheless, in one nonchalant motion, Trip entered the
nearest classroom to escape.

He didn't notice a single face as he took a seat. He saw neither teacher
nor students, and was aware only of the heavenly light in the room, an
orange glow from the autumnal foliage outside. The room seemed full of a
sweet viscous liquid, a honey nearly light as air, which he breathed in.
Time slowed down, and in his left ear the ringing of the cosmic Om
started up clear as a telephone. When we suggested these details had
been laced with the same THC in his blood, Trip Fontaine thrust a finger
into the air, the only time his hands stopped shaking during the entire
interview. "I know what it's like to be high," he said. "This was
different." In the orange light the students' heads looked like sea
anemones, undulating quietly, and the silence of the room was that of
the ocean floor. "Every second is eternal," Trip told us, describing how
as he sat in his desk the girl in front of him, for no apparent reason,
had turned around and looked at him. He couldn't say she was beautiful
because all he could see were her eyes. The rest of her face the pulpy
lips, the blond sideburn fuzz, the nose with its candy-pink translucent
nostrils-registered dimly as the two blue eyes lifted him on a sea wave
and held him suspended. "She was the still point of the turning world,"
he told us, quoting Eliot, whose Collected Poems he had found on the
shelf of the detoxification center. For the eternity that Lux Lisbon
looked at him, Trip Fontaine looked back, and the love he felt at that
moment, truer than all subsequent loves because it never had to survive
real life, still plagued him, even now in the desert, with his looks and
health wasted. "You never know what'll set the memory off," he told us.
"A baby's face. A bell on a cat's collar. Anything."

They didn't exchange a single word. But in the weeks that followed, Trip
spent his days wandering the halls, hoping for Lux to appear, the most
naked person with clothes on he had ever seen. Even in sensible school

shoes she shuffled as though barefoot, and the baggy apparel Mrs. Lisbon
bought for her only increased her appeal, as though after undressing she
had put on whatever was handy. In corduroys her thighs rubbed together,
buzzing, and there was always at least one untidy marvel to unravel him:
an untucked shirttail, a sock with a hole, a ripped scam showing
underarm hair. She carted her books from class to class but never opened
them. Her pens and pencils looked as temporary as Cinderella's broom.
When she smiled, her mouth showed too many teeth, but at night Trip
Fontaine dreamed of being bitten by each one.

He didn't know the first step in pursuing her because he'd always been
the one pursued. Little by little, from the girls who came up to his
bedroom, he learned where Lux lived, though he had to be discreet in his
questions in order to avoid provoking their jealousy. He began driving
by the Lisbon house in hopes of getting a glimpse of her, or the
consolation prize of a sister. Unlike us, Trip Fontaine never mixed up
the Lisbon girls, but from the outset saw Lux as their shining pinnacle.
He opened the windows of his Trans Am as he drove by, turning up his
eight-track so that she might hear his favorite song in her bedroom.
Other times, unable to control the riot in his gut, he floored the
accelerator, leaving behind as a love token only the smell of burning
rubber.

He didn't understand how she had bewitched him, nor why having done so
she promptly forgot his existence, and in desperate moods he asked his
mirror why the only girl he was crazy about was the only girl not crazy
about him. For a long time he resorted to his time-tested methods of
attracting girls, brushing his hair back as Lux passed, or clomping his
boots up on the desktop, and once he even lowered his tinted glasses to
give her the boon of his eyes. But she didn't look.

The truth was, even the wimpiest boys were more adept than Trip at
asking girls out, because their sparrows' chests and knockknees had
taught them perseverance, whereas Trip had never even had to dial a

girl's phone number. It was all new to him: the memorization of
strategic speeches, the trial runs of possible conversations, the yogic
deep breathing, all leading up to the blind, headlong dive into the
staticky sea of telephone lines. He hadn't suffered the eternity of the
ring about to be picked up, didn't know the heart rush of hearing that
incomparable voice suddenly linked with his own, the sense it gave of
being too close to even see her, of being actually inside her ear. He
had never felt the pain of lackluster responses, the dread of "Oh .. .
hi," or the quick annihilation of "Who?" His beauty had left him without
cunning, and so in despair he confessed his passion to his father and
Donald. They understood his predicament, and after calming him with a
snifter of Sambuca, gave him advice only two people experienced with the
burden of secret love could have given. First of all, they told him on
no account to call Lux on the telephone. "It's so all subtlety," Donald
said. "It's all nuance." Rather than making overt declarations, they
suggested that Trip speak to Lux only about the most mundane things, the
weather, school assignments, anything that gave him an opportunity to
communicate with the silent but unerring language of eye contact. They
made him get rid of his tinted lenses, and keep his hair out of his face
with hair spray. The next day Trip Fontaine took a seat in the Science
Wing and waited for Lux to pass by on the way to her locker. The rising
sun turned the honeycomb panels the color of a blush. Each time the ramp
doors opened, Trip saw Lux's face float forward, before her eyes, nose,
and mouth rearranged into the face of some other girl. He took this as a
bad omen, as though Lux were continually disguising herself in order to
evade him. He feared she would never come, or, worse, that she would.

After a week without seeing her, he decided to take extraordinary
measures. The next Friday afternoon he left his carrel in the Science
Wing to go to assembly. It was the first assembly he had attended in
three years, because skipping assembly was easier than skipping any
other period, and Trip preferred to spend the time smoking the hookah
pipe running from his glove compartment. He had no idea where Lux would
sit, and lingered at the drinking fountain, intending to follow her in.

Against the advice of his father and Donald, he put on sunglasses to
conceal his staring down the hall. Three times his heart jumped at the
decoys of Lux's sisters, but Mr. Woodhouse had already introduced the
day's speaker-a local television at meteorologist-by the time Lux came
out of the girls' bathroom. Trip Fontaine saw her with a concentration
so focused he ceased to exist. The world at that moment contained only
Lux. A fuzzy aura surrounded her, a shimmering as of atoms breaking
apart, brought on, we later decided, from so much blood draining out of
Trip's head. She passed right by him without noticing, and in that
instant he smelled not cigarettes as he expected, but watermelon gum.

He followed her into the colonial clarity of the auditorium with its
Monticello dome, Doric pilasters, and imitation gas lanterns we used to
fill with milk. He sat next to her in the last row, and though he
avoided looking at her, it was no use: with organs of sense he hadn't
realized he possessed, Trip Fontaine felt Lux beside him, registered her
body temperature, heartbeat, respiration rate, all the pumping and flow
of her body. The auditorium lights dimmed as the weatherman began
showing slides, and soon they were in the dark together, alone despite
four hundred students and forty-five teachers. Paralyzed by love, Trip
didn't move once as tornadoes flashed on the screen, and it was fifteen
minutes before he got up the courage to place a sliver of forearm along
the armrest. Once he did, an inch of space still separated them, so over
the next twenty minutes, with infinitesimal advances that made his whole
body sweat, Trip Fontaine moved his arm toward hers. As all other eyes
watched Hurricane Zelda tear toward a coastal Caribbean town, the hairs
on Trip's arm brushed Lux's, and electricity surged through the new
circuit. Without turning, without breathing, Lux responded with equal
pressure, then Trip applied more, she responded, and so on and so on,
until they were joined at the elbow. Right then, it happened: a
prankster in front, cupping his hands over his mouth, made a farting
noise, and the room rippled with laughter. Lux blanched, pulling her arm
away, but Trip Fontaine took the opportunity to whisper the first words
he had ever spoken in her ear: "That must've been Conley," he said. "His

ass is grass."

In response, she didn't so much as nod. But Trip, still leaning toward
her, continued: "I'm going to ask your old man if I can take you out."

"Fat chance," said Lux, not looking at him. The lights came up, and all
around them students began clapping. Trip waited for the applause to
peak before he spoke again. Then he said, "First I'm going to come over
and watch the tube at your house. This Sunday. Then I'm going to ask you
out."

Again he waited for her to speak, but the only sign she'd heard came
from her hand which, turning palm up, suggested he could do what he
liked. Trip stood up to go, but before doing so leaned over the back of
his vacated seat as the words he'd been keeping down for weeks came
pouring out. "You're a stone fox," he said, and took off.

Trip Fontaine became the first boy after Peter Sissen to enter the
Lisbon house alone. He did so simply by telling Lux when he would arrive
and leaving her to tell her parents. None of us could explain how we had
missed him, especially as he insisted during his interview that he had
taken no stealthy measures, driving up in plain sight and parking his
Trans Am in front of an elm stump so it wouldn't get covered with sap.
He'd had his hair cut for the occasion, and instead of a Western getup
wore a white shirt and black pants like a caterer. Lux met him at the
door and, without saying much (she was keeping track of her knitting),
led him to his assigned seat in the living room. He sat on the couch
beside Mrs. Lisbon, with Lux on her other side. Trip Fontaine told us
the girls paid him little attention, certainly less than a school
heartthrob would expect. Therese sat in the corner, holding a stuffed
iguana and explaining to Bonnie what iguanas ate, how they reproduced,
and what their natural habitat was like. The only sister who spoke to
Trip was Mary, who kept offering to refill his Coke. A Walt Disney
special was on, and the Lisbons watched it with the acceptance of a

family accustomed to bland entertainment, laughing together at the same
lame stunts, sitting up during the rigged climaxes. Trip Fontaine didn't
see any signs of twistedness in the girls, but later he did say, "You
would have killed yourself just to have something to do." Mrs. Lisbon
oversaw Lux's knitting. Before the channel could be changed, she
consulted TV Guide to judge the program's suitability. The curtains were
thick as canvas. A few spindly plants sat on the windowsill, and this
differed so much from his own leafy living room (Mr. Fontaine was a
gardening buff) that Trip would have felt he was on a dead planet had it
not been for the pulsing life of Lux at the sofa's other end. He could
see her bare feet every time she put them up on the coffee table. The
soles were black, her toenails flecked with pink polish. Each time they
appeared, Mrs. Lisbon tapped them with a knitting needle, driving them
back under the table.

And that was all that happened. Trip didn't get to sit next to Lux, nor
speak to her, nor even look at her, but the bright nearby fact of her
presence burned in his mind. At ten o'clock, taking a cue from his wife,
Mr. Lisbon slapped Trip on the back and said, "Well, son, we usually hit
the hay about now." Trip shook his hand, then Mrs. Lisbon's colder one,
and Lux stepped forward to escort him out. She must have seen the
situation was futile, because she hardly looked at him during the short
trip to the door. She walked with her head down, digging in her ear for
wax, and looked up as she opened the door to give him a sad smile that
promised only frustration. Trip Fontaine left crushed, knowing that all
he could hope for was another night on the sofa beside Mrs. Lisbon. He
walked across the lawn, uninown since Cecilia died. He sat in his car,
gazing at the house, watching as downstairs lights traded places with
those upstairs, and then, one by one, went out. He thought about Lux
getting ready for bed, and just the idea of her holding a toothbrush
excited him more than the fullfledged nudity he saw in his own bedroom
nearly every night. He laid his head back on the headrest and opened his
mouth to ease the constriction in his chest, when suddenly the air
inside the car churned. He felt himself grasped by his long lapels,

pulled forward and pushed back, as a creature with a hundred mouths as
started sucking the marrow from his bones. She said nothing as she came
on like a starved animal, and he wouldn't have known who it was if it
hadn't been for the taste of her watermelon gum, which after the first
few torrid kisses he found himself chewing. She was no longer wearing
pants but a flannel nightgown. Her feet, wet from the lawn, gave off a
pasture smell. He felt her clammy shins, her hot knees, her bristly
thighs, and then with terror he put his finger in the ravenous mouth of
the animal leashed below her waist. It was as though he had never
touched a girl before; he felt fur and an oily substance like otter
insulation. Two beasts lived in the car, one above, snuffling and biting
him, and one below, struggling to get out of its damp cage. Valiantly he
did what he could to feed them, placate them, but the sense of his
insufficiency grew, and after a few minutes, with only the words "Gotta
get back before bed check," Lux left him, more dead than alive.

Even though that lightning attack lasted only three minutes, it left its
mark on him. He spoke of it as one might of a religious experience, a
visitation or vision, any rupture into this life from beyond that cannot
be described in words. "Sometimes I think I dreamed it," he told us,
recalling the voracity of those hundred mouths that had sucked out his
juice in the dark, and even though he went on to enjoy an enviable love
life, Trip Fontaine confessed it was all anticlimactic. Never again were
his intestines yanked with such delectable force, nor did he ever again
feel the sensation of being entirely wetted by another's saliva.

"I felt like a stamp," he said. Years later he was still amazed by Lux's
singleness of purpose, her total lack of inhibitions, her mythic
mutability that allowed her to possess three or four arms at once. "Most
people never taste that kind of love," he said, taking courage amid the
disaster of his life. "At least I tasted it once, man." In comparison,
the loves of his early manhood and maturity were docile creatures with
smooth flanks and dependable outcries. Even during the act of love he
could envision them bringing him hot milk, doing his taxes, or presiding

tearfully at his deathbed. They were warm, loving, hot-water-bottle
women. Even the screamers of his adult years always hit false notes, and
no erotic intensity ever matched the silence in which Lux flayed him
alive.

We never learned whether Mrs. Lisbon caught Lux as she tried to sneak
back inside, but for whatever reason, when Trip tried to make another
date to come sit on the couch, Lux told him she was grounded, and that
her mother had forbidden any future visits. At school, Trip Fontaine was
cagey about what had passed between them, and though stories circulated
about their sneaking off into various enclosures, he insisted the only
time they ever touched was in the car. "At school, we could never find a
place to go. Her old man kept a close eye on her. It was agony, man.
Fucking agony."

In Dr. Hornicker's opinion, Lux's promiscuity was a commonplace reaction
to emotional need. "Adolescents tend to seek love where they can find
it," he wrote in one of the many articles he hoped to publish. "Lux
confused the sexual act with love. For her, sex became a substitute for
the comfort she needed as a result of her sister's suicide." A few of
the boys did provide details that supported this theory. Willard said
that once, while they lay together in the field house, Lux asked him if
he thought what they had done was dirty. "I knew what to say. I said no.
Then she grabs my hand and goes, "You like me, don't yout I didn't say
anything. It's best to keep chicks guessing." Years later, Trip Fontaine
was irritated by our suggestion that Lux's passion might have come from
a misplaced need. "What are you saying, that I was just a vehicle?

You can't fake that, man. It was real." We even managed to bring up the
subject with Mrs. Lisbon during our single interview with her in a bus
station cafeteria, but she grew rigid. "None of my daughters lacked for
any love. We had plenty of love in our house."

It was hard to tell. As October came, the Lisbon house began to look

less cheerful. The blue slate roof, which in certain lights had
resembled a pond suspended in the air, visibly darkened. The yellow
bricks turned brown. Bats flew out of the chimney in the evening, as
they did from the Stamarowski mansion the next block over. We were used
to seeing bats wheeling over the Stamarowskis', zigzagging and diving as
girls screamed and covered their long hair. Mr. Stamarowski wore black
turtlenecks and stood on his balcony. At sunset he let us roam his big
lawn, and as once in the flower bed we found a dead bat with its face of
a shrunken old man with two prize teeth. We always thought the bats had
come with the Stamarowskis from Poland; they made sense swooping over
that somber house with its velvet curtains and Old World decay, but not
over the practical double chimneys of the Lisbon house. There were other
signs of creeping desolation. The illuminated doorbell went out. The
bird feeder fell in the back yard and was left on the ground. On the
milk box Mrs. Lisbon left a curt note to the milkman: "Stop bringing bad
milk!" Recalling that time, Mrs. Higbie insisted that Mr. Lisbon, using
a long pole, had closed the outside shutters. When we asked around,
everyone agreed. Exhibit #3, however, a photograph taken by Mr. Buell,
shows Chase ready to swing his new Louisville Slugger, and in the
background the Lisbon house has all its shutters open (we find a
magnifying glass helpful). The photo was taken on October 13, Chase's
birthday and the opening of the World Series.

Other than to school or church the Lisbon girls never went anywhere.
Once a week a Kroger's truck delivered groceries. Little Johnny Buell
and Vince Fusilli stopped it one day by holding an imaginary rope across
the street, one on each side tugging air like twin Marcel Marceaux. The
driver let them climb in, and they looked through his order slips, lying
that they wanted to grow up and be deliverymen themselves. The Lisbon
order, which Vince Fusilli pocketed, turned out to resemble a
requisition of army supplies.

1 - 5 lb.

5 -1 gal 18 roll 24 can 24 can 10 lbs.

1 lb.

Krog. flour Carnat. Dehyd. milk Wh. Cld. t. p. Del. pchs. (in syr.) Del.
g. peas Gr. chuck Won. Br. Jif p. but. Kell. C. Flks. Stkst. Tu. Krog.
mayo. iceberg 0. May. bacon L. Lks. but. Tang o. f. Hersh. choc.

We waited to see what would happen with the leaves. For two weeks they
had been falling, covering lawns, because in those days we still had
trees. Now, in autumn, only a few leaves make swan dives from the tops
of remaining elms, and most leaves drop four feet from saplings held up
by stakes, runt replacements the city has planted to console us with the
vision of what our street will look like in a hundred years. No one is
sure what kind of trees these new trees are. The man from the Parks
Department said only that they had been selected for their "hardiness
against the Dutch elm beetle."

"Even the bugs don't like them, that means," said Mrs. Scheer.

In the past, fall began with a collective rattle in the treetops; then,
in an endless profusion, the leaves snapped off and came floating down,
circling and flapping in updrafts, like the world shedding itself. We
let them accumulate. We stood by with an excuse to do nothing while
every day the branches showed growing patches of sky.

The first weekend after leaf fall, we began raking in military ranks,
heaping piles in the street. Different families used different methods.
The Buells employed a three-man formation, with two rakers raking
lengthwise and another sweeping in at a right angle, in imitation of a
formation Mr. Buell had used over the Hump. The Pitzenbergers toiled
with ten peopletwo parents, seven teenagers, and the two-year-old
Catholic mistake following with a toy rake. Mrs. Amberson, fat, used a
leaf blower. We all did our part. Afterward, the scrubbed grass, like

thoroughly brushed hair, gave us a pleasure we felt all the way to our
bowels. Sometimes the pleasure was so keen we raked up the grass itself,
leaving patches of dirt. At the end of day we stood at the curbside
surveying our lawns where every blade had been flattened, every dirt
clod obliterated, and even some of the dormant crocus bulbs violated. In
those days before universal pollution we were allowed to bum our leaves,
and at night, in one of the last rituals of our disintegrating tribe,
every father came down to the street to ignite his family's pile.

Usually Mr. Lisbon did their raking alone, singing in his soprano's
voice, but from fifteen Therese had begun to help, stooping and
scratching in mannish clothes, knee-high rubber boots and a fishing cap.
At night Mr. Lisbon would light his pile like the rest of the fathers,
but his anxiety over the fire's getting out of control would diminish
his pleasure. He patrolled his pile, tossing leaves into the center,
tidying the conflagration, and when Mr. Wadsworth offered him a sip from
his monogrammed flask, as he did every father on his rounds, Mr. Lisbon
would say, "Thanks no, thanks no."

The year of the suicides the Lisbons' leaves went unraked. On the
appropriate Saturday Mr. Lisbon didn't stir from his house. From time to
time as we raked, we looked over at the Lisbon house, its walls
accumulating autumn's dampness, its littered and varicolored lawn hemmed
in by lawns becoming increasingly exposed and green. The more leaves we
swept away, the more seemed heaped over the Lisbons' yard, smothering
bushes and covering the first porch step. When we lit bonfires that
night, every house leaped forward, blazing orange. Only the Lisbon house
remained dark, a tunnel, an emptiness, past our smoke and flames. As
weeks passed, their leaves remained. When they blew onto other people's
lawns there was grumbling. "These aren't my leaves," Mr. Anderson said,
stuffing them into a can. It rained twice and the leaves grew soggy and
brown, making the Lisbon lawn look like a field of mud.

It was the growing shabbiness of the house that attracted the first

reporters. Mr. Baubee, editor of the local paper, continued to defend
his decision against reporting on a personal tragedy such as suicide.
Instead, he chose to investigate the controversy over the new guardrails
obscuring our lakefront, or the deadlock in negotiations over the
cemetery workers' strike, now in its fifth month (bodies were being
shipped out of state in refrigerated trailers). The "Welcome, Neighbor"
section continued to feature newcomers attracted by our town's greenness
and quiet, its breathtaking verandas-a cousin of Winston Churchill at
his home on Windmill Pointe Boulevard, looking too thin to be related to
the Prime Minister; Mrs. Shed Turner, the first white woman ever to
penetrate the jungles of Papua New Guinea, holding in her lap what
appeared to be a shrunken head, though the caption identified the blur
as "her Yorkie, William the Conqueror."

Back in summer, the city newspapers had neglected to report on Cecilia's
suicide because of its sheer prosaicness. Owing to extensive layoffs at
the automotive plants, hardly a day passed without some despairing soul
sinking beneath the tide of the recession, men found in garages with
cars running, or twisted in the shower, still wearing work clothes. Only
murder-suicides made the papers, and then only on page 3 or 4, stories
of fathers shotgunning families before turning the guns on themselves,
descriptions of men setting fire to their own houses after securing the
doors. Mr. Larkin, publisher of the city's largest newspaper, lived only
a half mile from the Lisbons, and there was no doubt he knew what had
transpired. Joe Hill Conley, who fooled around with Missy Larkin every
so often (she'd had a yearlong crush on him despite his frequent shaving
cuts), testified to us that Missy and her mother had discussed the
suicide within Mr. Larkins hearing, but that he showed no interest as he
lay on his chaise in the sun with a wet cloth over his eyes.
Nevertheless, on October 15, over three months later, a letter to the
editor was published describing in the sketchiest manner possible the
particulars of Cecilia's suicide, and calling on the schools to address
"today's teenagers' overwhelming anxiety." The letter was signed "Mrs.
1. Dew Hopewell," an obvious pseudonym, but certain details pointed to

someone on our street. First of all, the rest of the town had forgotten
about Cecilia's suicide by that point, whereas the growing disrepair of
the Lisbon house constantly reminded us of the trouble within. Years
later, after there were no more daughters to save, Mrs. Denton confessed
that she had written the letter, in a fit of righteous indignation under
the hair dryer. She did not regret it. "You can't just stand by and let
your neighborhood go down the toilet," she said. "We're good people
around here."

The day after her letter appeared, a blue Pontiac drove up to the Lisbon
house and an unfamiliar woman got out. After checking the address
against a piece of paper, she walked up to the front porch nobody had
climbed in weeks. Shaft Tiggs, the paper boy, now lobbed papers against
the door from ten feet away. He'd even stopped collecting on Thursdays
(his mother made up the difference from her pocketbook, cautioning him
not to tell his father). The Lisbon porch, where we'd first stood to see
Cecilia on the fence, had become like a sidewalk crack: stepping on it
was bad luck. The Astroturf welcome mat curled at the edges. Unread
papers lay in a waterlogged heap, red ink running from color sports
photographs. The metal mailbox released an odor of rust. The young woman
moved the newspapers aside with her blue pump and knocked. The door
opened a crack and the woman, squinting into the darkness, launched into
her spiel. At some point she realized her listener was a foot shorter
than where she was looking, and readjusted her gaze. She took a pocket
notebook from her jacket, waving it like the faked papers spies wave in
war films. It worked. The door opened a few more inches to let her in.

Linda Perl's story appeared the next day, though Mr. Larkin would never
discuss his reasons for running it. It gave a detailed account of
Cecilia's suicide. From the quotations in the piece (you may read it for
yourself if you like; we've included it as Exhibit #9), it's clear Ms.
Perl, a staff reporter recently hired from a provincial newspaper in
MacKinac, interviewed only Bonnie and Mary before Mrs. Lisbon threw her
out.

The story proceeds by the logic of the many "human interest" pieces that
had begun to proliferate at the time. It paints the picture of the
Lisbon house in the broadest terms. Phrases such as "The tony suburb
known more for debutante parties than for funerals of debutante-aged
girls" and "The bright bouncy girls show little sign of the recent
tragedy" give an idea of Ms. Perl's style. After rendering the most
cursory description of Cecilia ("She liked to paint and write in her
journal"), the piece solves the mystery of her death by giving way to
conclusions such as these: "Psychologists agree that adolescence is much
more fraught with pressures and complexities than in years past. Often,
in today's world, the extended childhood American life has bestowed on
its young turns out to be a wasteland, where the adolescent feels cut
off from both childhood and adulthood. Self-expression can often be
frustrated. More and more, doctors say, this frustration can lead to
acts of violence whose reality the adolescent cannot separate from the
intended drama.

Ostensibly, the piece avoids sensationalism by informing the readership
of a common social danger. The following day a general article on
teenage suicide appeared, also by Ms. Perl, complete with charts and
graphs, and mentioning Cecilia only in its first sentence: "The suicide
of an East Side teenager last summer has increased public awareness of a
national crisis."

From then on it was a free-for-all. Articles came out listing teenage
suicides statewide for the past year. Photographs ran, usually school
portraits showing troubled youngsters in dress-up clothes, boys with
wispy mustaches and necktie knots like goiters, girls with hair sprayed
into meringue, their vulnerable necks tagged by gold chains spelling out
"Sherri" and "Gloria."

Home photos presented the teenagers smiling in happier times, often over
birthday cakes flaming with conclusive candles. Because Mr. and Mrs.

Lisbon refused interviews, the papers had to obtain photographs of
Cecilia from our school yearbook, Spirit. On the torn-out page (Exhibit
#4), Cecilia's penetrating face peers from between the sweatered
shoulders of two cropped-out schoolmates. ngly dreary exterior of the
Lisbon house, first Channel 2, then Channel 4, then finally Channel 7.
We watched to see the Lisbon house on TV, but they didn't use the
footage until months later after the rest of the girls killed
themselves, and by then the season was all wrong. Meanwhile, a local
television show focused on the subject of teenage suicide, inviting two
girls and one boy to explain their reasons for attempting it. We
listened to them, but it was clear they'd received too much therapy to
know the truth. Their answers sounded rehearsed, relying on concepts of
self-esteem and other words clumsy on their tongues. One of the girls,
Rannie Jilson, had tried to end her life by baking a pie full of rat
poison so that she could eat it without attracting suspicion, but had
served only to kill her eighty-six-year-old grandmother, a lover of
sweets. At this point Rannie broke down weeping, the host consoled her,
and we were into a commercial.

Many people objected to the articles and television shows, coming as
they did so long after the fact. Mrs. Eugene said, "Why can't they let
her rest in peace," while Mrs. Larson lamented that the media attention
had come "just when things were getting back to normal." Nevertheless,
the coverage alerted us to danger signals we couldn't help but look for.
Were the Lisbon girls' pupils dilated? Did they use nose spay
excessively? Eye drops? Had they lost interest in school activities, in
sports, in hobbies? Had they withdrawn from their peers? Did they suffer
crying jags for no reason? Did they complain of insomnia, pains in the
chest, constant fatigue? Pamphlets arrived, dark green with white
lettering, sent out by our local Chamber of Commerce. "We thought green
was cheerful. But not too cheerful," said Mr. Babson, who was president.
"Green was also serious. So we went with it." The pamphlets made no
mention of Cecilia's death, delving instead into the causes of suicide
in general. We learned that there were 80 suicides per day in America,

30,000 per year, that an attempt or completion happened every minute, a
completion every 18 minutes, that 3 to 4 times as many males completed
suicide but 3 times as many females attempted it, that more whites than
non-whites completed suicide, that the rate of suicide among the young
(15-24) had tripled in the last four decades, that suicide was the
second leading cause of death among high-school students, that 25
percent of all suicides occurred in the 15-24 age group, but that,
contrary to our expectations, the highest rate of suicide was found
among white males over 50. Many men said afterward that the board
members of the local Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Babson, Mr. Laurie, Mr.
Peterson, and Mr. Hocksteder, had shown great prescience in predicting
the negative publicity the suicide scare would bring to our town, as
well as the subsequent fall in commercial activity. While the suicides
lasted, and for some time after, the Chamber of Commerce worried less
about the influx of black shoppers and more about the outflux of whites.
Brave blacks had been slipping in for years, though they were usually
women, who blended in with our maids. The city downtown had deteriorated
to such a degree that most blacks had no other place to go. Not by
choice did they pass our display windows where trim mannequins modeled
green skirts, pink espadrilles, blue handbags clasped by gold frogs
kissing. Even though we'd always chosen to play Indians and not cowboys,
considered Travis Williams the best kickoff returner ever and Willie
Horton the best hitter, nothing shocked us more than the sight of a
black person shopping on Kercheval. We couldn't help but wonder if
certain "improvements" in The Village hadn't been made to scare black
people off. The ghost in the window of the costume shop, for instance,
had an awfully pointed, hooded head, and the restaurant, without
explanation, took fried chicken off its menu.

But we were never sure if these developments had been planned, because
as soon as the suicides began the Chamber of Commerce turned its
attention to a "Campaign for Wellness." Under the guise of health
education, the chamber set up tables in school gymnasia, giving out
information on a variety of hazards, from rectal cancer to diabetes. The

Hare Krishnas were allowed to chant bald-headed and serve sugary
vegetarian food for free. Mixed in with this new approach were the green
pamphlets and family therapy sessions at which kids had to stand up and
describe their nightmares. Willie Kuntz, whose mother took him to one,
said, "They weren't going to let me out of there until I cried and told
my mom I loved her. So I did. But I faked the crying part. Just rub your
eyes until they hurt. That works, sort of."

Amid the increasing scrutiny, the girls managed to keep a low profile at
school. Various sightings of them at the time merged into a general
image of their careful cluster moving down the central hallway. They
passed beneath the great school clock, the black finger of the minute
hand pointing down at their soft heads. We always expected the clock to
fall, but it never did, and soon the girls had skipped past the danger,
their skirts growing transparent in the light coming from the hall's far
end, revealing the wishbones of their legs. If we followed, however, the
girls would vanish, and, looking into classrooms they might have
entered, we would see every other face but theirs, or would overshoot
their trail and end up in the Lower School amid a meaningless swirl of
finger paintings. The smell of egg tempera still brings back those
useless pursuits. The halls, cleaned by lonely janitors at night, were
silent, and we would follow a pencil arrow some kid had drawn on the
wall for fifty feet, telling ourselves that this would be the time we
spoke to the Lisbon girls and asked them what was troubling them.
Sometimes we caught sight of tattered knee socks rounding a corner, or
came upon them doubled over, shoving books into a cubbyhole, flicking
the hair out of their eyes. But it was always the same: their white
faces drifting in slow motion past us, while we pretended we hadn't been
looking for them at all, that we didn't know they existed.

We have a few documents from the time (Exhibits #13-#15)Therese's
chemistry write-ups, Bonnie's history paper on Simone Weil, Lux's
frequent forged excuses from phys. ed. She always used the same method,
faking the rigid t's and b's of her mother's signature and then, to

distinguish her own handwriting, penning her signature, Lux Lisbon,
below, the two beseeching L's reaching out for each other over the ditch
of the u and the barbed-wire x. Julie Winthrop also used to skip gym and
spent many classes with Lux in the girls' locker room. "We used to climb
up on the lockers and smoke," she told us. "You couldn't see us from the
ground, and if any teachers came by, they couldn't tell where the smoke
was coming from. They usually thought whoever was smoking had already
left." According to Julie Winthrop, she and Lux were only "cig friends"
and didn't talk much on top of the lockers, too busy inhaling or
listening for footsteps. She did say that Lux had an affected hardness
that might have been a reaction to pain.

"She was always saying, "Fuck this school,' or "I can't wait until I get
out of here.' But so did lots of kids." Once, however, after they were
finished smoking, Julie jumped down off the lockers and started out.
When Lux didn't follow, she called her name. "She still didn't answer,
so I went back and looked on top of the lockers. She was just lying
there, hugging herself She wasn't making any sound. She was just shaking
like she was really cold."

Our teachers remembered the girls during this period in various ways,
depending on the subject they taught. Mr. Nillis said of Bonnie, "It was
pre-cal. We didn't exactly get touchy-feely"; while Seflor Lorca said of
Therese, "A big girl! I think smaller, maybe happier. That is the way of
the world and men's hearts." Apparently, though not a natural at
languages, Therese spoke in a credible Castilian accent and had a great
capacity for memorizing vocabulary. "She could speak Spanish," Sehor
Lorca said, "but not feel it."

In her written response to our questions (she wanted time to "ponder and
deliberate"), Miss Arndt, the art teacher, said, "Mary's watercolors did
possess what, for lack of a better word, I will call a 'mournfulness.'
But in my experience, there are really only two kinds of children: the
empty-headed ones (Fauvist flowers, dogs, and sailboats) and the

intelligent ones (gouaches of urban decay, gloomy abstractions)-much
like my own painting in college, and during those three heady years in
'the Village.' Could I foresee she would commit suicide? I regret to
say, no. At least ten percent of my students were born with modernist
tendencies. I ask you: is dullness a gift? intelligence a curse? I'm
forty-seven years old and live alone."

Day by day, the girls ostracized themselves. Because they stayed in a
group, other girls found it difficult to talk or walk with them, and
many assumed they wanted to be left alone. And the more the Lisbon girls
were left alone, the more they retreated. Sheila Davis told of being in
an English study group with Bonnie Lisbon. "We were discussing this book
Portrait of a Lady. We had to do a character sketch on Ralph. Bonnie
didn't say much at first. But then she reminded us how Ralph always
keeps his hands in his pockets. Then, like a jerk, I go, "It's really
sad when he dies.' I wasn't even thinking. Grace Hilton elbowed me and I
turned purple. It got totally quiet."

It was Mrs. Woodhouse, the headmaster's wife, who came up with the idea
for the "Day of Grieving." She had majored in psychology in college and
now, twice a week, volunteered at a Head Start program in the inner
city. "They kept writing about the suicide in the paper, but do you know
we hadn't mentioned it once in school all that year?" she told us nearly
twenty years later. "I'd wanted Dick to address the matter at
Convocation, but he felt otherwise and I had to defer. But little by
little, as the volume rose, he came around to my view." (In fact, Mr.
Woodhouse had addressed the subject, if obliquely, during his speech of
welcome at Convocation. After introducing the new teachers, he had said,
"It has been a long, hard summer for some of us here today. But today
begins a new year of hopes and goals.") Mrs. Woodhouse broached her idea
to a few departmental heads during dinner at the modest ranch-style
house that came with her husband's position, and the following week
proposed it at a full teachers' meeting. Mr. Pulff, who left shortly
thereafter to pursue a job in advertising, recalled a few of Mrs.

Woodhouse's words that day." "Grief is natural,' she said. "Overcoming
it is a matter of choice.' I remember it because I used it later for a
diet product: "Eating is natural. Gaining weight is your choice.' Maybe
you saw it." Mr. Pulff voted against the Day of Grieving but was in the
minority. The date was set.

Most people remember the Day of Grieving as an obscure holiday. The
first three hours of school were canceled and we remained in our home
rooms. Teachers passed out mimeographs related to the day's theme, which
was never officially announced, as Mrs. Woodhouse felt it inappropriate
to single out the girls' tragedy. The result was that the tragedy was
diffused and universalized. As Kevin Tiggs put it, "It seemed like we
were supposed to feel sorry for everything that ever happened, ever."

Teachers had latitude to present material of their own choosing. Mr.
Hedlie, the English teacher who rode his bicycle to school with his
trouser cuffs secured in metal clips, handed out a collection of poems
by the Victorian poet Christina Rossetti. Deborah Ferentell remembered a
few lines from one poem entitled "Rest": Earth, lie heavily upon her
eyes; Seal her sweet eyes weary of watching, Earth; Lie close around
her; leave no roomfor mirth With its harsh laughter, norfor sound of
sighs. She hath no questions, she hath no replies.

The Reverend Pike spoke of the Christian message of death and rebirth,
working in a story of his own heartrending loss when his college
football team failed to clinch the division title. Mr. Tonover, who
taught chemistry and still lived with his mother, was at a loss for
words on the occasion, and let his students cook peanut brittle over a
Bunsen burner. Other classes, dividing into groups, played games where
they envisioned themselves as architectural structures. "If you were a
building," the leader would ask, "what kind of building would you be?"
They had to describe these structures in great detail and then make
improvements. The Lisbon girls, stranded in separate home rooms,
declined to play, or kept asking to be excused to go to the bathroom.

None of the teachers insisted on their participating, with the result
that all the healing was done by those of us without wounds. At midday,
Becky Talbridge saw the Lisbon girls together in the girls' bathroom in
the Science Wing. "They'd brought chairs in from the hall and they were
just sitting there, waiting it out. Mary had a run in her nylon-can you
believe she wore nylons?-and she was fixing it with fingernail polish.
Her sisters were sort of watching her but they seemed pretty ion bored.
I went into the stall, but I could feel them out there and I couldn't,
you know, go."

Mrs. Lisbon never learned about the Day of Grieving. Neither her husband
nor her daughters mentioned it when they returned home that day. Mr.
Lisbon had of course been present at the teachers' meeting when Mrs.
Woodhouse made her proposal, but accounts differ as to his reaction. Mr.
Rodriguez remembered him as "nodding his head, but not saying anything,"
while Miss Shuttleworth recalled that he left the meeting shortly after
it began and never returned. "He never heard about the Day of Grieving.
He left in a state of distraction and a winter coat, she said, still
quizzing us on rhetorical constructions (in this case, zeugma) which we
had to identify before being excused from her presence. When Miss
Shuttlewor-th came into the room for her interview, we stood in respect
as we always had, and even though we were approaching middle age, a few
of us balding, she still referred to us as "infants," as she had in her
classroom so long ago. She still had the plaster bust of Cicero on her
desk and the imitation Grecian urn we had given her upon graduation, and
still exuded the air of a powdered celibate polymath. "I don't think Mr.
Lisbon knew about the Dies Lacrimarum until it was well under way. I
passed by his classroom during second period and he was at the
blackboard, in his chair, instructing. I don't think anyone had had the
fortitude to acquaint him with the day's activities." Indeed, when we
spoke to him years later, Mr. Lisbon possessed only a vague memory of
the Day of Grieving. "Try decade," he told us.

For a long time no one agreed on the success of the various attempts to

address Cecilia's suicide. Mrs. Woodhouse thought the Day of Grieving
had served a vital purpose, and many teachers were pleased that the
silence around the subject had been broken. A psychological counselor
came on staff once a week, sharing the small office of the school nurse.
Any student feeling the need to talk was encouraged to go. We never did,
but every Friday peeked in to see if any of the Lisbon girls met with
the counselor. Her name was Miss Lynn Kilsem, but a year later, after
the rest of the suicides, she disappeared without a word. Her degree in
social work turned out to be fake, and no one is sure if her name was
really Lynn Kilsem, or who she was, or where she went off to. In any
case, she is one of the few people we haven't been able to track down,
and in the characteristic irony of fate, one of the few people who might
have been able to tell us something. For apparently the girls went to
see Miss Kilsem regularly on Fridays, though we never saw them amid the
paltry medical supplies of that poor excuse for a nurse's office. Miss
Kilsem's patient records were lost in an office fire five years later (a
coffee maker, an old extension cord) and we have no exact information
regarding the sessions. Muffie Perry, however, who had been using Miss
Kilsem as a sports psychologist, often recalled seeing Lux or Mary in
the office, and sometimes Therese and Bonnie as well. We had a great
deal of trouble locating Muffie Perry herself, owing to the many rumors
involving her married name. Some said she was now Muffie Friewald,
others Muffie von Rechewicz, but when we finally dug her up, tending the
rare orchids her grandmother had bequeathed to the Belle Isle Botanical
Garden, she told us her name was still Muffie Perry, period, as it had
been in the days of her field hockey triumphs. We didn't recognize her
at first, what with the sucking vines and thick creepers, the misty
hothouse air, and even when we cajoled her to stand under the artificial
grow lamp, we saw that she had swelled and puckered, that her great
goal-scoring back was hunched, but that her tiny teeth in their bright
gums were unchanged. The decadence of Belle Isle contributed to our
gloomy reappraisal. We remembered the delicate fig-shaped island,
stranded between the American Empire and peaceful Canada, as it had been
years ago, with its welcoming redwhite-and-blue flag-shaped flower bed,

splashing fountains, European casino, and horse paths leading through
woods where Indians had bent trees into giant bows. Now grass grew in
patches down to the littered beach where children fished with pop tops
tied to string. Paint flaked from once-bright gazebos. Drinking
fountains rose from mud puddles laid with brokenbrick stepping stones.
Along the road the granite face of the Civil War Hero had been
spray-painted black. Mrs. Huntington Perry had donated her prize orchids
to the Botanical Garden in the time before the riots, when civic moneys
still ran high, but since her death ion the eroding tax base had forced
cutbacks that had laid off one skilled gardener a year, so that plants
that had survived transplantation from equatorial regions to bloom again
in that false paradise now withered, weeds sprang up amid scrupulous
identification tags, and fake sunlight flowed for only a few hours per
day. The only thing that remained was the steam vapor, beading the
sloping greenhouse windows and filling our nostrils with the moisture
and aroma of a rotting world.

It was the decay that brought Muffie Perry back. Her grandmother's
cycnoches had nearly died of blight; parasites overran her three
extraordinary dendrobiums; and the bank of miniature masdevallias, whose
purple velvet petals tipped in blood Mrs. Huntington Perry had herself
bred through elaborate hybridization, looked for all the world like a
rack of cheap nursery pansies. Her granddaughter had been volunteering
her time in the hope of restoring the flowers to former glory, but she
told us it was hopeless, hopeless. The plants were expected to grow in
the light of a dungeon. Hoodlums jumped the back fence and ran through
the greenhouse, uprooting plants for the fun of it. Muffie Perry had
wounded one vandal by wielding a garden trowel. We had a hard time
directing her attention back from the world of cracked windows, heaped
dirt, unpaid admissions, and rats nesting in Egyptian bulrushes.
Gradually, however, feeding the tiny faces of the orchids with an
eyedropper filled with what looked like milk, she told us how the girls
had appeared during their sessions with Miss Kilsem. "At first they were
still pretty depressedlooking. Mary had these huge circles under her

eyes. Like a mask." Muffie Perry could still remember the office's
superstitious smell of antiseptic, which she always thought was the odor
of the girls' grief They would be just leaving when she came in, their
eyes downcast, their shoes untied, but they always remembered to take a
chocolate mint from the dish the nurse kept on a table by the door. They
left Miss Kilsem bobbing in the wake of whatever they'd told her. Often
she sat at her desk, eyes closed, thumbs to acupressure points, and
didn't speak for a full minute. "I've always had a hunch that Miss
Kilsem was the one they confided in," Muffie Perry said. "For whatever
reason. Maybe that's why she took off."

Whether the girls confided in Miss Kilsem or not, the therapy seemed to
help. Almost immediately their moods brightened. Coming in for her
appointment, Muffie Perry heard them laughing or talking excitedly. The
window would sometimes be open, and both Lux and Miss Kilsem would be
smoking against the rules, or the girls would have raided the candy
dish, strewing Miss Kilsem's desk with wadded wrappers.

We noticed the change, too. The girls seemed less tired. In class they
stared out the window less, raised their hands more, spoke up. They
momentarily forgot the stigma attached to them and took part again in
school activities. Therese attended Science Club meetings in Mr.
Tonover's bleak classroom with its fire-retardant tables and deep black
sinks. Mary helped the divorced lady sew costumes for the school play
two afternoons a week. Bonnie even showed up at a Christian fellowship
meeting at the house of Mike Firkin, who later became a missionary and
died of malaria in Thailand. Lux tried out for the school musical, and
because Eugie Kent had a crush on her, and Mr. Oliphant the theater
director had a crush on Eugie Kent, she got a small part in the chorus,
singing and dancing as though she were happy. Eugie said later that Mr.
Oliphant's blocking always kept Lux onstage while Eugie was off, so that
he could never find her in the darkness backstage to wrap himself up in
the curtains with her. Four weeks later, of course, after the girls'
final incarceration, Lux dropped out of the play, but those who saw it

performed said that Eugie Kent sang his numbers in his usual strident
unremarkable voice, more in love with himself than with the chorus girl
whose absence no one noticed.

By this time autumn had turned grim, locking the sky in steel. In Mr.
Lisbon's classroom, the planets shifted a few inches each day, and it
was clear, if you looked up, that the earth had turned its blue face
away from the sun, that it was sweeping down its own dark alley in
space, over where cobwebs collected in the ceiling corner, out of reach
of  the  janitor's  broom.  As  summer's  humidity  became  a  memory,  the
summer
itself began to seem unreal, until we lost sight of it. Poor Cecilia
appeared in our consciousness at odd moments, most often as we were just
waking up, or staring out a car-pool window streaked with rainshe rose
up in her wedding dress, muddy with the I I I afterlife, but then a horn
would honk, or our radio alarms would unleash a popular song, and we
snapped back to reality. Other people filed Cecilia's memory away even
more easily. When they spoke of her, it was to say that they had always
expected Cecilia to meet a bad end, and that far from viewing the Lisbon
girls as a single species, they had always seen Cecilia as apart, a
freak of nature. Mr. Hillyer summed up the majority sentiment at the
time: "Those girls have a bright future ahead of them. That other one
was just going to end up a kook."

Little by little, people ceased to discuss the mystery of Cecilia's
suicide, preferring to see it as inevitable, or as something best left
behind. Though Mrs. Lisbon continued her shadowy existence, rarely
leaving the house and getting her groceries delivered, no one objected,
and some even sympathized. "I feel sorriest for the mother," Mrs. Eugene
said. "You would always wonder if there was something you could have
done." As for the suffering, surviving girls, they grew in stature like
the Kennedys. Kids once again sat next to them on the bus. Leslie
Tompkins borrowed Mary's brush to tame her long red hair. Julie Winthrop
smoked with Lux atop the lockers, and said the shaking episode was not

repeated. Day by day, the girls appeared to be getting over their loss.

It was during this convalescent period that Trip Fontaine made his move.
Without consulting anyone or confessing his feelings for Lux, Trip
Fontaine walked into Mr. Lisbon's classroom and stood at attention
before his desk. He found Mr. Lisbon alone, in his swivel chair, staring
vacantly at the planets hanging above his head. A youthful cowlick
sprang from his gray hair. "It's fourth period, Trip," he said wearily.
"I don't have you until fifth."

"I'm not here for math today, sir."

"You're not?"

"I'm here to tell you that my intentions toward your daughter are
entirely honorable."

Mr. Lisbon's eyebrows rose, but his expression was used up, as though
six or seven boys had made the same declaration that very morning. "And
what might those intentions be?"

Trip brought his boots together. "I want to ask Lux to Homecoming."

At that point, Mr. Lisbon told Trip to sit down, and for the next few
minutes, in a patient voice, he explained that he and his wife had
certain rules, they had been the same rules for the older girls and he
couldn't very well change them now for the younger ones, even if he
wanted to his wife wouldn't let him, ha ha, and while it was fine if
Trip wanted to come over to watch television again, he could not, repeat
not, take Lux out, especially in a car. Mr. Lisbon spoke, Trip told us,
with surprising sympathy, as though he, too, recalled the below-thebelt
pain of adolescence. He could also tell how starved Mr. Lisbon was for a
son, because as he spoke he got up and gave Trip's shoulders three
sporting shakes. "I'm afraid it's just our policy," he said, finally.

Trip Fontaine saw the doors closing. Then he saw the family photograph
on Mr. Lisbon's desk. Before a Ferris wheel, Lux held in one red fist a
candy apple whose polished surface reflected the baby fat under her
chin. One side of her sugarcoated lips had come unstuck, showing a
tooth. "What if it was a bunch of us guys?" Trip Fontaine said. "And we
took out your other daughters, too, like in a group? And we had them
back by whatever time you say."

Trip Fontaine made this new offer in a controlled voice, but his hands
shook and his eyes grew moist. Mr. Lisbon looked at him a long time.
"You on the football squad, son?"

"Yes, sir."

"What position?"

"Offensive tackle."

"I played safety in my day."

"Crucial position, sir. Nothing between you and the goal line."

"Exactly."

"Thing is, sir, we've got the big Homecoming game against Country Day,
and then the dance and everything, and all the guys on the team are
going with dates. "

"You're a good-looking young fella. Lots of girls would go with you, I
bet."

"I'm not interested in lots of girls, sir," Trip Fontaine said. Mr.
Lisbon sat back down in his chair. He drew a long breath. He looked at

the photograph of his family, one face of which, smiling dreamily, no
longer existed. "I'll take it up with their mother," he said, finally.
"I'll do what I can." That was how a few of us came to take the girls on
the only unchaperoned date they ever had. As soon as he left Mr.
Lisbon's classroom, Trip Fontaine began assembling his team. At football
practice that afternoon, during wind sprints, he said, "I'm taking Lux
Lisbon to Homecoming. All I need is three guys for the other chicks.
Who's it going to be?" Running twentyyard intervals, gasping for breath,
in clumsy pads and unclean athletic socks, we each tried to convince
Trip Fontaine to pick us. Jerry Burden offered three free joints. Parkie
Denton said they could take his father's Cadillac. We all said
something. Buzz Romano, nicknamed "Rope" because of the astonishing
trained pet he showed us in the showers, covered his protective cup with
his hands and lay moaning in the end zone: "I'm dying! I'm dying! You
got to pick me, Tripster!"

In the end, Parkie Denton won because of the Cadillac, Kevin Head
because he'd helped Trip Fontaine tune up his car, and Joe Hill Conley
because he won all the school prizes, which Trip thought would impress
Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon. The next day Trip presented the slate to Mr.
Lisbon, and by the end of the week Mr. Lisbon announced his and his
wife's decision. The girls could go under the following conditions: (1)
they would go in a group; (2) they would go to the dance and nowhere
else; (3) they would be home by eleven. Mr. Lisbon told Trip it would be
impossible to get around these conditions. "I'm going to be one of the
chaperons," he said.

It's difficult to know what the date meant to the girls. When Mr. Lisbon
gave them permission, Lux ran and hugged him, kissing him with the
unselfconscious affection of a little girl. "She hadn't kissed me like
that in years," he said. The other girls reacted with less enthusiasm.
At the time, Therese and Mary were playing Chinese checkers while Bonnie
looked on. They broke their concentration from the dimpled metal board
only for a moment, asking their father the identities of the other boys

in the group. He told them. "Who's taking who?" Mary asked. "They're
just going to raffle us off," Therese said, and then made six ringing
jumps into her safety zone.

Their lukewarm reaction made sense in terms of family history. In
concert with other church mothers, Mrs. Lisbon had arranged group dates
before. The Perkins boys had paddled the Lisbon girls in five aluminum
canoes along a murky canal at Belle Isle, while Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon and
Mr. and Mrs. Perkins kept a watchful distance in paddle boats. Mrs.
Lisbon thought the darker urges of dating could be satisfied by frolic
in the open air-love sublimated by lawn darts. On a road trip recently
(no reason for going other than boredom and gray skies) we stopped in
Pennsylvania and, while buying candles in a roughhewn store, learned of
the Amish courting custom wherein a boy takes his homespun date for a
ride in a black buggy, followed by her parents in another.

Mrs. Lisbon, too, believed in keeping romance under surveillance. But
whereas the Amish boy later returns in the dead of night to throw
pebbles against the girl's window (pebbles everyone agrees not to hear),
no nocturnal amnesty existed in Mrs. Lisbon's doctrine. Her canoes never
led to campfires.

The girls could expect only more of the same. And with Mr. Lisbon
chaperoning, they would be kept on the usual short leash. It was
difficult enough having a teacher for a parent, on view day after day in
his three suits, making a living. The Lisbon girls received free tuition
because of their father's position, but Mary had once told Julie Ford
this made her feel "like a charity case." Now he would be patrolling the
dance along with other teachers who had volunteered or been forced to
chaperon, usually the most uncoordinated teachers who didn't coach a
sport, or the most socially inept for whom the dance was a way of
filling another lonely night. Lux didn't seem to mind because her
thoughts were filled with Trip Fontaine. She had gone back to writing
names on her underthings, using water-soluble ink so that she could wash

the "Trips" off before her mother saw them. (All day, however, his name
had been continuously announcing itself against her skin.) Presumably
she confessed her feelings about Trip to her sisters, but no girl at
school ever heard her mention his name. Trip and Lux sat together at
lunch, and sometimes we saw them walking the halls, searching for a
closet or bin or heating duct to lie down inside, but even at school Mr.
Lisbon was on hand, and after a few suppressed circuits, they came past
the cafeteria and up the rubber-matted ramp leading to Mr. Lisbon's
classroom and, briefly touching hands, went their separate ways.

The other girls barely knew their dates. "They hadn't even been asked,"
Mary Peters said. "It was like an arranged marriage or something.
Creepy." Nevertheless, they allowed the date to go forward, to please
Lux, to please themselves, or just to break the monotony of another
Friday night. When we talked to Mrs. Lisbon years later, she told us she
had had no qualms about the date, mentioning in support of this claim
the dresses she had sewn especially for the evening. The week before
Homecoming, in fact, she had taken the girls to a fabric store. The
girls wandered amid the racks of patterns, each containing the tissue
paper outline of a dream dress, but in the end it made no difference
which pattern they chose. Mrs. Lisbon added an inch to the bust lines
and two inches to the waists and hems, and the dresses came out as four
identical shapeless sacks.

A photo survives of that night (Exhibit #10). The girls are lined up in
their party dresses, shoulder to square shoulder, like pioneer women.
Their stiff hairdos ("hairdon'ts," Tessie Nepi, the beautician, said)
have the stoic, presumptuous quality of European fashions enduring the
wilderness. The dresses, too, look frontierish, with lace-trimmed bibs
and high necklines. Here you have them, as we knew them, as we're still
coming to know them: skittish Bonnie, shrinking from the flash; Therese,
with her braincase squeezing shut the suspicious slits of her eyes;
Mary, Ila proper and posed; and Lux, looking not at the camera but up in
the air. It was raining that night, and a leak had developed just over

her head, hitting her cheek a second before Mr. Lisbon said, "Cheese."
Though hardly ideal (a distracting'light source invades from the left),
the photograph still conveys the pride of attractive offspring and
liminal rites. An air of expectancy glows in the girls' faces. Gripping
one another, pulling each other into the frame, they seem braced for
some discovery or change of life. Of life. That, at least, is how we see
it. Please don't touch. We're going to put the picture back in its
envelope now.

After that portrait was taken, the girls waited for the boys in
individual ways. Bonnie and Therese sat down to play a game of cards,
while Mary stood very still in the middle of the living room, trying not
to wrinkle her dress. Lux opened the front door and wobbled onto the
porch. At first we thought she had sprained her ankle, but then we saw
she was wearing high heels. She walked up and down, practicing, until
Parkie Denton's car appeared at the end of the block. Then she turned,
rang her own doorbell to warn her sisters, and disappeared inside again.

Left out, we watched the boys drive up. Parkie Denton's yellow Cadillac
floated down the street, the boys suspended in the car's inner
atmosphere. Though it was raining, and the windshield wipers were going,
the car's interior had a warm glow. As they passed Joe Larson's house,
the boys gave us a thumbs-up.

Trip Fontaine got out first. He'd pushed up his jacket sleeves as male
models did in his father's fashion magazines. He was wearing a thin tie.
Parkie Denton had on a blue blazer, as did Kevin Head, and then Joe Hill
Conley vaulted from the back seat, wearing an oversize tweed blazer
belonging to his father the schoolteacher and Communist. At that point,
the boys hesitated, standing around the car, oblivious to the drizzle,
until Trip Fontaine finally headed up the front path. We lost sight of
them at the door, but they told us the beginning of the date was like
any other. The girls had gone upstairs, pretending not to be ready, and
Mr. Lisbon took the boys into the living room.

"The girls'll be down in just a minute," he said, looking at his watch.
"Jeez. I better get going myself." Mrs. Lisbon came to the archway. She
was holding her temple as though she had a headache, but her smile was
polite. "Hello, boys."

"Hello, Mrs. Lisbon" (in unison).

She had the rectitude, Joe Hill Conley later said, of someone who had
just come from weeping in the next room. He had sensed (this said many
years later, of course, when Joe Hill Conley claimed to tap at will the
energy of his chakras) an ancient pain arising from Mrs. Lisbon, the sum
of her people's griefs. "She came from a sad race," he said. "It wasn't
only Cecilia. The sadness had started long before. Before America. The
girls had it, too." He had never noticed her bifocals before. "They cut
her eyes in half"

"Which one of you is driving?" Mrs. Lisbon asked.

I am," said Parkie Denton. How long have you had your license?"

"Two months. But I had my permit for a year before that."

"We don't usually like the girls to go out in cars.

so many accidents nowadays. It's raining and the roads will be slick. So
I hope you'll be very careful."

"We will."

"OK," Mr. Lisbon said, "third degree's over.

Girls! "-delivered to the ceiling-"I've got to get going. I'll see you
at the dance, boys."

"See you there, Mr. Lisbon."

He went out, leaving the boys alone with his wife. She didn't meet their
eyes but scanned them generally, like a head nurse reading charts. Then
she went to the bottom of the stairs and stared up. Not even Joe Hill
Conley could imagine what she was thinking. Of Cecilia perhaps, climbing
those same stairs four months ago. Of the stairs she had descended on
her own first date. Of sounds only a mother can hear. None of the boys
ever remembered seeing Mrs. Lisbon so distracted. It was as though she
had suddenly forgotten they were there. She touched her temple (it was a
headache).

At last the girls came to the top of the stairs. It was dim up there
(three of twelve chandelier bulbs had burned out), and they held the
banister lightly as they descended. Their loose dresses reminded Kevin
Head of choir robes. "They didn't seem to notice, though. Personally, I
think they liked the dresses. Or else they were just so happy to be
going out they didn't care what they wore. I didn't care, either. They
looked great."

Only when the girls reached the bottom did the boys realize they hadn't
decided who was taking whom. Trip Fontaine, of course, had dibs on Lux,
but the other three girls were up for grabs. Fortunately, their dresses
and hairdos homogenized them. Once again the boys weren't even sure
which girl was which. Instead of asking, they did the only thing they
could think of doing: they presented the corsages. "We got white," Trip
Fontaine said. "We didn't know what color you were wearing. The flower
guy said white would go with everything."

"I'm glad you got white," said Lux. She reached out and took the
corsage, which was housed in a little plastic case.

"We didn't go for wrist ones," Parkie Denton said. "Those always fall

apart."

"Yeah, those are bad," said Mary. No one said anything more. No one
moved. Lux inspected her flower in its time capsule. In the background,
Mrs. Lisbon said, "Why don't you let the boys pin them on?"

At that, the girls stepped forward, shyly presenting the fronts of their
dresses. The boys fumbled with the corsages, taking them out of their
cases and avoiding the decorative stickpins. They could sense Mrs.
Lisbon watching them, and even though they were close enough to feel the
Lisbon girls' breath and to smell the first perfume they had ever been
allowed to wear, the boys tried not to stick the girls or even to touch
them. They gently lifted the material from the girls' chests and hung
white flowers over their hearts. Whichever Lisbon girl a boy pinned
became his date. When they finished, they said good night to Mrs. Lisbon
and led the girls outside to the Cadillac, holding the empty corsage
cases over the girls' heads to protect their hair from the drizzle.

From that point on, things went better than expected. At home, each boy
had pictured the Lisbon girls amid the stock scenery of our impoverished
imaginations-cavorting in the surf or playfully fleeing at the
ice-skating rink, dangling ski-hat pompoms like ripe fruit before our
faces. In the car, however, beside the actual living girls, the boys
realized the paltriness of these images. Inverse properties were also
discarded: notions of the girls as damaged or demented. (The crazy old
lady in the elevator every day turns out to be, when you finally speak
to her, perfectly lucid.) Something like this revelation came over the
boys. "They weren't all that different from my sister," Kevin Head said.
Lux, complaining she never got to, wanted to sit up front. She slid in
between Trip Fontaine and Parkie Denton. Mary, Bonnie, and Therese
crowded into the back seat, with Bonnie getting the hump. Joe Hill
Conley and Kevin Head sat on either side against the back doors.

Even up close, the girls didn't look depressed. They settled into the

seats, not minding the tight fit. Mary half sat in Kevin Head's lap.
They began chattering immediately. As houses passed, they had something
to say about the families in each one, which meant that they had been
looking out at us as intensely as we had been looking in. Two summers
ago they had seen Mr. Tubbs, the UAW middle-management boss, punch the
lady who had followed his wife home after a fender bender. They
suspected the Hessens had been Nazis or Nazi sympathizers. They loathed
the Kriegers' aluminum siding. "Mr. Belvedere strikes again," said
Therese, referring to the president of the homeimprovement company in
his late-night commercial. Like us, the girls had distinct memories tied
to various bushes, trees, and garage roofs. They recalled the race
riots, when tanks had appeared at the end of our block and National
Guardsmen had parachuted into our back yards. They were, after all, our
neighbors.

At first the boys said nothing, too overwhelmed by the Lisbon girls'
volubility. Who had known they talked so much, held so many opinions,
jabbed at the world's sights with so many fingers? Between our sporadic
glimpses of the girls they had been continuously living, developing in
ways we couldn't imagine, reading every book on the bowdlerized family
bookshelf. Somehow, too, they'd kept up on dating etiquette, through
television or observation at school, so that they knew how to keep the
conversation flowing or fill awkward silences. Their dating inexperience
showed only in their pinned-up hair, which looked like stuffing coming
out, or exposed wiring. Mrs. Lisbon had never given the girls beauty
tips, and forbade women's magazines in the house (a Cosmo survey, "Are
you multiply orgasmic?" had been the final straw). They had done the
best they could.

Lux spent the ride dialing the radio for her favorite , "It makes me
crazy," she said. "You know song. they're playing it somewhere. but you
have to find it." Parkie Denton drove down to Jefferson Avenue, past the
Wainwright house with its green historical marker, and toward the
gathering lakefront mansions. Imitation gas lanterns burned on front

lawns. On every corner a black maid waited for the bus. They drove on,
past the glittering lake, and finally under the ragged cover of elms
near the school. "Hold on a sec," Lux said. "I want a cig before we go
in."

"Dad'll smell it on you," Bonnie said from the back seat.

"Nah, I've got mints." She shook them. "He'll smell it on our clothes."

"Just tell him some kids were smoking in the bathroom. " Parkie Denton
lowered the front window while Lux smoked. She took her time, exhaling
through her nose.

At one point she jutted out her chin at Trip Fontaine, rounded her lips,
and, with a chimpanzee profile, sent forth three perfect smoke rings.
"Don't let it die a virgin," Joe Hill Conley said. He leaned into the
front seat and poked one.

"That's gross," said Therese. "Yeah, Conley," Trip Fontaine said. "Grow
up."

On the way into the dance, the couples separated.

One of Bonnie's high heels got stuck in the gravel and she leaned on Joe
Hill Conley while she detached it. Trip Fontaine and Lux moved on
together, already an item. Kevin Head walked in with Therese, while
Parkie Denton gave Mary his arm.

The light rain had stopped for a moment and the stars were out, in
patches. As Bonnie's shoe came loose, she looked up and called attention
to the sky. "It's always the Big Dipper," she said. "You look at those
charts and they have stars all over the place, but if you look up, all
you see is the Big Dipper."

"It's because of the lights," Joe Hill Conley said. "From the city."

"Duh," Bonnie said.

The girls were smiling as they entered the gymnasium amid the glowing
pumpkins and scarecrows dressed in school colors. The Dance Committee
had decided on a harvest theme. Straw was scattered over the basketball
court and cornucopias spewed tumorous gourds on the cider table. Mr.
Lisbon had already arrived, wearing an orange tie reserved for festive
occasions. He was talking with Mr. Tonover, the chemistry teacher. Mr.
Lisbon didn't acknowledge the girls' arrival in any way, though he might
not have seen them. The game lights had been covered with orange gels
from the theater and the bleachers were dark. A rented disco ball hung
from the scoreboard, dappling the room with light.

We had arrived with our own dates by then, and danced with them as
though holding mannequins, looking over their chiffon shoulders for the
Lisbon girls. We saw them come in, unsteady in their high heels.
Wide-eyed, they looked around the gym, and then, conferring among
themselves, left their dates while they took the first of seven trips to
the bathroom. Hopie Riggs was at the sink when the girls entered. "You
could tell they were embarrassed by their dresses," she said. "They
didn't say anything, but you could tell. I was wearing a dress with a
velvet bodice and taffeta skirt that night. I can still fit into it."
Only Mary and Bonnie had to use the facilities, but Lux and Therese kept
them company, Lux looking in the mirror for the instant it took to
reconfirm her beauty, Therese avoiding it altogether. "There's no
paper," Mary said from her stall. "Throw me some."

Lux ripped a bunch of paper towels from the dispenser and lofted them
over the stall. "It's snowing," Mary said, "They were really loud,"
Hopie Riggs told us.

"They acted like they owned the place. I had something on the back of my

dress, though, and Therese got it off." When we asked if the Lisbon
girls had spoken about their dates in the confessional surroundings of
the bathroom, Hopie answered, "Mary said she was happy her guy wasn't a
total geek. That was it, though. I don't think they cared so much about
their dates as just being at the dance. I felt the same way. I was there
with Tim Carter, the shrimpo."

When the girls came out of the bathroom, the dance floor was getting
more crowded, circulating couples slowly around the gym. Kevin Head
asked Therese to dance and soon they were lost in the tumult. "God, I
was so young," he said years later. "So scared. So was she. I took her
hand and we didn't know which way to do it. To interlace fingers or not.
Finally we did. That's what I remember most. The finger thing."

Parkie Denton remembers Mary's studied movements, her poise. "She led,"
he said. "She had a Kleenex balled in one hand."

During the dance, she made polite conversation, the kind beautiful young
women make with dukes during waltzes in old movies. She held herself
very straight, like Audrey Hepburn, whom all women idolize and men never
think about. She seemed to have a picture in her mind of what pattern
their feet should make over the floor, of how they should look together,
and she concentrated fiercely to realize it. "Her face was calm, but
inside she was tense," Parkie Denton said. "Her back muscles were like
piano strings." When a fast song came on, Mary danced less well. "Like
old people at weddings trying it out."

Lux and Trip didn't dance until later, and instead moved about the
gymnasium looking for a place to be alone. Bonnie followed. "So I
followed her," Joe Hill Conley said. "She pretended she was just walking
around, but she kept track of Lux from the corner of her eye." They went
in one side of the dance mob and out the other. They hugged the far wall
of the gym, passing beneath the decorated basketball net, and ended up
by the bleachers. Between songs, Mr. Durid . Dean of Students. opened

the voting for Homecoming King and Queen, and while everyone was looking
toward the glass ballot jar on the cider table, Trip Fontaine and Lux
Lisbon slipped underneath the bleachers.

Bonnie pursued them. "It was like she was afraid of being left alone,"
Joe Hill Conley said. Though she hadn't asked him to, he followed her.
Underneath, in the stripes of light coming through the slats, he saw
Trip Fontaine holding a bottle up to Lux's face so she could read the
label. "Did anybody see you come in?" Lux asked her sister. "No."

"What about you?"

"No," Joe Hill Conley said.

Then no one spoke. Everyone's attention returned to the bottle Trip
Fontaine held in his hand. Reflections from the disco ball glittered on
the bottle's surface, illuminating the inflamed fruit on the label.
"Peach schnapps," Trip Fontaine explained years later, in the desert,
drying out from that and everything else. "Babes love it."

He had purchased the liqueur with a fake 1. D. that afternoon, and had
carried it in the lining of his jacket all evening. Now, as the other
three watched, he unscrewed the bottle cap and sipped the syrup that was
like nectar or honey. "You have to taste it with a kiss," he said. He
held the bottle to Lux's lips, saying, "Don't swallow." Then, taking
another swig, he brought his mouth to Lux's in a peach-flavored kiss.
Her throat gurgled with captive mirth. She laughed, a trickle of
schnapps dripped down her chin where she caught it with one ringed hand,
but then they grew solemn, faces pressed together, swallowing and
kissing. When they stopped, Lux said, "That stuff's really good."

Trip handed the bottle to Joe Hill Conley. He held it to Bonnie's mouth,
but she turned away. I don't want any," she said. "Come on," Trip said.
"Just a taste."

"Don't be a goody-goody," said Lux.

Only the strip of Bonnie's eyes was visible, and in the silver light
they filled with tears. Below, in the dark where her mouth was, Joe Hill
Conley thrust the bottle. Her moist eyes widened. Her cheeks filled.
"Don't swallow it," Lux commanded. And then Joe Hill Conley spilled the
contents of his own mouth into Bonnie's. He said she kept her teeth
together throughout the kiss, grinning like a skull. The peach schnapps
passed back and forth between his mouth and hers, but then he felt her
swallowing, relaxing. Years later, Joe Hill Conley boasted that he could
analyze a woman's emotional makeup by the taste of her mouth, and
insisted he'd stumbled on this insight that night under the bleachers
with Bonnie. He could sense her whole being through the kiss, he said,
as though her soul escaped through her lips, as the Renaissance
believed. He tasted first the grease of her Chap Stick, then the sad
Brussels-sprout flavor of her last meal, and past that the dust of lost
afternoons and the salt of tear ducts. The peach schnapps faded away as
he sampled the juices of her inner organs, all slightly acidic with woe.
Sometimes her lips grew strangely cold, and, peeking, he saw she kissed
with her frightened eyes wide open. After that, the schnapps went back
and forth. We asked the boys if they had talked intimately with the
girls, or asked them about Cecilia, but they said no. "I didn't want to
ruin a good thing," Trip Fontaine said. And Joe Hill Conley: "There's a
time for talk and a time for silence." Even though he tasted mysterious
depths in Bonnie's mouth, he didn't search them out because he didn't
want her to stop kissing him.

We saw the girls come out from underneath the bleachers, dragging their
dresses and wiping their mouths. Lux moved sassily to the music. It was
then Trip Fontaine finally got to dance with her, and years later he
told us the baggy dress had only increased his desire. "You could feel
how slim she was under all those drapes. It killed me." As the night
wore on, the girls became accustomed to their dresses and learned to

move in them. Lux found a way of arching her back that made her dress
tight in front. We walked past them whenever we could, going to the
bathroom twenty times and drinking twenty glasses of cider. We tried to
grill the boys in order to participate vicariously in the date, but they
wouldn't leave the girls alone for a minute. When the balloting for King
and Queen was finished, Mr. Durid mounted the portable stage and
announced the winners. Everyone knew the King and Queen could only be
Trip Fontaine and Lux Lisbon, and even girls in hundred-dollar dresses
applauded as they made their way forward. Then they danced, and we all
danced, cutting in on Head and Conley and Denton to dance with the
Lisbon girls ourselves. They were flushed by the time they got to us,
damp under the arms and giving off heat from their high necklines. We
held their sweaty palms, turning them under the mirrored ball. We lost
them in the vastness of their dresses and found them again, squeezed the
pulp of their bodies and inhaled the perfume of their exertion. A few of
us grew brave enough to insert our legs between theirs and to press our
agony against them. In the dresses the Lisbon girls looked identical
again, as they flowed from hand to hand, smiling, saying thank you,
thank you. A loose thread got caught in David Stark's wristwatch, and as
Mary untangled it, he asked, "Are you having a good time?"

"I'm having the best time of my life," she said.

She was telling the truth. Never before had the Lisbon girls looked so
cheerful, mixed so much, or talked so freely. After one dance, while
Therese and Kevin Head got some cool air in the doorway, Therese asked,
"What made you guys ask us out?"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean, do you feel sorry for us?"

"No way."

"Liar."

"I think you're pretty. That's why. "Do we seem as crazy as everyone
thinks9"

"Who thinks that?"

She didn't reply, only stuck her hand out the door to test for rain.
"Cecilia was weird, but we're not." And then: "We just want to live. If
anyone would let us.

Later, going to the car, Bonnie stopped Joe Hill Conley to look for the
stars again. Everything was clouded over. As they gazed up at the dull
sky, she asked, "Do you think there's a God?"

"Yeah."

"Me too."

By that time it was ten-thirty and the girls had only a half hour to get
back home. The dance was breaking up, and Mr. Lisbon's car emerged from
the faculty parking lot, heading home. Kevin Head and Therese, Joe Hill
Conley and Bonnie, Parkie Denton and Mary all converged at the Cadillac,
but Lux and Trip didn't follow. Bonnie ran back into the gymnasium to
check, but they couldn't be found. "Maybe they went home with your dad,"
Parkie Denton said. "I doubt it," said Mary, looking off into the dark
and fingering her crushed corsage. The girls took off their high heels
so they could walk better, and searched in among the parked cars and by
the flagpole that had flown at half-mast the day Cecilia died, though it
had been summer and no one but the lawn crew had noticed. The girls, so
happy moments before, grew quiet, and forgot about their dates. They
moved in a pack, separating and coming back together. They searched over
near the theater, behind the Science Wing, and even in the courtyard
where the small statue of a girl stood, donated in memory of Laura

White, her bronze skirt just beginning to oxidize. Sears crossed her
welded wrists, symbolically, but the Lisbon girls didn't notice, or say
anything when they returned to the car at 10:50 p.m. They got in to be
taken home.

The ride back happened mostly in silence. Joe Hill Conley and Bonnie sat
in back beside Kevin Head and Therese. Parkie Denton drove, later
complaining that this afforded him no chance to make his move on Mary.
Mary, however, spent the ride fixing her hair in the sun-visor mirror.
Therese said to her, "Forget it. We're cooked."

"Luxie is. Not us."

"Anyone have some mints or some gum?" Bonnie asked. No one did, and she
turned to Joe Hill Conley. She scrutinized him a moment, then, using her
fingers, combed his part over to the left side. "That looks better," she
said. Nearly two decades later, the little hair he has left remains
parted by Bonnie's invisible hand.

Outside the Lisbon house, Joe Hill Conley kissed Bonnie for the last
time and she let him. Therese gave Kevin Head her cheek. Through steamed
windows the boys looked up at the house. Mr. Lisbon had already returned
and a light was on in the master bedroom. "We'll walk you to the door,"
Parkie Denton said. "No, don't," said Mary. "Why not?"

"Just don't." She got out without so much as a handshake. "We had a
really good time," Therese said in back. Bonnie whispered into Joe Hill
Conley's ear, "Will you call me?"

"Absolutely.

The car doors creaked open. The girls climbed out, adjusted themselves,
and went into the house.

Uncle Tucker had just gone out to the garage refrigerator to get another
six-pack when the taxi drove up two hours later. He saw Lux get out and
reach into her purse for the five-dollar bill Mrs. Lisbon had given each
daughter before leaving that evening. "Always have cab fare" was her
dictum, even though that night was the first time she had allowed the
girls to go out, and, hence, to need any. Lux didn't wait for her
change. She started up the driveway, lifting her dress to walk and
staring at the ground. The back of her coat was smudged white. The front
door opened and Mr. Lisbon stepped onto the porch. His jacket was off
but he was still wearing the orange necktie. He came down the steps and
met Lux halfway. Lux began making excuses with her hands. When Mr.
Lisbon cut her off, she hung her head and then, grudgingly, nodded.
Uncle Tucker couldn't recall the exact moment Mrs. Lisbon joined the
scene. At some point, however, he became conscious of music playing in
the background and, looking up at the house, saw Mrs. Lisbon in the open
doorway. She was dressed in a plaid robe and held a drink in her hand.
Behind her, music filtered out, full of reverberating organs and
seraphic harps. Having started drinking at noon, Uncle Tucker had almost
finished the case of beer he consumed each day. He began to weep,
looking out from the garage, as music filled the street like air. "It
was the kind of music they play when you die," he said.

It was church music, a selection from among the three albums Mrs. Lisbon
liked to play over and over again on Sundays. We knew about the music
from Cecilia's diary ("Sunday morning. Mom's playing that crap again"),
and months later, when they were moving out, we found the albums in the
trash they put at the curb. The albums are-as we've listed in the Record
of Physical Evidence-Songs of Faith, by Tyrone Little and the Believers,
Eternal Rapture, by the Toledo Baptist Choir, and Singing Thy Praises,
by the Grand Rapids Gospelers. Beams of light pierce clouds on each
cover. We haven't even played the records through once. It's the same
music we pass by on the radio, in between the Motown and rock and roll,
a beacon of light in a world of darkness, and totally shitty. Choirs
sing in blond voices, scales ascend toward harmonic crescendos, like

marshmallow foaming into the ears. We'd always wondered who listened to
such music, picturing lonely widows in rest homes, or pastors' families
passing plates of ham. Never once did we imagine those pious voices
drifting up through floorboards to churchify niches where the Lisbon
girls knelt to pumice calluses on their big toes. Father Moody heard the
music the few times he visited for coffee on Sunday afternoons. "It
wasn't my cup of tea," he said to us later. "I go in for the more august
stuff. Handel's Messiah. Mozart's Requiem. This was basically, if I may
say so, what you might expect to hear in a Protestant household."

As the music played, Mrs. Lisbon stood in the doorway, unmoving.

Mr. Lisbon herded Lux inside.

Lux came up the steps and crossed the porch, but her mother did not let
her enter. Mrs. Lisbon said something Uncle Tucker couldn't hear. Lux
opened her mouth. Mrs. Lisbon bent forward and held her face motionless
near Lux's. "Breathalizer," Uncle Tucker explained to us. The test
lasted no more than five seconds before Mrs. Lisbon reared back to
strike Lux across the face. Lux flinched, but the blow never came. Arm
raised, Mrs. Lisbon froze. She turned toward the dark street, as though
a hundred eyes and not only Uncle Tucker's two were watching. Mr. Lisbon
also turned. As did Lux. The three of them stared into the largely
lightless neighborhood, where trees continued to drip, and cars slept in
garages and carports, engines pinging all night as they cooled. They
stayed very still, and then Mrs. Lisbon's hand fell limply to her side,
and Lux saw her chance. She shot by her, up the stairs, into her room.

We learned only years later what had happened to Lux and Trip Fontaine.
Even then Trip Fontaine told us with extreme reluctance, insisting, as
the Twelve Steps mandated, that he was a changed man. After their dance
as Homecoming King and Queen, Trip had ushered Lux through the knot of
applauding subjects to the very door where Therese and Kevin Head had
gone to get some air. "We were hot from dancing," he said. Lux was still

wearing the Miss America tiara Mr. Durid had placed on her head. They
both bore royal ribbons across their chests. "What do we do now?" Lux
had asked. "Whatever we want."

"I mean as King and Queen. Do we have to do something?"

"This is it. We danced. We got ribbons. It only lasts for tonight."

"I thought it was for all year long."

"Well, it is. But we don't do anything."

Lux took this in. "I think it stopped raining," she said. "Let's go
outside."

"I better not. We've got to go in a minute. "We can keep an eye on the
car. They won't leave without us."

"My dad," Lux said. "Just say you had to put your crown in your locker."

It had indeed stopped raining, but the air was misty when they crossed
the street and walked hand in hand over the soggy football field. "See
that divot," Trip Fontaine said. "That's where I reamed this guy today.
Cross-body block." They walked past the fifty, the forty, and into the
end zone, where no one saw them. The white stripe Uncle Tucker later saw
on Lux's coat came from the goal line she lay down upon. Throughout the
act,. headlights came on across the field, sweeping over them, lighting
up the goalpost. Lux said, in the middle, "I always screw things up. I
always do," and began to sob. Trip Fontaine told us little more.

We asked him if he put her in the cab, but he said no. "I walked home
that night. I didn't care how she got home. I just took off." Then:
"It's weird. I mean, I liked her. I really liked her. I just got sick of
her right then." As for the other boys, they spent the rest of the night

driving around our suburb. They drove past the Little Club, the Yacht
Club, the Hunt Club. They drove through The Village, where Halloween
displays had given way to Thanksgiving. At 1:30 a.m., unable to stop
thinking about the girls whose presence still filled the car, they
decided to make one final pass by the Lisbon house. They stopped for Joe
Hill Conley to relieve himself behind a tree, then proceeded down
Cadieux, speeding past the smallish houses that had once been cottages
for summer help. They passed a subdivision where one of our great
mansions had stood, its ornamental gardens replaced by red-brick houses
with antiqued doors and mammoth garages. They turned onto Jefferson,
passing the War Memorial and the black gates of the remaining
millionaires, and rode in silence toward the girls who had become real
to them at last. As they approached the Lisbons' house, they saw a light
burning in a bedroom window. Parkie Denton held up his hand for the
other boys to slap. "Pay dirt," he said. But their jubilation was
short-lived. For even before the car stopped they knew what had
happened. "It hit me in the pit of my stomach that those girls weren't
going on any more dates," Kevin Head told us years later. "The old bitch
had locked them up again. Don't ask me how I knew. I just did."

The window shades had closed like eyelids and the shaggy flower beds
made the house look abandoned . In the window where the one light
burned, however, the shade rippled. A hand peeled it back, revealing a
hot yellow slice of face-Bonnie, Mary, Therese, or even Lux-looking down
the street. Parkie Denton tooted his horn, a short hopeful blast, but
just as the girl put her palm to the glass, the light went out.

FOUR Afew weeks after Mrs. Lisbon shut the house in maximum-security
isolation, the sightings of Lux making love on the roof began.

Following the Homecoming dance, Mrs. Lisbon closed the downstairs
shades. All we could see were the girls' incarcerated shadows, which ran
riot in our imaginations. Moreover, as fall turned to winter, the trees
in the yard drooped and thickened, concealing the house, even though

their leaflessness should have revealed it. A cloud always seemed to
hover over the Lisbons' roof. There was no explanation except the
psychic one that the house became obscured because Mrs. Lisbon willed it
to. The sky grew darker, and light abandoned the daytime, so that we
found ourselves always moving in a timeless murk, the only way to
discern the hour the taste of our burps, toothpasty in the morning,
redolent in the afternoon of the jellied beef of school cafeteria meals.

Without explanation, the girls were taken out of school. They merely
failed to show up one morning, and then again the next. When Mr.
Woodhouse asked about the matter, Mr. Lisbon seemed to have no idea the
girls were gone. "He kept saying, "Have you checked out back?' " Jerry
Burden picked the combination on Mary's locker to find most of her books
left behind. "She had postcards taped up inside. Weird stuff. Couches
and shit." (Actually art museum postcards showing a Biedermeier chair
and a pink chintz Chippendale sofa.) Her notebooks were piled on the top
shelf, each one bearing the name of a bright new subject she never got
to study. Inside American History, amid spasmodic notes, Jerry Burden
found the following doodle: a girl with pigtails is bent under the
weight of a gigantic boulder. Her cheeks puff out, and her rounded lips
expel steam. One widening steam cloud contains the word Pressure, darkly
retraced.

Given Lux's failure to make curfew, everyone expected a crackdown, but
few anticipated it would be so drastic. When we spoke to her years
later, however, Mrs. Lisbon maintained that her decision was never
intended to be punitive. "At that point being in school was just making
things worse," she said. "None of the other children were speaking to
the girls. Except boys, and you knew what they were after. The girls
needed time to themselves. A mother knows. I thought if they stayed at
home, they'd heal better." Our interview with Mrs. Lisbon was brief. She
met us at the bus station in the small town she now lives in, because
the station was the only place that served coffee. Her hands were
red-knuckled and her gums had receded. Her tragedy hadn't made her more

approachable, and in fact lent her the unknowable quality of a person
who had suffered more than could be expressed. Nevertheless, we wanted
to talk to her most of all because we felt that she, being the girls'
mother, understood more than anyone why they had killed themselves. But
she said, "That's what's so frightening. I don't. Once they're out of
you, they're different, kids are." When we asked her why she had never
pursued the psychological counseling Dr. Hornicker offered, Mrs. Lisbon
became angry. "That doctor wanted to blame it on us. He thought Ronnie
and I were to blame." A bus came into the station then, and through the
open doorway at Gate 2 a gust of carbon monoxide blew over the counter
with its stacks of fried doughnuts. Mrs. Lisbon said she had to leave.

She had done more than take the girls out of school. The next Sunday,
arriving home after a spirited church sermon, she had commanded Lux to
destroy her rock records. Mrs. Pitzenberger (who happened to be
redecorating a room next door) heard the fierce argument. "Now!" Mrs.
Lisbon kept repeating, while Lux tried to reason, to negotiate, and
finally burst into tears. Through the upstairs hall window, Mrs.
Pitzenberger saw Lux stomp to her bedroom, returning with a collection
of peach crates. The crates were heavy and Lux slid them down the stairs
like sleds. "She acted like she was going to whiz them down. But she
always grabbed them before they got out of control." In the living room,
Mrs. Lisbon had the fire going, and Lux, now crying without sound, began
to consign her records one by one to the flames. We never learned which
albums were condemned at that auto-da-f6, but apparently Lux held up
album after album, appealing for Mrs. Lisbon's mercy. The smell quickly
grew overpowering, and the plastic melted over the andirons, so that
Mrs. Lisbon told Lux to stop. (She threw out the rest of the albums with
that week's trash.) Still, Will Timber, who was getting a grape pop,
said he could smell burning plastic all the way to Mr. Z's, the party
store on Kercheval.

For the next few weeks we hardly saw the girls at all. Lux never spoke
to Trip Fontaine again, nor did Joe Hill Conley call Bonnie, as he had

promised. Mrs. Lisbon took the girls to their grandmother's house to get
advice from an old woman who had lived through everything. When we
called her in Roswell, New Mexico, where she had moved after living
forty-three years in the same single-story house, the old lady (Mrs.
Lema Crawford) did not respond to questions about her involvement in the
punishment, either out of stubbornness or because of the feedback her
hearing aid picked up over the phone. She did refer, however, to her own
misfortune at the hands of love some sixty years earlier. "You never get
over it," she said. "But you get to where it doesn't bother you so
much." And then, before hanging up: "Lovely weather down here. Best
thing I ever did was to throw down the old shovel and hoe and get out of
that town." The smoky sound of her voice brought the scene to life for
us: the old woman at the kitchen table, her skimpy hair up in an
elasticized turban; Mrs. Lisbon tight-lipped and grim in a chair
opposite; and the four penitents, heads lowered, fingering knickknacks
and porcelain figurines. There is no discussion of how they feel or what
they want out of life; there is only the descending order-grandmother,
mother, daughters with the back yard outside under rain, and the dead
vegetable garden.

Mr. Lisbon continued to go to work in the mornings and the family
continued to attend church on Sundays, but that was it. The house
receded behind its mists of youth being choked off, and even our own
parents began to mention how dim and unhealthy the place looked.
Raccoons were attracted by its miasmic vapors at night, and it wasn't
unusual to find a dead one squashed by a car as it had tried to make its
getaway from the Lisbons' trash cans. One week, on the front porch, Mrs.
Lisbon set off tiny smoke bombs that gave off a sulfurous stench. No one
had ever seen the gadgets before, but it was rumored they were a defense
against the raccoons. Then, about the time the first cold spell hit,
people began to see Lux copulating on the roof with faceless boys and
men.

At first it was impossible to tell what was happening. A cellophane body

swept its arms back and forth against the slate tiles like a child
drawing an angel in the snow. Then another darker body could be
discerned, sometimes in a fast-food restaurant uniform, sometimes
wearing an assortment of gold chains, once in the drab gray suit of an
accountant. Through the bronchioles of leafless elm branches, from the
Pit zenbergers' attic, we finally made out Lux's face as she sat wrapped
in a Hudson's Bay blanket, smoking a cigarette, impossibly close in the
circle of our binoculars because she moved her lips only inches away but
without sound.

We wondered how she could do such a thing on her own house, with her
parents sleeping nearby. True, it was impossible for Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon
to see their own roof, and, once installed, Lux and her partners enjoyed
relative safety; but there was the unavoidable prior noise of sneaking
down to let the boys and men in, of leading them up creaking stairs in a
darkness charged with anxious vibrations, night noises humming in their
ears, the men sweating, risking statutory rape charges, the loss of
their careers, divorce, just to be led up the stairway, through a
window, to the roof, where in the midst of their passion they chafed
their knees and rolled in stagnant puddles. We never knew how Lux met
them. From what we could tell, she didn't leave the house. She didn't
even leave at night, sneaking out to do it in a vacant lot or down by
the lake, but preferred to make love on the premises of her confinement.
For our own part, we learned a great deal about the techniques of love,
and because we didn't know the words to denote what we saw, we had to
make up our own. That was why we spoke of "yodeling in the canyon" and
"tying the tube," of "groaning in the pit,"

"slipping the turtle's head," and "chewing the stinkweed." Years later,
when we lost our own virginities, we resorted in our panic to
pantomiming Lux's gyrations.on the roof so long ago; and even now, if we
were to be honest with ourselves, we would have to admit that it is
always that pale wraith we make love to, always her feet snagged in the
gutter, always her single blooming hand steadying itself against the

chimney, no matter what our present lovers' feet and hands are doing.
And we'd have to admit, too, that in our most intimate moments, alone at
night with our beating hearts, asking God to save us, what comes most
often is Lux, succubus of those binocular nights.

We received reports of her erotic adventures from the most unlikely
sources, kids from working-class neighborhoods with feathered haircuts
who swore they'd gone to the roof themselves with Lux, and though we
quizzed them, trying to find inconsistencies in their stories, we never
succeeded. They said it was always too dark inside the house to see, the
only thing alive Lux's hand, urgent and bored at once, tugging them
forward by their belt buckles. The floor was an obstacle course. Dan
Tyco, with his tackle's neck, stepped in something soft at the top of
the landing and picked it up. Only after Lux led him out the window and
up to the roof could he see by moonlight what he held: the half-eaten
sandwich Father Moody had encountered five months earlier. Other kids
found congealed bowls of spaghetti, empty tin cans, as though Mrs.
Lisbon had stopped cooking for the girls and they lived by foraging.

According to the boys' descriptions, Lux had lost weight, though we
couldn't tell through the binoculars. All sixteen mentioned her jutting
ribs, the insubstantiality of her thighs, and one, who went up to the
roof with Lux during a warm winter rain, told us how the basins of her
collarbones collected water. A few boys mentioned the acidic taste of
her salivathe taste of digestive fluids with nothing to do-but none of
these signs of malnourishment or illness or grief (the small cold sores
at the corners of her mouth, the patch of hair missing above her left
ear) detracted from Lux's overwhelming impression of being a carnal
angel. They spoke of being pinned to the chimney as if by two great
beating wings, and of the slight blond fuzz above her upper lip that
felt like plumage. Her eyes shone, burned, intent on her mission as only
a creature with no doubts as to either Creation's glory or its
meaninglessness could be. The words the boys used, their shifty
eyebrows, fright, bafflement, made it clear they had served as only the

most insignificant footholds in Lux's ascent, and, in the end, even
though they had been carried to the peak, they couldn't tell us what lay
beyond. A few of them remarked on the overriding sense of Lux's
measureless charity.

Though she carried on few extended conversations, we got an idea of her
state of mind from the little that got back to us of the little she
said. She told Bob McBrearley that she couldn't live without "getting it
regular," though she delivered the phrase with a Brooklyn accent, as
though imitating a movie. A sense of playacting permeated much of her
behavior. Willie Tate admitted that, despite her eagerness, "she didn't
seem to like it much," and many boys described similar inattention.
Lifting their heads from the soft shelf of Lux's neck, they found her
eyes open, her brow knitted in thought; or at the height of passion they
felt her pick a pimple on their backs. Nevertheless, on the roof, Lux
reportedly said pleading things like, "Put it in. Just for a minute.
It'll make us feel close." Other times she treated the act like some
small chore, positioning the boys, undoing zippers and buckles with the
weariness of a checkout girl. She oscillated wildly in her contraceptive
vigilance. Some reported her administering complex procedures, inserting
three or four jellies or creams at once, topping them off with a white
spermicide she referred to as "the cream cheese."

Occasionally she sufficed with her "Australian method," which involved
shaking up a Coke bottle and hosing down her insides. In stricter moods
she laid down her catch-phrase ultimatum: "No erection without
protection." Often she used sanitized pharmaceutical products; other
times, presumably cut off by Mrs. Lisbon's blockade, she fell back on
the ingenious methods devised by midwives in centuries past. Vinegar
proved useful, as did tomato juice. Love's tiny seacraft foundered in
acidic seas. Lux kept an assortment of bottles, as well as one foul rag,
behind the chimney. Nine months later, when the roofers hired by the new
young couple found the bottles, they called down to the young wife,
"Looks like somebody was having salad up here."

It was crazy to make love on the roof at any time, but to make love on
the roof in winter suggested derangement, desperation,
self-destructiveness far in excess of any pleasure snatched beneath the
dripping trees. Though some of us saw Lux as a force of nature,
impervious to chill, an ice goddess generated by the season itself, the
majority knew she was only a girl in danger, or in pursuit, of catching
her death of cold. Therefore we were not surprised when, three weeks
into Lux's airborne displays, the EMS truck appeared yet again. By this,
its third rescue, the truck had become as familiar as Mrs. Buell's
hysterical voice calling Chase home. When it rocketed up the drive,
familiarity blinded us to its new snow tires, the rings of salt
encrusting each fender. We saw Sheriff-the skinny one with the
mustache-leaping from the driver's seat even before he did so, and after
that every sight had deja vu written all over it. We were prepared for
the nightgowned girls to streak past the windows, for lights to chart
the paramedics' progress toward the victim, first the foyer light going
on, then the hall light, the upstairs hall, the bedroom on the right,
until the pinballmachine house was lit up in sectors. It was after 9
p.m. and no moon showed. Birds had built nests in the old streetlamps,
so that light filtered down through straw and moulted feathers. The
birds had flown south long ago, but in dappled beams Sheriff and the fat
one appeared once again in the doorway of the Lisbon house. They were
carrying the stretcher, just as we expected, but when the porch light
came on we were not prepared for what we saw: Lux Lisbon, sitting up,
very much alive.

She appeared to be in pain, but as they carried her out of the house she
had the presence of mind to snatch up a Reader's Digest, which she later
read cover ISO to cover in the hospital. In fact, despite her
convulsions (she was clutching her stomach), Lux had dared to put on a
coat of the forbidden pink lipstick that tasted-so the boys on the roof
told us-like strawberries. Woody Clabault's sister had the same brand,
and once, after we got into his parents' liquor cabinet, we made him put

on the lipstick and kiss each one of us so that we, too, would know what
it tasted like. Beyond the flavor of the drinks we improvised that
night-part ginger ale, part bourbon, part lime juice, part scotch-we
could taste the strawberry wax on Woody Clabault's lips, transforming
them, before the artificial fireplace, into Lux's own. Rock music blared
from the tape player; we threw ourselves about in chairs, bodilessly
floating to the couch from time to time to dip our heads into the
strawberry vat, but the next day we refused to remember that any of this
had happened, and even now it's the first time we've spoken of it. At
any rate, the memory of that night was superseded by that of Lux's being
hoisted into the EMS truck, because, despite discrepancies of time and
space, it was Lux's lips we tasted, not Clabault's.

Her hair clearly needed washing. George Pappas, who reached the truck
before Sheriff closed the door, described how blood had pooled in Lux's
cheeks. "You could see veins," he said. Holding the magazine in one
hand, clutching her midsection with the other, she rode the stretcher as
though it were a bobbing lifeboat. Her thrashing, cries, scowls of agony
only emphasized the inertness of Cecilia, whom we now saw in memory as
even deader than she had actually been. Mrs. Lisbon didn't jump into the
truck as she had previously but remained on the lawn, waving as though
Lux had boarded a bus to summer camp. Neither Mary, Bonnie, nor Therese
came outside. Discussing it later, many of us felt we suffered a mental
dislocation at that moment, which only grew worse through the course of
the remaining deaths. The prevailing symptom of this state was an
inability to recall any sound. Truck doors slammed silently; Lux's mouth
(eleven fillings, according to Dr. Roth's records) screamed silently;
and the street, the creaking tree limbs, the streetlight clicking
different colors, the electric buzz of the pedestrian crossing box-all
these usually clamorous voices hushed, or had begun shrieking at a pitch
too high for us to hear, though they sent chills up our spines. Sound
returned only once Lux had gone. Televisions erupted with canned
laughter. Fathers splashed, soaking aching backs.

It was half an hour before Mrs. Patz's sister called from Bon Secours
with the preliminary report that Lux had suffered a burst appendix. We
were surprised to hear the damage was not selfinflicted, though Mrs.
Patz said, "It's the stress. That poor girl's under so much stress, her
appendix just blew up. Same thing happened to my sister." Brent
Christopher, who had nearly cut off his right hand with a power saw that
night (he was installing a new kitchen), saw Lux being wheeled into the
emergency room. Though his arm was bandaged and his brain stupefied with
painkiller, he remembers the interns lifting Lux onto the cot next to
his. "She was breathing out of her mouth, hyperventilating, and holding
her stomach. She kept saying, "Ouch,' exactly the way you'd spell it."
Apparently, after the interns hurried off to get the doctor, there came
a moment when Brent Christopher and Lux were left alone. She stopped
crying and looked his way. He held up his gauze-wrapped hand. She looked
at it without interest. Then she reached up and closed the curtain
separating the beds.

A Dr. Finch (or French-the records are illegible) examined Lux. He asked
her where it hurt, took blood, thumped her, gagged her with a tongue
depressor, and peered in her eyes, ears, and nose. He checked her side
and found no swelling. She no longer showed signs of pain, in fact, and
after the first few minutes, the doctor stopped asking questions
relating to her appendix. Some people said that to an experienced
medical eye the signs were obvious: a look of anxiety, a frequent
touching of the belly. Whatever it was, the doctor knew right away. "How
long since your last period?" he asked. "A while."

"A month?"

"Fortytwo days. "Don't want your parents to know?"

"No, thank you. "

"Why all the commotion? Why the ambulance?"

"Only way I could get out of the house."

They were whispering, the doctor leaning over the bed, Lux sitting up.
Brent Christopher heard a sound he identified as teeth chattering. Then
Lux said, "I just want a test. Can you give me one?"

The doctor didn't verbally agree to the test, but for some reason, when
he stepped into the hall, he told Mrs. Lisbon, who had just arrived,
leaving her husband home with the girls, "Your daughter's going to be
fine." He then went into his office, where a nurse later found him
chain-smoking his pipe. We've imagined various possibilities of what
went through Dr. Finch's mind that day: that he had fallen in love with
a fourteen-yearold with a late period, that he was estimating in his
head how much money he had in the bank, how much gas in the car, how far
they could get before his wife and kids found out. We never understood
why Lux went to the hospital instead of to Planned Parenthood, but most
people agreed she was telling the truth and that, in the end, she could
devise no other way to see a doctor. When Dr. Finch came back, he said,
"I'm going to tell your mother we're running gastrointestinal tests."
Brent Christopher stood up then, silently vowing to help Lux escape
himself He heard her say, "How long will it take to find out?"

"About half an hour."

"Do you really use a rabbit?"

The doctor laughed. Upright, Brent Christopher felt his hand throb, his
eyes blurred, he became dizzy; but before he fell back into
unconsciousness, he saw Dr. Finch pass by, heading toward Mrs. Lisbon.
She heard about it first, and then the nurses heard about it, and then
we did. Joe Larson ran across the street to hide in the Lisbons' bushes,
and it was then he heard Mr. Lisbon's girlish weeping, a sound quite
musical, he said. Mr. Lisbon was sitting in his La-Z-Boy, his feet up on

the footrest, his hands over his face. The phone rang. He looked at it.
He picked it up. "Thank God," he said, "thank God." Lux, it turned out,
had only a bad case of indigestion.

In addition to a pregnancy test, Dr. Finch gave Lux a complete
gynecological exam. It was from Ms. Angelica Turnette, a hospital
clerical worker, that we later received the documents that we hold among
our most prized possessions (her non-union pay hardly made ends meet).
The doctor's report, in a series of titillating numbers, presents Lux in
a stiff paper gown stepping onto the scale (99), opening her mouth for
the thermometer (98.7), and urinating into a plastic cup (WBC 6-8 occ.
clump; mucus heavy; leukocytes 2 +). The simple appraisal "mild
abrasions" reports the condition of her uterine walls, and in an
advancement that has since been discontinued, a photograph was taken of
her rosy cervix, which looks like a camera shutter set on an extremely
low exposure. (It stares at us now like an inflamed eye, fixing us with
its silent accusation.) "The pregnancy test was negative, but it was
clear she was sexually active," Ms. Turnette told us. "She had HPV
[human papilloma virus, a precursor to genital warts]. The more partners
you have, the more HPV. It's that simple." Dr. Homicker happened to be
on call that night and managed to see Lux for a few minutes without Mrs.
Lisbon's knowledge. "The girl was still waiting for the test results, so
she was understandably tense," he said. "Still, though, there was
something else about her, an additional unease." Lux had gotten dressed
and was sitting on the edge of the emergency room cot. When Dr.
Hornicker introduced himself, she said, "You're the doctor who talked to
my sister."

"That's right."

"Are you going to ask me questions?"

"Only if you want me to."

"I'm just here"-she lowered her voice-"to see the gyno."

"So you don't want me to ask you questions?"

"Ceel told us all about your tests. I'm just not in the mood right now."

"What kind of mood are you in?"

"No mood. I'm just kind of tired is all."

"Not getting enough sleep?"

"I sleep all the time."

"And yet you're still tired?"

"Yeah."

"Why do you think that is?"

Up to this point, Lux had answered briskly, swinging her feet, which
didn't reach the floor. Now she paused and regarded Dr. Hornicker. She
settled back, retracting her head so that the slight chubbiness swelled
beneath her chin. "Iron-poor blood," she said. "Runs in the family. I'm
going to ask the doctor for some vitamins."

"She was in deep denial," Dr. Hornicker told us later. "She was
obviously not sleeping-a textbook symptom of depression-and was
pretending that her problem, and by association her sister Cecilia's
problem, was of no real consequence." Dr. Finch came in with the test
results soon after that, and Lux jumped happily off the cot. "But even
her delight had a manic quality to it. She bounced off the walls."

Shortly after that meeting, in the second of his many reports, Dr.

Hornicker began to revise his view of the Lisbon girls. Citing a recent
study by Dr. Judith Weisberg that examined "the bereavement process of
adolescents who have lost a sibling by suicide" (see List of Funded
Studies), Dr. Hornicker gave an explanation for the Lisbon girls'
erratic behavior-their withdrawal, their sudden fits of emotion or
catatonia. The report maintained that as a result of Cecilia's suicide
the surviving Lisbon girls suffered from Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
"It's not unusual," Dr. Hornicker wrote, "for the sibling of an A.L.S.
[adolescent lost to suicide] to act out suicidal behavior in an attempt
to come to grips with their grief. There is a high incidence of
repetitive suicide in single families." Then, in a marginal aside, he
dropped his medical manner and jotted: "Lemmings."

As it circulated in the next few months, this theory convinced many
people because it simplified things. Already Cecilia's suicide had
assumed in retrospect the stature of a longprophesied event. Nobody
thought it shocking anymore, and accepting it as First Cause removed any
need for further explanation. As Mr. Hutch put it, "They made Cecilia
out to be the bad guy." Her suicide, from this perspective, was seen as
a kind of disease infecting those close at hand.

In the bathtub, cooking in the broth of her own blood, Cecilia had
released an airborne virus which the other girls, even in coming to save
her, had contracted. No one cared how Cecilia had caught the virus in
the first place. Transmission became explanation. The other girls, safe
in their own rooms, had smelled something strange, sniffed the air, but
ignored it. Black tendrils of smoke had crept under their doors, rising
up behind their studious backs to form the evil shapes smoke or shadow
take on in cartoons: a black-hatted assassin brandishing a dagger; an
anvil about to drop. Contagious suicide made it palpable. Spiky bacteria
lodged in the agar of the girls' throats. In the morning, a soft oral
thrush had sprouted over their tonsils. The girls felt sluggish. At the
window the world's light seemed dimmed. They rubbed their eyes, to no
avail. They felt heavy, slow-witted. Household objects lost meaning. A

bedside clock became a hunk of molded plastic, telling something called
time, in a world marking its passage for some reason. When we thought of
the girls along these lines, it was as feverish creatures, exhaling
soupy breath, succumbing day by day in their isolated ward. We went
outside with our hair wet in the hopes of catching flu ourselves so that
we might share their delirium.

At night the cries of cats making love or fighting, their caterwauling
in the dark, told us that the world was pure emotion, flung back and
forth among its creatures, the agony of the one-eyed Siamese no difiso
ferent from that of the Lisbon girls, and even the trees plunged in
feeling. The first slate tile slid off their roof, missing the porch by
an inch and embedding itself in the soft turf, and from a distance we
could see the tar underneath, letting in water. In the living room, Mr.
Lisbon positioned an old paint can underneath a leak, then watched as it
filled with the midnight-blue shade of Cecilia's bedroom ceiling (she'd
chosen the shade to look like the night sky; the can had been in the
closet for years). In the days following, other cans caught streams, on
top of the radiator, the mantel, the dining room table, but no roofer
showed up, most likely, people believed, because the Lisbons could no
longer bear anyone intruding into their house. They endured their leaks
on their own, staying in the rain forest of their living room. Mary kept
up appearances by getting the mail (heating bills, advertisements, never
anything personal anymore), coming out in bright green or pink sweaters
emblazoned with red hearts. Bonnie wore a kind of smock we took to
calling her hair shirt, largely because of the spiky feathers that
covered it. "Her pillow must leak," said Vince Fusilli. The plumage, not
white, as one would expect, but dun-colored, came from low-grade ducks,
farmed creatures whose cooped-up smell drifted downwind whenever Bonnie
appeared stuck all over with quills. But no one got very near. No one
ventured to the house anymore, not any of our mothers or fathers, not
the priest; and even the mailman, rather than touching the mailbox,
lifted the lid with the spine of Mrs. Eugene's Family Circle.

Now the soft decay of the house began to show up more clearly. We
noticed how tattered the curtains had become, then realized we weren't
looking at curtains at all but at a film of dirt, with spy holes wiped
clean. The best thing was to see them make one: the pink heel of a hand
flattening against the glass, then rubbing back and forth to uncover the
bright mosaic of an eye, looking out at us. Also, the gutters sagged.

Mr. Lisbon alone left the house, and our only contact with the girls was
through the signs they left on him. His hair looked excessively combed,
as though the girls, unable to preen for anybody else, preened him. His
cheeks no longer sported banners of tissue paper, blood-spotted like
tiny Japanese flags, suggesting to many people that his daughters had
begun to shave him with considerably more care than Joe the Retard's
brothers lavished on him. (Mrs. Loomis, however, maintained he'd gotten
an electric razor after what had happened with Cecilia.) Whatever the
details, Mr. Lisbon became the medium through which we glimpsed the
girls' spirits. We saw them through the toll they exacted on him: his
puffy red eyes that hardly opened anymore to see his daughters wasting
away; his shoes scuffed from climbing stairs forever threatening to lead
to another inert body; his sallow complexion dying in sympathy with
them; and his lost look of a man who realized that all this dying was
going to be the only life he ever had. As he set off for work, Mrs.
Lisbon no longer fortified him with a mug of coffee. Nevertheless, at
the wheel, he automatically reached for the mug in its dashboard holder
.. . and brought last week's cold coffee to his lips. At school, he
walked the halls with a fake smile and welling eyes, or in shows of
boyish spirits shouted, "Hip check!" and pinned students against the
wall. He held on too long, though, freezing until the kids said,
"Face-off," or, "You're in the penalty box now, Mr. Lisbon," anything to
snap him out of it. Kenny Jenkins got in a headlock with Mr. Lisbon and
spoke only of the serenity that came over the two of them. "It was
weird. I could smell his breath and everything, but I didn't try to get
away. It was like being on the bottom of a nigger pile, when you're
getting squashed but it's all peaceful and everything." Some people

admired his continuing to work; others condemned it as hardness of
heart. He began to look skeletal beneath his green suit, as though
Cecilia, in dying, had tugged him briefly to the other side. He reminded
us of Abraham Lincoln, loose-limbed, silent, carrying around the world's
pain. He never passed a drinking fountain without sampling its small
relief.

Then, abruptly, less than six weeks after the girls left school, Mr.
Lisbon resigned. From Dini Fleisher, the headmaster's secretary, we
learned that Mr. Woodhouse had called Mr. Lisbon in for a meeting over
Christmas vacation. Dick Jensen, chairman of the Board of Trustees, also
attended. Mr. Woodhouse asked Dini to serve eggnog from the carton in
the small office refrigerator. Before accepting, Mr. Lisbon asked, "This
isn't spiked, is it?"

"It's Christmas," Mr. Woodhouse said.

Mr. Jensen spoke about the Rose Bowl. He said to Mr. Lisbon, "You're a
U. of M. man yourself, right?" At this point Mr. Woodhouse indicated
that Dini should leave, but before she was out the door, she heard Mr.
Lisbon say, "I am. But I don't think I've ever told you that, Dick.
Sounds like you've been looking into my file."

The men laughed, without mirth. Dini shut the door.

On January 7, when school resumed, Mr. Lisbon was no longer on staff.
Technically, he had taken a leave of absence, but the new math teacher,
Miss Kolinski, evidently felt secure enough about her position to remove
the planets from their ceiling orbit. The fallen globes sat in the
corner like the final trash heap of the universe, Mars embedded in
Earth, Jupiter cracked in half, Saturn's rings slicing poor Neptune. We
never learned exactly what was said in the meeting, but the gist was
clear: Dini Fleisher told us that parents had begun making complaints
shortly after Cecilia killed herself. They maintained that a person who

couldn't run his own family had no business teaching their children, and
the chorus of disapproval had grown steadily louder as the Lisbon house
deteriorated. Mr. Lisbon's behavior hadn't helped, his eternal green
suit, his avoidance of the faculty lunch room, his piercing tenor
cutting through the male singing group like the keening of a bereaved
old woman. He was dismissed. And returned to a house where, some nights,
lights never went on, not even in the evening, nor did the front door
open.

Now the house truly died. For as long as Mr. Lisbon had gone back and
forth to school, he circulated a thin current of life through the house,
bringing the girls treats-Mounds bars, orange push-ups, rainbow-colored
Kool-Pops. We could imagine what the girls felt inside because we knew
what they were eating. We could share their headaches from wolfing ice
cream. We could make ourselves sick on chocolate. When Mr. Lisbon
stopped going out, however, he stopped bringing home sweets. We couldn't
be sure the girls were eating at all. Offended by Mrs. Lisbon's note,
the milkman had stopped delivering milk, good or bad. Kroger's stopped
bringing groceries. Mrs. Lisbon's mother, Lema Crawford, mentioned
during that same crackling phone call to New Mexico that she had given
Mrs. Lisbon most of her summer pickles and preserves (she had hesitated
saying "summer" because that had been the summer Cecilia had died, and
all the while the cucumbers, strawberries, and even she herself,
seventy-one years old, had gone on growing and living). She also told us
that Mrs. Lisbon kept an abundant supply of canned goods downstairs, as
well as fresh water and other preparations against nuclear attack. They
had a kind of bomb shelter downstairs, apparently, just off the rec room
from which we had watched Cecilia climb to her death. Mr. Lisbon had
even installed a propane camping toilet. But that was in the days when
they expected perils to come from without, and nothing made less sense
by that time than a survival room buried in a house itself becoming one
big coffin.

Our concern increased when we saw Bonnie visibly wasting away. Just

after dawn, as Uncle Tucker was going to bed, he used to see her come
onto the front porch, under the mistaken notion that everyone on the
street was asleep. She always wore the feathered smock and sometimes
carried the pillow Uncle Tucker referred to as a "Dutch wife" because of
the way she hugged it. One ripped corner spewed feathers, fleecing the
air around her head. She sneezed. Her long neck was thin and white and
she had the rickety painful walk of a Biafran, as though her hip joints
lacked lubrication. Because he was so skinny himself from his liquid
beer diet, we believed Uncle Tucker's statements about Bonnie's weight.
It wasn't as if Mrs. Amberson had said Bonnie was wasting away. Compared
to her, everyone was. But Uncle Tucker's turquoise-and-silver belt
buckle looked as big on him as the jeweled belt of a heavyweight champ.
He knew what he was talking about. And, peering from his garage, one
hand on the refrigerator, he watched as with uncoordinated movements
Bonnie Lisbon came down the two front steps, proceeded across the lawn
to the small dirt mound left from the digging months ago, and, at the
site of her sister's death, began to say the rosary. Holding the pillow
in one hand, she told her beads with the other, making sure to finish
before the first house light came on down the block and the neighborhood
awoke.

We didn't know whether it was asceticism or starvation. She looked
peaceful, Uncle Tucker said, without the feverish appetite of Lux, or
the tight-lipped, tight-assed expression of Mary. We asked if she had
carried a laminated picture of the Virgin, but he didn't think so. She
came out every morning, though sometimes, if a Charlie Chan movie was
on, Uncle Tucker would forget to check.

It was Uncle Tucker, too, who first detected the smell we could never
identify. One morning, as Bonnie came out to the dirt mound, she left
the front door open, and Uncle Tucker became aware of an odor unlike any
other he had ever encountered. At first he thought it was merely an
intensification of Bonnie's wet-bird aroma, but it persisted even after
she returned inside, and when we woke up, we smelled it, too. For even

as the house began to fall apart, casting out whiffs of rotten wood and
soggy carpet, this other smell began wafting from the Lisbons', invading
our dreams and making us wash our hands over and over again. The smell
was so thick it seemed liquid, and stepping into its current felt like
being sprayed. We tried to locate its source, looking for dead squirrels
in the yard or a bag of fertilizer, but the smell contained too much
syrup to be death itself. The smell was definitely on the side of life,
and reminded David Black of a fancy mushroom salad he'd eaten on a trip
with his parents to New York. "It's the smell of trapped beaver," Paul
Baldino said, sagely, and we didn't know enough to disagree, but we
found it hard to imagine such an aroma issuing from the ventricles of
love. The smell was partly bad breath, cheese, milk, tongue film, but
also the singed smell of drilled teeth. It was the kind of bad breath
you get used to the closer you go in, until you can't really notice
because it's your own breath, too. Over the years, of course, the open
mouths of women have blown into our faces ingredients of that original
smell, and occasionally, poised over unfamiliar bedsheets, in the dark
of that night's betrayal or blind date, we've greedily welcomed any new
particular reek because of its partial connection to the fumes that
began blowing from the Lisbon house shortly after it was closed up, and
never really stopped. Right now, if we concentrate, we can smell it
still. It found us in our beds, and on the playground as we played Kill
the Man with the Ball; it came down the stairs of the Karafilises' so
that Old Mrs. Karafilis dreamed she was back in Bursa cooking grape
leaves. It reached us even over the stink of Joe Barton's grandfather's
cigar, as he showed us the photo album of his Navy days, explaining that
the plump women in petticoats were only his cousins. Strangely enough,
even though the smell was overpowering, we didn't once think of holding
our breaths, or, as a last resort, breathing through our mouths, and
after the first few days we sucked in the aroma like mother's milk.

Dim dormant months followed: ice-bound January; unrelenting February;
soiled, slushy March. We still had winters in those days, vast
snowdrifts, days of canceled school. At home on snowy mornings,

listening to school closings on the radio (a parade of Indian county
names, Washtenaw, Shiawassee, until our own Anglo-Saxon Wayne), we still
knew the vivifying feeling of staying warm inside a shelter like
pioneers. Nowadays, because of shifting winds from the factories and the
rising temperature of the earth, snow never comes in an onslaught
anymore but by a slow accretion in the night, momentary suds. The world,
a tired performer, offers us another half-assed season. Back in the days
of the Lisbon girls, snow fell every week and we shoveled our driveways
into heaps higher than our cars. Trucks dumped salt. Christmas lights
went up, and old man Wilson sprang for his annual extravagant display: a
twenty-foot snowman, with three mechanized reindeer pulling a fat Santa
in his sleigh. The display always brought a line of cars up our street,
but that year the traffic slowed down twice. We could see families
pointing and smiling at Santa, then growing still and avid before the
Lisbons' house like rubberneckers at a crash site. The fact that the
Lisbons put up no lights until after Christmas made their house look
even bleaker. On the Pitzenbergers' lawn next door, three snowbound
angels blew red trumpets. At the Bateses' on the other side,
multicolored gumdrops glowed within the frosted bushes. It was only in
January, after Mr. Lisbon had been out of work a week, that he came out
to string lights. He covered the front bushes, but when he plugged in
the lights he wasn't pleased with the result. "One of these is a
blinker," he said to Mr. Bates as the latter walked to his car. "The box
says it's got a red tip, but I've checked them all and can't find the
culprit. I hate blinking lights." Perhaps he did, but they stayed
blinking, whenever he remembered to plug them in at night.

All winter, the girls remained elusive. Sometimes one or another would
come outside, hugging herself in the cold, her breath clouding her face,
and after a minute would go back in. At night, Therese continued to use
her ham radio, tapping out messages that took her away from her house,
to warm southern states and even to the tip of South America. Tim Winer
searched the radio waves for Therese's frequency and a few times claimed
to have found it. Once she was talking to a man in Georgia about his dog

(arthritic hips, operate or not?), and another time she spoke, in that
genderless, nationless medium, to a human being whose few responses
Winer managed to record. It was all dots and dashes, but we made him put
it into English. The exchange went something like this: "You too?"

"My brother. "How old?"

"Twenty-one. Handsome. Beautiful on violin."

"How?"

"Bridge nearby. Swift current."

"How get over?"

"Never will."

"What is Colombia like?"

"Warm. Peaceful. Come."

"Like to. "

"You are wrong about bandidos. "Have to go. Mom calling."

"Painted roof blue like you said."

"Bye.

"Bye." That was it. The interpretation is, we think, quite obvious, and
shows that as late as March, Therese was reaching out toward a freer
world. About this time she sent away for application materials from a
list of colleges (the reporters would make much of this later). The
girls also ordered catalogues for items they could never buy, and the

Lisbons' mailbox filled up once again: furniture catalogues from
Scottshruptine, high-end clothing, exotic vacations. Unable to go
anywhere, the girls traveled in their imaginations to goldtipped Siamese
temples, or past an old man with bucket and leaf broom tidying a
moss-carpeted speck of Japan. As soon as we learned the names of these
brochures we sent for them ourselves to see where the girls wanted to
go. Far East Adventures. Footloose Tours. Tunnel to China Tours. Orient
Express. We got them all. And, flipping pages, hiked through dusty
passes with the girls, stopping every now and then to help them take off
their backpacks, placing our hands on their warm, moist shoulders and
gazing off at papaya sunsets. We drank tea with them in a water
pavilion, above blazing goldfish. We did whatever we wanted to, and
Cecilia hadn't killed herself: she was a bride in Calcutta, with a red
veil and the soles of her feet dyed with henna. The only way we could
feel close to the girls was through these impossible excursions, which
have scarred us forever, making us happier with dreams than wives. Some
of us abused the catalogues, taking them off into rooms alone, or
sneaking them out under our shirts. But we had little else to do, and
the snow came down, and the sky was unremittingly gray.

We'd like to tell you with authority what it was like inside the Lisbon
house, or what the girls felt being imprisoned in it. Sometimes, drained
by this investigation, we long for some shred of evidence, some Rosetta
stone that would explain the girls at last. But even though that winter
was certainly not a happy one, little more can be averred. Trying to
locate the girls' exact pain is like the self-examination doctors urge
us to make (we've reached that age). On a regular basis, we're forced to
explore with clinical detachment our most private pouch and, pressing
it, impress ourselves with its anatomical reality: two turtle eggs
bedded in a nest of tiny sea grapes, with tubes snaking in and out,
knobbed with nodules of gristle. We're asked to find in this dimly
mapped place, amid naturally occurring clots and coils, upstart
invaders. We never realized how many bumps we had until we went looking.
And so we lie on our backs, probing, recoiling, probing again, and the

seeds of death get lost in the mess God made us.

It's no different with the girls. Hardly have we begun to palpate their
grief than we find ourselves wondering whether this particular wound was
mortal or not, or whether (in our blind doctoring) it's a wound at all.
It might just as well be a mouth, which is as wet and as warm. The scar
might be over the heart or the kneecap. We can't tell. All we can do is
go groping up the legs and arms, over the soft bivalvular torso, to the
imagined face. It is speaking to us. But we can't hear.

Every night we scanned the girls' bedroom windows. Around dinner tables
our conversations inevitably turned to the family's predicament. Would
Mr. Lisbon get another job? How would he support his family? How long
could the girls endure being cooped up? Even Old Mrs. Karafilis made one
of her rare journeys to the first floor (it not being bath day) just to
stare down the street at the Lisbon house. We couldn't remember another
instance where Old Mrs. Karafilis had taken interest in the world,
because ever since we had known her, she had lived in the basement
waiting to die. Sometimes Demo Karafilis took us downstairs to play
Foosball, and, moving among the heating ducts, spare cots, battered
luggage, we would tunnel through to the small room Old Mrs. Karafilis
had decorated to resemble Asia Minor. Artificial grapes hung from a
ceiling lattice; decorative boxes housed silkworms; the cinder-block
walls were painted the precise cerulean blue of the old country's air.
Taped-up postcards served as windows into another time and place where
Old Mrs. Karafilis still lived. Green mountains rose in the background,
giving way to chipped Ottoman tombs, red-tiled roofs, a puff of steam
rising in one Technicolor corner from a man selling hot bread. Demo
Karafilis never told us what was wrong with his grandmother, nor did he
think it odd they kept her in the basement amid the vast boiler and
gurgling drains (our lowland suburb was prone to flooding). Still, the
way she stopped before the postcards, licking one thumb and pressing it
to the same whitened spot, the way she smiled with her golden teeth,
nodding toward the vistas as though greeting passersby, all this told us

that Old Mrs. Karafilis had been shaped and saddened by a history we
knew nothing about. When she did see us, she said, "Close the light,
dolly mou," and we did, leaving her in the dark, fanning herself with
the complimentary fan the funeral parlor that had buried her husband
sent every Christmas. (The fan, cheap cardboard stapled to a Popsicle
stick, showed Jesus praying at Gethsemane, portentous clouds piling up
behind him, and on the flip side advertised mortuary services.) Other
than to take a bath, Old Mrs. Karafilis came upstairs-a rope tied to her
waist, Demo's father lightly pulling, Demo and his brothers assisting
behind-only when Train to Istanbul came on television every two years.
Then she'd sit, excited as a girl, leaning forward on the couch and
waiting for the ten-second scene where the train passed a few green
hills that held her heart. She'd raise both arms, let out a vulture's
cry, just as the train-same way every time-disappeared into the tunnel.

Old Mrs. Karafilis never cared much about neighborhood gossip, mostly
because she couldn't understand it, and the part she did understand
seemed trivial. As a young woman, she had hidden in a cave to escape
being killed by the Turks. For an entire month she had eaten nothing but
olives, swallowing the pits to fill herself up. She had seen family
members butchered, men strung up in the sun eating their own privates,
and now hearing how Tommy Riggs totaled his parents' Lincoln, or how the
Perkinses' Christmas tree caught fire, killing the cat, she didn't see
the drama. The only time she perked up was when someone mentioned the
Lisbon girls, and then it wasn't to ask questions or get details but to
enter into telepathy with them. If we were talking about the girls
within her hearing, Old Mrs. Karafilis would lift her head, then raise
herself painfully from her chair and cane across the cold cement floor.
At one end of the basement a window well let in weak light, and, going
up to its cold panes, she stared at a patch of sky visible through a
lace of spiderweb. That was as much of the girls' world as she could
see, just the same sky above their house, but it told her enough. It
occurred to us that she and the girls read secret signs of misery in
cloud formations, that despite the discrepancy in their ages something

timeless communicated itself between them, as though she were advising
the girls in her mumbling Greek, "Don't waste your time on life." Mulch
and blown leaves filled the window well, a broken chair from when we'd
made a fort. Light shone through Old Mrs. Karafilis's housedress, as
thin and drably patterned as paper toweling. Her sandals were right for
wearing to a hammam, some steaming place, not across that drafty floor.
On the day she heard about the girls' new incarceration, she jerked her
head up, nodded, didn't smile. But had known already, it seemed.

From her weekly bath of Epsom salts, she talked of the girls, or to
them, we couldn't tell which. We didn't get too close, or listen at the
keyhole, because the few contradictory glimpses we'd gotten of Old Mrs.
Karafilis, with her sagging breasts from another century, her blue legs,
her undone hair shockingly long and glossy as a girl's, filled us with
embarrassment. Even the sound of the tub running made us blush, her
muffled voice coming over it, complaining of aches while the black lady,
none too young herself, coaxed her in, the two of them alone with their
decrepitude behind the bathroom door, crying out, singing, first the
black lady, then Old Mrs. Karafilis singing some Greek song, and finally
just the sound of water we couldn't imagine the color of, sloshing
around. Afterward, she'd appear just as pale as before, her head wrapped
in a towel. We could hear her lungs inflating as the black lady fitted
the rope around Old Mrs. Karafilis's waist and began lowering her down
the stairs. Despite her wish to die as soon as possible, Old Mrs.
Karafilis always looked fearful during these descents, gripping the
banister, eyes magnified behind rimless glasses. Sometimes as she passed
we'd tell her the latest about the girls, and she'd cry, "Mana!," which
meant something like "Holy shit!," Demo said, but she never really
seemed surprised. Out past the weekly glimpsed windows, out past the
street, lived the world, which had, Old Mrs. Karafilis knew, been dying
for years.

In the end, it wasn't death that surprised her but the stubbornness of
life. She couldn't understand how the Lisbons kept so quiet, why they

didn't wail to heaven or go mad. Seeing Mr. Lisbon stringing Christmas
lights, she shook her head and muttered. She let go of the special
geriatric banister installed along the first floor, took a few steps at
sea level without support, and for the first time in seven years
suffered no pain. Demo explained it to us like this: "We Greeks are a
moody people. Suicide makes sense to us. Putting up Christmas lights
after your own daughter does itthat makes no sense. What my yia yia
could never understand about America was why everyone pretended to be
happy all the time." Winter is the season of alcoholism and despair.
Count the drunks in Russia or the suicides at Cornell. So many
exam-takers threw themselves into the gorge of that hilly campus that
the university declared a midwinter holiday to ease the tension
(popularly known as "suicide day," the holiday popped up in a computer
search we ran, along with "suicide ride" and "suicide-mobile"). We don't
understand those Cornell kids any better, some Bianca with her first
diaphragm and all life ahead of her plunging off the footbridge,
cushioned only by her down vest; dark existential Bill, with his clove
cigarettes and Salvation Army overcoat, not leaping as Bianca did, but
easing himself over the rail and hanging on for dear death before
letting go (shoulder muscles show tears in 33 percent of people choosing
bridges; the other 67 percent just jump). We mention this now only to
show that even college students, free to booze and fornicate, bring
about their own ends in large numbers. Imagine what it was like for the
Lisbon girls, shut up in their house with no blaring stereo or ready
bong around.

The newspapers, later writing about what they termed a "suicide pact,"
treated the girls as automatons, creatures so barely alive that their
deaths came as little change. In the sweep of Ms. Perl's accounts, which
boiled two or three months and the suffering of four individuals into a
paragraph with a heading "When Youth Sees No Future," the girls appear
as indistinguishable characters marking black x's on a calendar or
holding hands in self-styled Black Masses. Suggestions of satanism, or
some mild form of black magic, haunt Ms. Perl's calculations. She made

much of the record-burning incident, and often quoted rock lyrics that
alluded to death or suicide. Ms. Perl befriended a local deejay and
spent an entire night listening to the records that Lux's schoolmates
listed among her favorites. From this "research," she came up with the
find she was most proud of: a song by the band Cruel Crux, entitled
"Virgin Suicide." The chorus follows, though neither Ms. Perl nor we
have been able to determine if the album was among those Mrs. Lisbon
forced Lux to burn: Virgin suicide What was that she cried?

No use in stayin' On this holocaust ride She gave me her cherry She's my
virgin suicide The song certainly ties in nicely with the notion that a
dark force beset the girls, some monolithic evil we weren't responsible
for. Their behavior, however, was anything but monolithic. While Lux
trysted on the roof, Therese grew fluorescent sea horses in a drinking
glass, and, down the hall, Mary spent hours looking into her portable
mirror. Set in an oval of pink plastic, the mirror was surrounded by
exposed bulbs like a mirror in an actress's dressing room. A switch
allowed Mary to simulate various times and weathers. There were settings
for "morning,"

"afternoon," and 66evening," as well as one for "brite sun" and
"overcast." For hours Mary would sit before the mirror, watching her
face swim through the alterations of counterfeit worlds. She wore dark
glasses in sunshine, and bundled up under clouds. Mr. Lisbon sometimes
saw her flipping the switch back and forth, passing through ten or
twenty days at once, and she often got one of her sisters to sit before
the mirror so that she could dispense advice. "See, the circles under
your eyes come out in overcast. That's because we've got pale skin. In
sunlight .. . just a minute . .. see, like this, they're gone. So you
should wear more base or concealer on cloudy days. On sunny days, our
complexions tend to wash out, so we need color. Lipstick and even
eyeshadow."

The searchlight of Ms. Perl's prose also tends to wash out the girls'

features. She uses catchphrases to describe the girls, calling them
"mysterious" or "loners," and at one point goes so far as to say they
were "attracted to the pagan aspect of the Catholic Church." What that
phrase meant exactly we were never sure, but many people felt it had to
do with the girls, attempt to save the family elm.

Spring had finally arrived. Trees budded. The frozen streets, in
thawing, cracked. Mr. Bates recorded new potholes, as he did every year,
sending a typed list to the Department of Transportation. In early
April, the Parks Department returned to replace ribbons around condemned
trees, this time using not red but yellow ribbons printed with the words
"This tree has been diagnosed with Dutch elm disease and will be removed
in order to inhibit further spread. By order of Parks Dept." You had to
circle a tree three times to read the whole sentence. The elm in the
Lisbons' front yard (see Exhibit #1) was among the condemned, and with
the weather still cool a truckful of men arrived to cut it down.

We knew the technique. First a man in a fiberglass cage ascended into
the treetop and, after boring a hole into the bark, put his ear to it as
though listening for the tree's failing pulse; then, without ceremony,
he began clipping smaller branches, which fell into the grasping orange
gloves of the men below. They stacked the branches neatly, as though
they were two byfours, and then fed them into the buzz saw in the
truck's back. Showers of sawdust shot into the street, and years later,
when we found ourselves in oldfashioned bars, the sawdust on the floors
always brought back to us the cremation of our trees. After denuding the
trunk, the men left to denude others, and for a time the tree stood
blighted, trying to raise its stunted arms, a creature clubbed mute,
only its sudden voicelessness making us realize it had been speaking all
along. In that death-row state, the trees resembled the Baldinos'
barbecue, and we understood that Sammy the Shark had fashioned his
escape tunnel with great foresight, to look not as trees did now but as
they were coming to look, so that if he was ever forced to escape in the
future, he could leave through one of a hundred identical stumps.

Normally, people came out to say goodbye to their trees. It wasn't
uncommon to see a family gathered on the lawn at a safe distance from
the chain saws, a tired mom and dad with two or three long-haired
teenagers, and a poodle with a ribbon in its hair. People felt they
owned the trees. Their dogs had marked them daily. Their children had
used them for home plate. The trees had been there when they'd moved in,
and had promised to be there when they moved out. But when the Parks
Department came to cut them down, it was clear our trees were not ours
but the city's. to do with as it wished.

The Lisbons, however, didn't come out during the debranching. The girls
looked on from an upstairs window, their faces coldcream white. Lunging
and retreating, the elevated man sheared off the elm's great green
crown. He chopped off the sick limb that had sagged and sprouted yellow
leaves last summer.

He proceeded to cut off the healthy limbs, too, and left the tree trunk
rising like a gray pillar in the Lisbons' front yard. When the men drove
away, we weren't sure whether it was dead or alive.

For the next two weeks we waited for the Parks Department to finish the
job, but it took them three weeks to return. This time two men with
chain saws climbed out of the truck. They circled the trunk, taking its
measure, then steadied saws on thighs and pulled the starter cords. We
were down in Chase Buell's basement at the time, playing bumper pool,
but the whine reached us through the exposed rafters overhead. The
aluminum heating vents rattled. The bright balls trembled on the green
felt. The sound of the chain saws filled our heads like a dentist's
drill, and we ran outside to see the men moving in on the elm. They wore
goggles against flying chips, but otherwise dragged about with the
boredom of men accustomed to slaughter. They lifted the snarling guide
bars. One spit out tobacco juice. Then, revving the motors, they were
just about to tear the tree apart when the foreman jumped out of the

truck, furiously waving his arms. Across the lawn, in a phalanx, the
Lisbon girls were running toward the men. Mrs. Bates, who was looking
on, said she thought the girls were going to fling themselves on the
chain saws. "They were heading straight for them. And their eyes looked
wild." The Parks Department men didn't know what the foreman was jumping
up and down about. "I was blind-sided," one said. "The girls ducked
right under my saw. Thank God I saw them in time." Both men did, and
held their saws in the air, backing off. The Lisbon girls ran past them.
They might have been playing a game. They looked behind them as though
afraid of being tagged. But then they reached the too safety zone. The
men turned off their chain saws and the pulsing air subsided into
silence. The girls surrounded the tree, linking hands in a daisy chain.
"Go away," said Mary. "This is our tree."

They weren't facing the men but the tree itself, pressing their cheeks
against the trunk. While Therese and Mary had shoes on, Bonnie and Lux
had run out barefoot, which led many to believe the rescue had been a
spontaneous idea. They hugged the trunk, which rose above them into
nothingness. "Girls, girls," the foreman said. "You're too late. The
tree's already dead." That's what you say," said Mary.

"It's got beetles. We have to take it down so they won't spread to other
trees."

"There's no scientific evidence that removal limits infestation," said
Therese. "These trees are ancient. They have evolutionary strategies to
deal with beetles. Why don't you just leave it up to nature9"

"If we left it up to nature, there'd be no trees left."

"That's what it's going to be like anyway," said Lux. "if boats didn't
bring the fungus from Europe in the first place," Bonnie said, "none of
this would have ever happened."

"You can't put the genie back in the bottle, girls. Now we've got to use
our own technology to see what we can save." Actually, none of this
might have been spoken. We've pieced it together through partial
accounts, and can attest only to the general substance. The girls did
feel the trees would survive better on their own, and did place the
blame for the disease on human arrogance. But many people felt this was
a smoke screen. That particular elm, as everyone knew, had been
Cecilia's favorite. Its tarred knothole still retained her small
handprint. Mrs. Scheer recalled Cecilia often standing under the tree in
springtime, trying to catch the whirling propellers of its seeds. (For
our own part, we recall those green seeds housed in a single fibrous
wing, and how they helicoptered to the ground, but we can't be sure
whether they came from the elms or from, say, the chestnuts, and none of
us has a botany handbook handy, so popular with rangers and realists.)
At any rate, many people in our neighborhood found it easy to imagine
why the girls might connect the elm with Cecilia. "They weren't saving
it," said Mrs. Scheer. "They were saving her memory."

Three rings formed around the tree: the blond ring of the Lisbon girls,
the forest green of the Parks Department men, and, farther out, the ring
of onlookers. The men reasoned with the girls, grew stem, tried to bribe
them with a ride on the truck, and finally threatened them. The foreman
had his men break for lunch, thinking the girls would give up, but after
forty-five minutes they remained belted around the tree. Finally he went
up to the house to talk with Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon, but, to our surprise,
they offered no help. They answered the door together, Mr. Lisbon with
his arm around his wife in a rare display of physical affection. "We've
got an order to cut down your elm," the foreman said. "But your kids
won't let us."

"How do you know that tree's sick?" Mrs. Lisbon said. "Believe me. We
know. It's got yellow leaves. It had yellow leaves. We cut that branch
off already. The tree's dead, for Christ's sake."

"We're for aritex," Mr. Lisbon said. "Are you familiar with that? Our
daughter showed us an article. It's a less aggressive therapy."

"And it doesn't work. Look, we leave this tree and the others will all
be gone by next year."

"Will be anyway, way things are going," said Mr. Lisbon. "I don't want
to have to call the police."

"The police?" Mrs. Lisbon asked. "The girls are just standing in their
own front yard. Since when is that a crime?"

The foreman gave up then, but he never followed through on his threat.
By the time he got back to the truck, Ms. Perl's blue Pontiac had pulled
up behind it. A staff photographer was already snapping the shots that
would later appear in the newspaper. Less than an hour had elapsed
between the time the girls surrounded the tree and Ms. Perl's
Weegee-like arrival, but she would never divulge the source who had
tipped her off. Many people believe the girls did it themselves to get
publicity, but there's no way of telling. As the photographer continued
shooting, the foreman told his men to get into the truck. The next day,
a short article appeared, accompanied by a grainy picture of the girls
embracing the tree (Exhibit #8). They seem to be worshipping it like a
group of Druids. In the picture, you can't tell that the tree ends
starkly twenty feet above their inclined heads. "Four sisters of Cecilia
Lisbon, the East Side teen whose suicide last summer focused awareness
on a national problem, put their own bodies in jeopardy Wednesday in an
attempt to save the elm Cecilia had so dearly loved. The tree was
diagnosed with Dutch elm disease last year and was scheduled to be
removed this spring." From the above, it's clear Ms. Perl accepted the
theory that the girls saved the tree in memory of Cecilia, and from what
we've read in Cecilia's journal, we see no reason to disagree. Years
later, however, when we spoke to Mr. Lisbon, he denied this. "Therese
was the one who was into trees. She knew everything about them. All the

varieties. How deep the roots went. I never remember Cecilia taking much
interest in plant life, to be honest."

Only after the Parks Department drove away did the girls break their
daisy chain. Rubbing sore arms, they went back inside the house without
so much as looking at any of us gathered on neighboring lawns. Chase
Buell heard Mary say, "They'll be back," as they went inside. Mr. Patz,
who had been standing in a group of ten or so people, offered, "I was on
their side. When the Parks men left, I felt like applauding." The tree
survived, temporarily. The Parks Department moved down their list,
removing other trees on our block, but no one else was courageous or
misled enough to oppose them. The Buells' elm, with its car tire swing,
was taken down; the Fusillis' disappeared one day while we were at
school; and the Shalaans' vanished, too. Soon the Parks Department moved
on to other blocks, though the incessant whine of their chain saws never
let us, or the girls, forget about them.

Baseball season began and we lost ourselves in green fields. In the old
days, Mr. Lisbon would sometimes bring the girls to a home game, and
they would sit in the bleachers, rooting like everybody else. Mary would
talk to the cheerleaders. "She always wanted to be one. But her mother
wouldn't let her," Kristi McCulchan told us. "I used to teach her some
of the cheers and she was really good." We didn't doubt it. We always
watched the Lisbon girls instead of our dizzy cheerleaders. In close
games they chewed their fists, and thought every ball hit to the
outfield would be a home run. They bounced up and down, then rose to
their feet just as the ball descended, too soon, into the outfielder's
rnitt. The year of the suicides the girls didn't come to a single game,
nor did we expect them to. Gradually, we stopped scanning the bleachers
for their excited faces, and stopped walking underneath to see what we
could see of them, cut up in slices from behind.

Though we felt for the Lisbon girls, and continued to think about them,
they were slipping away from US. The images we treasured of them-in

bathing suits, jumping through a sprinkler, or running from a garden
hose charmed by water pressure into a giant snake-began to fade, no
matter how religiously we meditated on them in our most private moments,
lying in bed beside two pillows belted together to simulate a human
shape. We could no longer evoke with our inner ears the precise pitches
and lilts of the Lisbon girls' voices. Even the jasmine soap from
Jacobsen's, which we kept in an old bread box, had gotten damp and lost
its aroma, smelling now like a wet matchbook. At the same time, the fact
that the girls were slowly sinking hadn't completely penetrated our
minds, and on some mornings we awoke to a world still unruptured: we
stretched, we got out of bed, and only after rubbing our eyes at the
window did we remember the rotting house across the street, and the
mossblackened windows hiding the girls from our sight. The truth was
this: we were beginning to forget the Lisbon girls, and we could
remember nothing else.

The colors of their eyes were fading, the location of moles, dimples,
centipede scars. It had been so long since the Lisbon girls had smiled
we could no longer picture their crowded teeth. "They're just memories
now," Chase Buell said sadly. "Time to write them off." But even as he
uttered these words, he rebelled against them, as we all did. And rather
than consign the girls to oblivion, we gathered their possessions once
more, everything we'd gotten hold of during our strange curatorship:
Cecilia's high-tops; Therese's microscope; a jewelry box in which a
strand of Mary's dishwater-blond hair lay bedded on cotton; the
photocopy of Cecilia's laminated picture of the Virgin; one of Lux's
tube tops. We piled everything in the middle of Joe Larson's garage,
opening the automatic door halfway to see out. The sun had set and the
sky was dark. With the Parks Department gone, the street was ours again.
For the first time in months, a light came on in the Lisbon house, then
winked out. Another light, in an adjoining room, flickered in answer.
Around the aureolae of streetlights we noticed a dim swirling we didn't
recognize at first because we knew it so well, a senseless pattern of
ecstasy and madness: the massing of the first fish flies of the season.

A year had passed and still we knew nothing. From five the girls had
reduced themselves to four, and they were all-the living and the
dead-becoming shadows. Even their assorted possessions arrayed at our
feet didn't reassert their existence, and nothing seemed more anonymous
than a certain vinyl go-go purse, covered with gold chain, that could
have belonged to any of the girls, or to any girl in the world. The fact
that we had once been close enough to pass through the aromas of the
girls' separate shampoos (through herbal garden, to lemon glade, and
into a grove of green apples) began to seem more and more unreal.

How long could we remain true to the girls? How long could we keep their
memory pure? As it was, we didn't know them any longer, and their new
habits-of opening a window, for instance, to throw out a wadded paper
towel-made us wonder if we had ever really known them, or if our
vigilance had been only the fingerprinting of phantoms. Our talis mans
ceased to work. Lux's school tartan, when touched, summoned only a hazy
memory of her wearing it in class-one bored hand fiddling with the
silver kilt pin, undoing it, leaving the folds unfastened on her bare
knees, about to fall open any minute, but never, never  ... We had to
rub the skirt for minutes to see it clearly. And every other slide in
our carousel began to fade in the same way, or we clicked and absolutely
nothing fell into the projection slot, leaving us staring at goose bumps
on a white wall.

We would have lost them completely if the girls hadn't contacted us.
Just as we had begun to despair of ever being near them again, more
laminated pictures of the Virgin began showing up. Mr. Hutch found one
tucked into the windshield wiper of his car and, not recognizing its
significance, crumpled it up and threw it into the ashtray. Ralph Hutch
found it later under a layer of ash and cigarette butts. When he brought
it to us the picture was burned in three spots. Still, we could see
right away that it was identical to the picture of the Virgin Cecilia
had clutched in the bathtub, and when we wiped off the soot, the

telephone number emerged on the back.

Hutch wasn't the only one to find a picture. Mrs. Hessen found one
pierced among her rose bushes. Joey Thompson heard an unfamiliar
whirring in his bicycle tires one day, and looked down to see a Virgin
picture taped between the spokes. Finally, Tim Winer found a picture
stuck into the grout of his study windows, facing in at him. The picture
had been there for some time, he told us, because moisture had penion
etrated the laminated surface, giving the Virgin's face a touch of
gangrene. Otherwise she looked the same: dressed in a blue cloak with a
butterfly collar of gold lam6. On her head sat an Imperial margarine
crown.

A rosary girded her waist, and, as usual, the Holy Mother had that
beatific expression of someone on lithium. No one ever saw the girls
placing the cards, nor did anyone know why they would do so. Even now,
though, so many years later, we can easily recall the tingling that
overtook us whenever someone came bearing a new find. The pictures were
invested with significance we couldn't quite fathom, and their sorry
staterips, mildew-made them seem ancient. "The feeling," Tim Winer wrote
in his own journal, "was akin to unearthing the anklet of some poor
smothered girl in Pompeii. She had just put it on, and was dandling it
before the window, admiring how the jewels glittered, when they suddenly
lit up red with the volcano's eruption." (Winer read Mary Renault a
lot.) In addition to the Virgin cards, we became convinced the girls
were signaling to us in other ways. Sometime in May, Lux's Chinese
lantern began to blink an indecipherable Morse code. Every night, as the
street grew dark, her lantern flicked on, the bulb's heat turning an
inner magic lantern that projected shadows on the walls. We thought the
shadows spelled out a message, and binoculars confirmed this, but the
messages turned out to be written in Chinese. The lantern usually went
off and on in varying patternsthree short, two long, two long, three
short-after which the overhead light blazed, revealing the room like a
museum exhibit. We respected the velvet ropes as we made our brief tour,

past the late-twentiethcentury furnishings: a headboard from Sears with
matching night table; Therese's Apollo 11 lamp casting light on Lux's
life-size poster of Billy Jack in flatbrimmed black hat and Navajo belt.
The viewing lasted only thirty seconds before Lux and Therese's room
went dark. Then Bonnie and Mary's room lit up twice, as though in
response. No figures passed before the windows, nor did the length of
the illuminations correspond to any habitual activity. The girls' lights
went off and on for no reason we could see.

Each night we tried to break the code. Tim Winer began recording the
girls' flashes with his mechanical pencil, but somehow we knew they
wouldn't correspond to any established mode of communication. Some
nights, the lights hypnotized us so that we came back to consciousness
having forgotten where we were or what we were doing, only the bordello
glow of Lux's Chinese lantern lighting the back room of our brains.

It took us a while to notice the lights in Cecilia's old room.
Distracted by flashes at either end of the house, we failed to see the
red and white pinpricks glowing at the window from which she'd jumped
ten months before. Once we did, we couldn't agree what they were. Some
believed they were incense sticks glowing in a secret ceremony, while
others claimed they were only cigarettes. The cigarette theory caved in
as soon as we detected more red lights than possible smokers, and by the
time we counted sixteen, we understood at least a portion of the
mystery: the girls had created a shrine to their dead sister. Those who
attended church said the window resembled the Grotto at St. Paul's
Catholic Church on the Lake, but instead of neat ascending rows of
votive candles, each alike in size and importance like the souls they
pilotlighted, the girls had engineered a phantasmagoria of beacons. They
had fused drippings from dinner candles into a single paraffin bundle
wrapped with its own wick. They had fashioned ten torches from a
psychedelic "craft candle" Cecilia had bought at a street art fair. They
had lit the box of six squat emergency candles Mr. Lisbon kept in the
upstairs closet in case of power failures. They had ignited three tubes

of Mary's lipstick, which burned surprisingly well. From the windowsill,
from cups suspended on clothes hangers, from old flowerpots, from
cut-out milk cartons, the candles burned. At night we saw Bonnie tending
the flames. Occasionally, finding candles drowning in their own wax, she
dug runoff trenches with a pair of scissors; but most often she watched
the candles as if their outcome held her own, the flames almost
extinguishing themselves, but, by some greed of oxygen, persisting.

In addition to God, the candles beseeched us. The Chinese lantern sent
out its untranslatable S. 0. S. The overhead light showed us the shabby
state of the Lisbon house, and showed us Billy Jack, who had avenged his
girlfriend's rape using forsworn karate. The girls' signals reached us
and no one else, like a radio station picked up by our braces. At night,
afterimages flashed on our inner eyelids, or hovered over our beds like
a swarm of fireflies. Our inability to respond only made the signals
more important. We watched the show nightly, always on the verge, of
discovering the key, and Joe Larson even tried flashing his own bedroom
light in answer, but this made the Lisbon house go dark, and we felt
reprimanded.

The first letter arrived on May 7. Slipped into Chase Buell's mailbox
with the rest of the day's mail, the letter bore no stamp or return
address, but when we opened it, we recognized at once the purple Flair
Lux liked to write with.

Dear whoever, Tell Trip I'm over him.

He's a creep.

Guess Who That was all it said. In the next few weeks, other letters
arrived, expressing various moods, each envelope delivered to our houses
by the girls themselves in the dead of night. The idea of their sneaking
out and moving about our street excited us, and a few nights we tried to
stay up long enough to see them. We always awoke in the morning

realizing that we'd fallen asleep at our posts. In the mailbox, like a
quarter deposited under our pillows by the Tooth Fairy, a letter would
be waiting. There were eight letters in all. Not all of them were
written by Lux. All were unsigned. All were briel One letter said:
"Remember us?" Another said: "Down with unsavory boys." Another: "Watch
for our lights." The longest said: "In this dark, there will be light.
Will you help us?"

In the daytime, the Lisbon house looked vacant. The trash the family put
out once a week (also in the middle of the night because no one saw
them, not even Uncle Tucker) looked more and more like the refuse of
people resigned to a long siege. They were eating canned lima beans.
They were flavoring rice with sloppy-joe mix. At night, when the lights
signaled, we racked our brains for a way of contacting the girls. Tom
Faheem suggested flying a kite with a message alongside the house, but
this was voted down on logistical grounds. Little Johnny Buell offered
the recourse of tossing the same message on a rock through the girls'
windows, but we were afraid the breaking glass would alert Mrs. Lisbon.
In the end, the answer was so simple it took a week to come up with.

We called them on the telephone. In the Larsons' sun-faded phone book,
right between Licker and Little, we found the intact listing for Lisbon,
Ronald A. It sat halfway down the righthand page, unmarked by any code
or symbol, not even an asterisk referring to an appendix of pain. We
stared at it for some time. Then, three index fingers at once, we
dialed.

The telephone tolled eleven times before Mr. Lisbon answered. "What's it
going to be today?" he said right away in a tired voice. His speech was
slurred. We covered the phone and said nothing. "I'm waiting. Today I'll
listen to all your crap."

Another click sounded on the line, like a door opening onto a hollow
corridor. "Look, give us a break, will you?" Mr. Lisbon muttered.

There was a pause. Assorted breathing, mechanically reformulated, met in
electronic space. Then Mr. Lisbon spoke in a voice unlike his own, a
high screech .. .Mrs. Lisbon had grabbed the receiver. "Why won't you
leave us alone!" she shouted, and slammed down the phone.

We stayed on. For five more seconds her furious breath blew through the
receiver, but just as we expected, the line didn't go dead. On the other
end, an obscure presence waited.

We called out a tentative hello. After a moment, a faint, crippled voice
returned, "Hi."

We hadn't heard the Lisbon girls speak in a long time, but the voice
didn't jog our memories. It sounded-perhaps because the speaker was
whispering-irreparably altered, diminished, the voice of a child fallen
down a well. We didn't know which girl it was, and didn't know what to
say. Still, we hung on together-her, them, us-and at some adjacent
recess in the Bell telephone system another line connected. A man began
talking underwater to a woman.

We could half hear their conversation ("I thought maybe a salad" .. . "A
salad? You're killing me with these salads"), but then another circuit
must have freed, because the couple were shunted off suddenly, leaving
us in buzzing silence, and the voice, raw but stronger now, said, "Shit.
See you later," and the phone was hung up.

We called again next day, at the same time, and were answered on the
first ring. We waited a moment for safety's sake, then proceeded with
the plan we'd devised the night before. Holding the phone to one of Mr.
Larson's speakers, we played the song which most thoroughly communicated
our feelings to the Lisbon girls. We can't remember the song's title
now, and an extensive search through records of the period has proved
unsuccessful. We do, however, recall the essential sentiments, which

spoke of hard days, long nights, a man waiting outside a broken
telephone booth hoping it would somehow ring, and rain, and rainbows. It
was mostly guitars, except for one interlude where a mellow cello
hummed. We played it into the phone, and then Chase Buell gave our
number and we hung up.

Next day, same time, our phone rang. We answered it immediately, and
after some confusion (the phone was dropped), heard a needle bump down
on a record, and the voice of Gilbert O'Sullivan singing through
scratches. You may recall the song, a ballad which charts the
misfortunes of a young man's life (his parents die, his fiance stands
him up at the altar), each verse leaving him more and more alone. It was
Mrs. Eugene's favorite, and we knew it well from hearing her singing
along over her simmering pots. The song never meant much to us, speaking
as it did of an age we hadn't reached, but once we heard it playing
tinily through the receiver, coming from the Lisbon girls, the song made
an impact. Gilbert O'Sullivan's elfin voice sounded high enough to be a
girl's. The lyrics might have been diary entries the girls whispered
into our ears. Though it wasn't their voices we heard, the song conjured
their images more vividly than ever.

We could feel them, on the other end, blowing dust off the needle,
holding the telephone over the spinning black disk, playing the volume
low so as not to be overheard. When the song stopped, the needle skated
through the inner ring, sending out a repeating click (like the same
time lived over and over again). Already Joe Larson had our response
ready, and after we played it, the Lisbon girls played theirs, and the
evening went on like that. Most of the songs we've forgotten, but a
portion of that contrapuntal exchange survives, in pencil, on the back
of Demo Karafilis's Teafor the Tillerman, where he jotted it. We provide
it here: the Lisbon girls us the Lisbon girls us the Lisbon girls us the
Lisbon girls "Alone Again, Naturally," Gilbert O'Sullivan "You've Got a
Friend," James Taylor "Where Do the Children Play?, Cat Stevens "Dear
Prudence, " The Beatles "Candle in the Wind, " Elton John "Wild Horses,"

The Rolling Stones "At Seventeen, " Janice Ian us "Time in a Bottle,"
Jim Croce the Lisbon girls "So Far Away," Carole King Actually, we're
not sure about the order. Demo Karafilis scribbled the titles
haphazardly. The above order, however, does chart the basic progression
of our musical conversation. Because Lux had burned her hard rock, the
girls' songs were mostly folk music. Stark plaintive voices sought
justice and equality. An occasional fiddle evoked the country the
country had once been. The singers had bad skin or wore boots. Song
after song throbbed with secret pain. We passed the sticky receiver from
ear to ear, the drumbeats so regular we might have been pressing our
ears to the girls' chests. Occasionally, we thought we heard them
singing along, and it was almost like being at a concert with them. Our
songs, for the most part, were love songs. Each selection tried to turn
the conversation in a more intimate direction. But the Lisbon girls kept
to impersonal topics. (We leaned in and commented on their perfume. They
said it was probably the magnolias.) After a while, our songs turned
sadder and sappier. That was when the girls played "So Far Away." We
noted the shift at once (they had let their hand linger on our wrist)
and followed with "Bridge over Troubled Water," turning up the volume
because the song expressed more than any other how we felt about the
girls, how we wanted to help them. When it finished, we waited for their
response. After a long pause, their turntable began grinding again, and
we heard the song which even now, in the Muzak of malls, makes us stop
and stare back into a lost time: Hey, have you ever tried Really
reaching outfor the other side I may be climbing on rainbows, But, baby,
here goes: Dreams, they'refor those who sleep Life, it's for us to keep
And if you're wondering what this song is leading to I want to make it
with you.

The line went dead. (Without warning, the girls had thrown their arms
around us, confessed hotly into our ears, and fled the room.) For some
minutes, we stood motionless, listening to the buzz of the telephone
line. Then it began to beep angrily, and a recording told us to hang up
our phone and hang it up now.

We had never dreamed the girls might love us back. The notion made us
dizzy, and we lay down on the Larsons' carpet, which smelled of pet
deodorizer and, deeper down, of pet. For a long time no one spoke. But
little by little, as we shifted bits of information in our heads, we saw
things in a new light. Hadn't the girls invited us to their party last
year? Hadn't they known our names and addresses? Rubbing spy holes in
grimy windows, hadn't they been looking out to see us? We forgot
ourselves and held hands, smiling with closed eyes. On the stereo
Garfunkel began hitting his high notes, and we didn't think of Cecilia.

We thought only of Mary, Bonnie, Lux, and Therese, stranded in life,
unable to speak to us until now, in this inexact, shy fashion. We went
over their last months in school, coming up with new recollections. Lux
had forgotten her math book one day and had to share with Tom Faheem. In
the margin, she had written, "I want to get out of here." How far did
that wish extend? Thinking back, we decided the girls had been trying to
talk to us all along, to elicit our help, but we'd been too infatuated
to listen. Our surveillance had been so focused we missed nothing but a
simple returned gaze. Who else did they have to turn to? Not their
parents. Nor the neighborhood. Inside their house they were prisoners;
outside, lepers. And so they hid from the world, waiting for someone-for
us-to save them.

But in the following days we tried to call the girls back without
success. The phone rang on hopelessly, forlornly. We pictured the device
howling under pillows while the girls reached for it in vain. Unable to
get through, we bought The Best of Bread, playing "Make It with You"
over and over. There was grand talk of tunnels, of starting from the
Larsons' basement and going beneath the street. The dirt could be
carried out in our pant legs and emptied during strolls like in The
Great Escape. The drama of this pleased us so much we momentarily forgot
that our tunnel had already been built: the storm sewers. We checked the
sewers, however, and found them full of water: the lake had risen again

this year. It didn't matter. Mr. Buell had an extension ladder we could
easily prop against the girls' windows. "Just like eloping," Eugie Kent
said, and the words made our minds drift, to a red-faced, small-town
justice of the peace, and a sleeper compartment in a train passing
through blue wheat fields at night. We imagined all sorts of things,
waiting for the girls to signal for us.

None of this-the record-playing, the flashing lights, the Virgin
cards-ever got into the papers, of course. We thought of our
communication with the Lisbon girls as a sacred confidence, even after
such fidelity ceased to make sense. Ms. Perl (who later published a book
with a chapter dedicated to the Lisbon girls) described their spirits
sinking further and further in an inevitable progression. She shows
their pathetic last attempts to make a life-Bonnie's tending the shrine,
Mary's wearing bright sweatersbut every stone the girls built shelter
with has, for Ms. Perl, an underside of mud and worms. The candles were
a two-way mirror between worlds: they called Cecilia back, but also
called her sisters to join her. Mary's pretty sweaters only showed a
desperate adolescent urge to be beautiful, while Therese's baggy
sweatshirts revealed a "lack of self-esteem."

We knew better. Three nights after the record playing, we saw Bonnie
bring a black trunk into her bedroom. She put it on her bed and began
filling it with clothes and books. Mary appeared and threw in her
climate mirror. They argued about the trunk's contents and, in a huff,
Bonnie took out some of the clothes she'd put in, giving Mary more room
for her things: a cassette player, a hair dryer, and the object we
didn't understand until later, a cast-iron doorstop. We had no idea what
the girls were doing, but we noticed the change in their demeanor at
once. They moved with a new purpose. Their aimlessness was gone. It was
Paul Baldino who interpreted their actions: "Looks like they're going to
make a break for it," he said, putting down the binoculars. He made this
conclusion with the confident air of someone who had seen relatives
disappear to Sicily or South America, and we believed him at once. "Five

dollars gets you ten those girls are out of here by the end of the
week."

He was right, though not in the way he intended. The last note, written
on the back of a laminated picture of the Virgin, arrived in Chase
Buell's mailbox on June 14. It said simply: "Tomorrow.

Midnight. Wait for our signal."

By this time of year, fish flies coated our windows, making it difficult
to see out. The next night, we gathered in the vacant lot beside Joe
Larson's house. The sun had fallen below the horizon, but still lit the
sky in an orange chemical streak more beautiful than nature. Across the
street the Lisbon house was dark except for the red haze of Cecilia's
shrine, nearly hidden. From the ground we couldn't see the upper story
well, and tried to go up to the Larsons' roof. Mr. Larson stopped us. "I
just got finished retarring it," he said. We wandered back to the lot,
then walked down to the street, putting our palms against the asphalt
still warm from the day's sun. The sodden smell of the Lisbon house
reached us, then faded, so that we thought we'd imagined it. Joe Hill
Conley began climbing trees, as usual, though the rest of us had
outgrown it. We watched him shinny up a young maple. He couldn't climb
far because the thin limbs wouldn't support his weight. Still, Chase
Buell called up to him, "See anything?" and Joe Hill Conley squinted,
then pulled the skin at the corners of his eyes taut, which he thought
worked better than squinting, but finally shook his head. It gave us an
idea, however, and we moved to the old tree house. Gazing up through
foliage, we determined its condition. Part of the roof had been blown
off in a storm years ago, and our crowning touch, the doorknob, was
missing, but the structure still looked habitable.

We climbed up to the tree house the way we always had, stepping in the
knothole, then on the nailed board, then on two bent nails, before
grasping the frayed rope and pulling ourselves through the trapdoor. We

were so much bigger now we could barely squeeze through, and once we
were inside, the plywood floor sagged under our weight. The oblong
window we'd cut with a handsaw years ago still looked onto the front of
the Lisbon house. Next to it were five spotted photographs of the Lisbon
girls, pinned with rusty tacks. We didn't remember putting them up, but
there they were, dim from time and weather so that all we could make out
were the phosphorescent outlines of the girls' bodies, each a different
glowing letter of an unknown alphabet. Outside and below, a few people
had come out to water lawns or flower beds, tossing silver lassos. The
cracker voice of our local baseball announcer rose from a score of
radios, describing a slow drama we couldn't see, and homerun cheers
rose, too, converging above the trees and then dispersing. It grew still
darker. People went inside. We tried the wick of the ancient kerosene
lamp, which lit, burning on invisible residue, but within a minute, fish
flies began streaming through the window, and we put the lamp out. We
could hear their bodies battering streetlamps, a hail of hair balls, and
popping under the tires of passing cars. A few bugs exploded as we
leaned back against the tree-house walls. Inert unless detached, they
flapped furiously between our fingers, then flew away to cling again, on
anything, inert. The scum of their dead or dying bodies darkened street-
and headlights, turned house windows into theater scrims poking out
light. We settled back, pulling up a warm six-pack on a rope, and drank,
and waited.

Each of us had said he was sleeping over at a friend's house, so we had
all night to sit and drink, unmolested by adults. But neither at
twilight nor thereafter did we see any lights in the Lisbon house other
than the candles. They seemed to bum more dimly, and we suspected that
despite their ministrations, the girls were running out of wax.
Cecilia's window had the dank glow of an unclean fish tank. Angling Carl
Tagel's telescope out the tree-house window, we managed to see the
pockmarked moon steaming silently across space, then blue Venus, but
when we turned the telescope on Lux's window it brought us so close we
couldn't see a thing. What at first appeared the xylophone of her spine,

curled in bed, turned out to be a decorative molding. A stringy peach
pit, left on her bedside table from a time of fresh food, gave rise to a
number of lurid conjectures. Any time we caught sight of her, or of
something moving, the piece was too small to put the puzzle together,
and in the end we gave up, retracting the telescope and relying on our
eyes.

Midnight passed in silence. The moon set. A bottle of Boone's Farm
strawberry wine materialized, was passed around, and set on a tree limb.
Tom Bogus rolled to the tree-house door and dropped from sight. A minute
later, we heard him retching in the bushes of the vacant lot. We stayed
up late enough to see Uncle Tucker emerge, holding a piece of linoleum
from the thirteenth layer he was installing to fill up the hours of his
life. After getting a beer from the garage refrigerator, he walked to
the front yard and surveyed his nighttime territory. Moving behind a
tree, he waited for Bonnie to appear, rosary in hand. From his vantage
point he couldn't see the flashlight come on in the bedroom window, and
he had gone back inside before we heard the window open. By that time we
were fixed on it. The flashlight waved through the darkness. Then the
light went on and off three times in succession.

A breeze arose. In the blackness, the leaves of our tree began to
flutter, and the air filled with the crepuscular scent of the Lisbon
house. None of us remembers thinking anything, or deciding anything,
because at that moment our minds had ceased to work, filling us with the
only peace we've ever known. We were above the street, aloft, at the
same height as the Lisbon girls in their crumbling bedrooms, and they
were calling to us. We heard wood scrape. Then, for an instant, we saw
them-Lux, Bonnie, Mary, and Therese-framed in a single window. They
looked our way, looked across the void at us. Mary blew us a kiss, or
wiped her mouth. The flashlight went off. The window closed. And they
were gone.

We didn't even stop to discuss it. In single file, like paratroopers, we

dropped from the tree. It was an easy jump, and only on impact did we
realize how close the ground was: no more than ten feet down. Jumping
from the grass, we could nearly touch the tree-house floor. Our new
height astounded us, and later many said this contributed to our
resolve, because for the first time ever we felt like men.

We advanced on the house from different directions, hiding in shadows of
surviving trees. As we approached, some of us crawling army-style,
others still on two feet, the smell grew stronger. The air thickened.
Soon we reached an invisible barrier: no one had gotten this close to
the Lisbon house in months. We hesitated, and then Paul Baldino held his
hand in the air, giving the signal, and we went in closer. We grazed the
brick walls, crouching under windows and getting spider-web in our hair.
We came into the damp mess of the back yard. Kevin Head tripped on the
bird feeder, which was still lying there. It cracked in half, the
remaining seed spilling out onto the ground. We froze, but no lights
came on.

After a minute, we inched in closer. Mosquitoes divebombed past our
ears, but we paid no attention. We were too busy gazing up into the
darkness for a ladder of knotted bed sheets and a descending nightgown.
We saw nothing. The house rose above us, its windows reflecting dark
masses of leaves. In a whisper, Chase Buell reminded us that he had just
gotten his driver's license, and held up the keys to his mother's
Cougar. "We can use my car," he said. Tom Faheem searched the overgrown
flower beds for pebbles to ping against the girls' windows. Any second
an upstairs window might open, breaking its seal of fish flies, and a
face would look down at us for the rest of our lives.

At the back window, we grew brave enough to look in. Through a scrub of
dead windowsill plants, we made out the interior of the house: a
seascape of confused objects, advancing and retreating as our eyes
adjusted to the light. Mr. Lisbon's La-Z-Boy rolled forward, its
footrest raised like a snow shovel. The brown vinyl sofa slunk back

against the wall. As they moved apart, the floor seemed to rise like a
hydraulic stage, and in the room's only light, coming from a small
shaded lamp, we saw Lux. She was lying back in a beanbag chair, her
knees lifted and spread apart, her upper half sunk into the bag, which
closed over her like a straitjacket. She was wearing blue jeans and
suede clogs. Her long hair fell over her shoulders. She had a cigarette
in her mouth, the long ash about to fall.

We didn't know what to do next. We had no instructions. We pressed our
faces against the windows, using our hands as goggles. The glass panes
conducted sound vibrations, and as we leaned forward, we could feel the
other girls moving about above us. Something slid, stopped, slid again.
Something bumped. We drew our faces away and everything went still. Then
we returned to the buzzing glass.

Now Lux was groping for an ashtray. Finding none within reach, she
flicked her ash onto her blue jeans, rubbing it in with her hand. As she
moved, she rose out of the beanbag, and we saw that she was wearing a
halter top. Tied behind her neck in a bow, the halter descended on two
thin straps over her pale shoulders and sculpted collarbones, swelling
finally into two yellow slings. The halter was slightly askew on the
right side, revealing a soft white plumpness as she stretched. "July,
two years ago," said Joe Hill Conley, identifying the last time we'd
seen the halter. On a very hot day, Lux had worn it outside for five
minutes before her mother had called her back in to change. Now the
halter spoke of all the time in between, of everything that had
happened. Most of all, it said that the girls were leaving, that from
now on they'd wear whatever they liked. "Maybe we should knock," Kevin
Head whispered, but none of us did. Lux settled back in the beanbag
chair. She ground out her cigarette on the floor. Behind her, on the
wall, a shadow swelled. She turned abruptly, then smiled as a stray cat
we'd never seen before climbed into her lap. She hugged its unresponsive
body until the animal struggled free (that's one more thing we have to
include: right up to the end, Lux loved the stray cat. It ran off then,

out of this report). Lux lit another cigarette. In the match's flare,
she looked up at the window. She lifted her chin so that we thought
she'd seen us, but then she ran her hand through her hair. She was only
examining her reflection. The light inside the house made us invisible
outside, and we stood inches from the window but unseen, as though
looking in at Lux from another plane of existence. The faint glow of the
window flickered against our faces. Our trunks and legs descended into
darkness. On the lake a freighter sounded its horn, on a fogless night.
Another freighter responded at a deeper pitch. That halter could have
come undone with one quick yank.

Tom Faheem went first, disproving his shy reputation. He climbed onto
the back porch, quietly opened the door, and let us, at last, back into
the Lisbon house. "We're here" was all he said.

Lux looked up, but didn't rise from the chair. Her sleepy eyes showed no
surprise that we were there, but at the base of her white neck a
lobstery blush spread. "About time," she said. "We've been waiting for
you guys." She took another drag. "We've got a car," Tom Faheem
continued. "Full tank. We'll take you wherever you want to go."

"It's just a Cougar," said Chase Buell, "but it's got a pretty big
trunk."

"Can I sit in front?" Lux asked, screwing her mouth up to exhale to one
side, politely away from us.

"Sure can."

"Which one of you studs is going to sit up front next to me?"

She tilted her head toward the ceiling and blew a series of smoke rings.
We watched them rise, and this time Joe Hill Conley didn't run forward
to stick his finger in them. For the first time, we looked around the

house. The smell, now that we were inside, was stronger than ever. It
was the smell of wet plaster, drains clogged with the endless tangle of
the girls' hair, mildewed cabinets, leaking pipes. Paint cans were still
stationed under leaks, each full of a weak solution of other times. The
living room had a plundered look. The television sat at an angle, its
screen removed, Mr. Lisbon's toolbox open in front of it. Chairs were
missing arms or legs, as though the Lisbons had been using them for
firewood.

Where are your parents?" Asleep. ,:What about your sisters?"

They're coming." Something thudded downstairs. We retreated to the back
door. "Come on," Chase Buell said. "We better get out of here. It's
getting late." But Lux only exhaled again, shaking her head. She pulled
a halter strap away from her skin, where it left a red mark. Everything
was quiet again. "Wait," she said. "Five more minutes. We're not
finished packing. We had to wait until my parents were asleep. They take
forever. Especially my mom. She's an insomniac. She's probably awake
right now."

She got up then. We saw her rise from the beanbag chair, leaning forward
to get enough momentum. The halter, on its flimsy strings, hung
completely away from her body so that we saw dark air between material
and skin, and then the soft flash of her flour-dusted breasts. "My feet
are all swollen," she said. "Weirdest thing. That's why I'm wearing
clogs. Do you like them9" She dangled one on the end of her toes.
"Yeah." Now she stood at full height, which wasn't tall. We had to keep
telling ourselves that this was happening, that this was really Lux
Lisbon, that we were in the same room with her. She looked down at
herself, adjusted the halter, tucked with one thumb the exposed
plumpness on her right side. Then she looked up again as though into
each of our eyes at once, and began walking forward. She shuffled in the
clogs, moving into the shadows, and as she approached we could hear her
printing the dusty floor. From the darkness she said, "We won't all fit

in a Cougar." She took one more step and her face reappeared. For a
second it didn't seem alive: it was too white, the cheeks too perfectly
carved, the arched eyebrows painted on, the full lips made of wax. But
then she came closer and we saw the light in her eyes we have been
looking for ever since." We better take my mom's car, don't you think?
It9s bigger. Which one of you can drive?"

Chase Buell raised his hand. "Think you can drive a station wagon?"

"Sure." And then: "It's not a stick, is it?"

"No."

"Sure. No problem."

"Will you let me steer some?"

"Sure. But we should get out of here. I just heard something. Maybe it's
your mom."

She came up to Chase Buell. She came so close her breath stirred his
hair. And then, in front of us all, Lux unbuckled his belt. She didn't
even need to look down. Her fingers saw their way, and only once did
something snag, at which point she shook her head, like a musician
missing an easy note. All the while she stared into his eyes, rising up
on the balls of her feet, and in the quiet house we heard the pants
unsnap. The zipper opened all the way down our spines. None of us moved.
Chase Buell didn't move. Lux's eyes, burning and velvet, glowed in the
dim room. A vein on her neck was softly pulsing, the one you're supposed
to put perfume on for that reason. Even though she was doing it to Chase
Buell, we could all feel Lux undoing us, reaching out for us and taking
us as she knew we could be taken. Just at the last second, another soft
thud came from downstairs. Upstairs, Mr. Lisbon coughed in his sleep.
Lux stopped. She looked away, consulting with herself, and then she

said, "We can't do this now."

She let go of Chase Buell's belt and crossed to the back door. "I've got
to get some fresh air. You guys have got me all worked up." She smiled
then, a loose, clumsy smile, genuine, unpretty. "I'll go wait in the
car. You guys wait here for my sisters. We've got a lot of stuff." She
fished in a bowl by the back door for the car keys. She made to leave,
but stopped again. "Where will we go?"

"Florida," Chase Buell said. "Cool," said Lux. "Florida."

A minute later, we heard a car door slam shut in the garage. A few of us
recall hearing the faint strains of a popular song drifting through the
night, which told us she was playing the radio. We waited. We weren't
sure where the other girls were. We could hear sounds of packing
upstairs, a closet door opening, a suitcase jangling bedsprings. Feet
moved above and below. Something was being dragged across the basement
floor. Though the nature of the sounds eluded us, a precision surrounded
them; every movement seemed exact, part of an elaborate escape plan. We
understood that we were only pawns in this strategy, useful for a time,
but this didn't lessen our exhilaration. The knowledge welled in us that
we would soon be in the car with the girls, driving them out of our
green neighborhood and into the pure, free desolation of back roads we
didn't even know yet. We played paper, scissors, rock to see who would
go along, who would stay behind. And all the while the sense that the
girls would soon join us filled us with a quiet happiness. Who knew how
accustomed we might get to those sounds? Of elastic satin suitcase
pockets snapping closed? Of jewelry rattling? Of the hunchback
foot-dragging sound of the girls carrying suitcases down an anonymous
corridor? Unknown roads took shape in our minds. We saw ourselves
cutting swaths through cattails, freshwater inlets, old boatyards. At
some gas station we would ask for the ladies' room key because the girls
would be too shy. We would play the radio with the windows open.

Sometime during this reverie, the house went silent. We assumed the
girls had finished packing. Peter Sissen took out his penlight and made
a shallow foray into the dining room, coming back to say, "One of them
is still downstairs. There's a light on in the stairway." We stood, we
waved the penlight, we waited for the girls, but no one came. Tom Faheem
tried the first stair, but it creaked so loudly he came back down again.
The silence of the house rang in our ears. A car passed, sending a
shadow sweeping across the dining room, momentarily lighting up the
painting of the Pilgrims. The dining table was heaped with winter coats
wrapped in plastic. Other hulking bundles loomed. The house had the feel
of an attic where junk collects, establishing revolutionary
relationships: the toaster in the birdcage; ballet slippers protruding
from a wicker creel. We snaked our way amid the clutter, passing into
spaces cleared for games-a backgammon board, Chinese checkers-then
moving again into thickets of eggbeaters and rubber boots. We entered
the kitchen. It was too dark to see, but we heard a small hiss, like
someone sighing. A trapezoid of light projected up from the basement. We
went to the stairs and listened. Then we started down to the rec room.

Chase Buell led the way, and as we descended, holding on to one
another's belt loops, we traveled back to the day a year earlier when we
had descended those same steps to attend the only party the Lisbon girls
were ever allowed to throw. By the time we reached bottom, we felt we'd
literally traveled back in time. For despite the inch of floodwater
covering the floor, the room was just as we had left it: Cecilia's party
had never been cleaned up. The paper tablecloth, spotted with mice
droppings, still covered the card table. A brownish scum of punch lay
caked in the cut-glass bowl, sprinkled with flies. The sherbet had
melted long ago, but a ladle still protruded from the gummy silt, and
cups, gray with dust and cobwebs, remained neatly stacked in front. A
profusion of withered balloons hung from the ceiling on thin ribbons.
The domino game still called for a three or a seven.

We didn't know where the girls had gone. Ripples spread across the

water's surface as though something had just swum by or dived down. The
gurgling drain sucked intermittently. The water lapped the walls,
reflecting our pink faces, and the red and blue streamers overhead. The
room's changes-water bugs adhering to walls, one bobbing dead mouse-only
heightened what hadn't changed. If we half closed our eyes and held our
noses, we could trick ourselves into thinking the party was still going
on. Buzz Romano waded out to the card table, and as we all watched,
began to dance, to box-step, as his mother had taught him in the papal
splendor of their living room. He held only air, but we could see
herthem-all five, clasped in his arms. "These girls make me crazy. If I
could just feel one of them up just once," he said, as his shoes filled
and emptied with silt. His dancing kicked up the sewage smell, and after
that, stronger than ever, the smell we could never forget. Because it
was then we saw, over Buzz Romano's head, the only thing that had
changed in the room since we left it a year before. Hanging down amid
the half-deflated balloons were the two brownand-white husks of Bonnie's
saddle shoes. She had tied the rope to the same beam as the decorations.

None of us moved. Buzz Romano, oblivious, kept dancing. Above him, in a
pink dress, Bonnie looked clean and festive, like a pifiata. It took a
minute to sink in. We gazed up at Bonnie, at her spindly legs in their
white confirmation stockings, and the shame that has never gone away
took over. The doctors we later consulted attributed our response to
shock. But the mood felt more like guilt, like coming to attention at
the last moment and too late, as though Bonnie were murmuring the secret
not only of her death but of her life itself, of all the girls' lives.
She was so still. She had such enormous weight. The soles of her wet
shoes were embedded with bits of mica, shining and dripping.

We had never known her. They had brought us here to find that out.

How long we stayed like that, communing with her departed spirit, we
can't remember. Long enough for our collective breath to start a breeze
through the room that made Bonnie twist on her rope. She spun slowly,

and at one point her face broke out of the seaweed of balloons, showing
us the reality of the death she'd chosen. It was a world of blackening
eye sockets, blood pooling in lower extremities, stiffening joints.

Already we knew the rest-though we would never be sure about the
sequence of events. We argue about it still. Most likely, Bonnie died
while we sat in the living room, dreaming of highways. Mary put her head
in the oven shortly thereafter, on hearing Bonnie kick the trunk out
from under herself. They were ready to assist one another, if need be.
Mary might have still been breathing when we passed by on our way
downstairs, missing her by less than two feet in the dark, as we later
measured. Therese, stuffed with sleeping pills washed down with gin, was
as good as dead by the time we entered the house. Lux was the last to
go, twenty or thirty minutes after we left. Fleeing, screaming without
sound, we forgot to stop at the garage, from which music was still
playing. They found her in the front seat, gray-faced and serene,
holding a cigarette lighter that had burned its coils into her palm. She
had escaped in the car just as we expected. But she had unbuckled us, it
turned out, only to stall us, so that she and her sisters could die in
peace.

We knew them now. Knew the way the skinny one drove, with his bursts of
acceleration mid-block, his cautious turning, his habit of misjudging
the Lisbons' driveway so that he ran over the lawn. We knew the bending
sound a siren made as it passed, a phenomenon Therese identified
correctly as the Doppler effect the third time the EMS truck came, but
not the fourth because she was bent herself by then, winding down and
away in slow spirals, a feeling akin to being sucked through your own
intestines. We knew that the fat one had sensitive skin and was plagued
with razor bumps, that.he wore a metal wedge on the heel of his shoe
because his left leg was shorter than his right, and that he made an
uneven clicking sound as he hitched across the macadam driveway. We knew
that the skinny one's hair tended to get oily, because when they came to
get Cecilia his long hair had looked like Bob Seger's, but now, a year

later, the fluff was gone and he looked like a drowned rat. We still
didn't know their real names, but we were beginning to intuit the
condition of their paramedic lives, the smell of bandages and oxygen
masks, the taste of pre-calamity dinners on resuscitated mouths, the
flavor of life ebbing away on the other side of their own puffing faces,
the blood, brain spatter, blue cheeks, bulging eyes, and-on our own
block-the succession of limp bodies wearing charm bracelets and gold
lockets in the shape of a heart.

When they came the fourth time they were losing faith. The truck made
the same jolting stop, tires skidded, doors flew open, but as they
jumped out the paramedics had lost their valiant appearance and were
clearly two men afraid of being humiliated. "It's those two guys again,"
said Zachary Larson, five. The fat one gave the skinny one a look and
they started for the house, this time taking no equipment. Mrs. Lisbon,
face white, answered the door. She pointed inside, saying nothing. When
the paramedics entered, she remained in the doorway, tightening the belt
of her robe. She straightened the welcome mat with her toe, twice. Soon
the paramedics ran out again, changed and electrified, and got the
stretcher. A minute later they were carrying Therese out, facedown. Her
dress, hiked up around her waist, revealed her unbecoming underwear, the
color of an athletic bandage. The buttons in back had popped open to
reveal a slice of mushroom-colored back. Her hand kept falling off the
stretcher, though each time Mrs. Lisbon replaced it. "Stay," she
commanded, to the hand apparently. But the hand flopped out again. Mrs.
Lisbon stopped, her shoulders sagged, she seemed to give up. In the next
second she was running, holding on to Therese's arm and murmuring what
some people heard as, "Not you, too," and Mrs. O'Connor, who had acted
in college, as, "But too cruel."

By this time we were back in our beds, shamming sleep. Outside, Sheriff
wore an oxygen mask to enter the garage and raise the automatic door.
When it opened (so people told us) nothing came out, no smoke as
everyone expected, not even a trace of gas that made things shimmer like

a mirage-the station wagon sat vibrating, and because Sheriff had
brushed another switch accidentally, the windshield wipers were going
like mad. The fat one went inside to get Bonnie down from the rafters,
balancing one chair on another like a circus performer. They found Mary
in the kitchen, not dead but nearly so, her head and torso thrust into
the oven as though she were scrubbing it. A second EMS truck came (the
only time this happened) bringing two paramedics more efficient than
Sheriff and the fat one. They rushed inside and saved Mary's life. For a
while. For what it was worth.

Technically, Mary survived for more than a month, though everyone felt
otherwise. After that night, people spoke of the Lisbon girls in the
past tense, and if they mentioned Mary at all it was with the veiled
wish that she would hurry up and get it over with. In fact, the final
suicides surprised few people. Even we who had tried to save the girls
came to consider ourselves temporarily insane. In hindsight, Bonnie's
battered trunk lost its associations with travel and flight and became
only what it was: a drop weight for a hanging, like sandbags in old
Westerns. Still, while everyone agreed the suicides came as predictably
as seasons or old age, we could never agree on an explanation for them.
The final suicides seemed to confirm Dr. Hornicker's theory that the
girls had been suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, but Dr.
Hornicker later distanced himself from that conclusion. Even if
Cecilia's suicide led to copycatting, that still didn't explain why
Cecilia had killed herself in the first place. At a hastily called Lions
Club meeting, Dr. Hornicker, the guest speaker, brought up the
possibility of a chemical link, citing a new study of "platelet
serotonin receptor indices in suicidal children." Dr. Kotbaum of the
Western Psychiatric Institute had found that many suicidal persons
possessed deficient amounts of serotonin, a neurotransmitter essential
for the regulation of mood. Since the serotonin study had been published
after Cecilia's suicide, Dr. Hornicker had never measured her serotonin
level. He did, however, examine a blood sample taken from Mary, which
showed a slight deficiency of serotonin. She was put on medication, and

after two weeks of psychological tests and intensive therapy, her blood
was tested again. At that time her serotonin level appeared normal.

As for the other girls, autopsies were performed on each of them, in
accordance with a state law requiring investigation in all deaths by
suicide. As written, the law gave the police leeway in such cases, and
their prior failure to order an autopsy on Cecilia led many to believe
they now suspected Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon of foul play, or wished to put
pressure on them to move. A single coroner, brought in from the city
with two fatigued assistants, opened up the girls' brains and body
cavities, peering inside at the mystery of their despair. They used an
assembly-line approach, the assistants rolling each girl past the doctor
as he used his table saw, his hose, his vacuum. Photographs were taken,
but never released, though we wouldn't have had the stomach to look at
them. We did, however, read the coroner's report, written in a colorful
style that made the girls' deaths as unreal as the news. He spoke of the
incredible cleanliness of the girls' bodies, the youngest he had ever
worked on, showing no signs of wastage or alcoholism. Their smooth blue
hearts looked like water balloons, and the rest of their organs
possessed a similar textbook clarity. In older people, or the
chronically ill, the organs tend to lose their shape, to distend, change
color, grow connections with organs they have nothing to do with, so
that most entrails look, as the coroner put it, "like a rubbish dump."
The Lisbon girls, on the other hand, were "like something behind glass.
Like an exhibit." Nevertheless, it saddened the coroner to pierce and
shred those unblemished bodies, and a few times he was overcome with
emotion. In one margin he scrawled a note to himself. "Seventeen years
in this business and I'm a basket case." He persevered in his function,
however, finding the mass of half digested pills trapped in Therese's
ileum, the strangulated section of Bonnie's esophagus, the riot of
carbon monoxide in Lux's tepid blood.

Ms. Perl, whose story came out in the evening paper, was the first to
point out the significance of the date. The girls, it turned out, had

killed themselves on June 16, the anniversary of Cecilia's
wristslitting. Ms. Perl made much of this, speaking of "ominous
foreshadowing" and "eerie coincidence," and singlehandedly initiated the
feeding frenzy of speculation that continues to this day. In her
subsequent articles-one every two or three days for two weeks-she
shifted her tone from the sympathetic register of a fellow mourner to
the steely precision of what she never succeeded in being: an
investigative reporter. Scouring the neighborhood in her blue Pontiac,
she cobbled together reminiscences into an airtight conclusion, far less
truthful than our own, which is full of holes. Fed the emetic of Ms.
Perl's insistent questions, Amy Schraff, Cecilia's old friend, disgorged
a memory of pre-suicidal days: one boring afternoon, Cecilia had made
her lie on her bed beneath the zodiac mobile. "Close your eyes and keep
them closed," she had said. The door opened and the other sisters
entered the room. They placed their hands over Amy's face and body. "Who
do you want to contact?" Cecilia asked. "My grandmother," Amy replied.
The hands were cool on her face. Someone lit incense. A dog barked.
Nothing happened.

From that episode, no more indicative of spiritualism than a Ouija
board's turning up amid the usual Milton Bradleys, Ms. Perl based her
claim that the suicides were an esoteric ritual of self-sacrifice. Her
third story, under the headline "Suicides May Have Been Pact," outlines
the generic conspiracy theory, which held that the girls planned the
suicides in concert with an undetermined astrological event. Cecilia had
merely entered first, while her sisters waited in the wings. Candles lit
the stage. In the orchestra pit, Cruel Crux began to wail. The Playbill
we held in the audience showed a picture of the Virgin. Ms. Perl
choreographed it all nicely. What she could never explain, however, was
why the girls chose the date of Cecilia's suicide attempt rather than
her actual death some three weeks later on July 9.

But this discrepancy stopped no one. Once the copycat suicides occurred,
the media descended on our street without letup. Our three local

television stations sent news teams, and even a national correspondent
showed up in a motor home. He'd heard about the suicides at a truck stop
in the southwestern corner of our state, and had come up to see for
himself. "I doubt I'll shoot anything," he said. "I'm supposed to be the
color guy."

Still, he parked the motor home down the block, and from then on we saw
him lounging on its plaid seats, or cooking hamburgers on the miniature
stove. Undeterred by the parents' delicate condition, the local news
teams ran stories immediately. It was then we saw the footage of the
Lisbon house taken months earlier, a soggy pan of roof and stark front
door, leading to a recap where every night the same five faces filed by,
Cecilia in her yearbook photo, followed by her sisters in theirs. Live
hookups were still new at the time, and often microphones went dead, or
lights burned out, leaving reporters speaking in the dark. Spectators
not yet bored with television competed to get their heads into the
frame. Each day the reporters attempted to interview Mr. and Mrs.
Lisbon, and each day they failed. By showtime, however, they seemed to
have gained access to the girls' very bedrooms, given all the intimate
treasures they brought back. One reporter held up a wedding dress made
the same year as Cecilia's, and except for the unshorn hem, we couldn't
tell them apart. Another reporter ended his broadcast by reading a
letter Therese had written to the Brown admissions office -"ironically,"
as he put it, "only three days before she put an end to any dreams of
college .. . or of anything else."

Gradually, the reporters began referring to the Lisbon girls by first
names, and neglected to interview medical experts in favor of collecting
reminiscences. Like us, they became custodians of the girls' lives, and
had they completed the job to our satisfaction, we might never have been
forced to wander endlessly down the paths of hypothesis and memory. For
less and less did the reporters ask why the girls had killed themselves.
Instead, they talked about the girls' hobbies and academic awards. Wanda
Brown, on Channel 7, unearthed a photo of a bikinied Lux at the

community swimming pool, allowing a lifeguard to reach down from his
chair and apply zinc oxide to her bunnyish nose. Every night the
reporters revealed a new anecdote or photo, but their discoveries bore
no relation to what we knew to be true, and after a while it began to
seem as though they were talking about different people. Channel 4's
Pete Patillo referred to Therese's "love of horses, though we'd never
seen Therese near a horse, and Tom Thomson, on Channel 2, often mixed up
the girls' names.

The reporters cited as fact the most apocryphal accounts, and confused
details of stories they got basically right (in this way Cecilia's black
underwear appeared on the wax dummy Pete Patillo passed off as Mary).
Knowing the rest of the city accepted the news as gospel only
demoralized us further. Outsiders, in our opinion, had no right to refer
to Cecilia as "the crazy one," because they hadn't earned their
shorthand by a long distillation of firsthand knowledge. For the first
time ever we sympathized with the President because we saw how wildly
our sphere of influence was misrepresented by those in no position to
know what was going on. Even our parents seemed to agree more and more
with the television version of things, listening to the reporters'
inanities as though they could tell us the truth about our own lives.

After the suicide free-for-all, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon gave up the attempt
to lead a normal life. Mrs. Lisbon stopped attending church, and when
Father Moody went to the house to console her, no one answered the door.
"I kept ringing the bell," he told us. "No dice." During Mary's entire
stay in the hospital, Mrs. Lisbon appeared only once. Herb Pitzenberger
saw her come out onto the back porch with a stack of manuscript pages.
Putting them into a pile, she lit them. We never learned what they were.

About this time, Ms. Carmina D'Angelo received a call from Mr. Lisbon,
asking her to put the house back on the market (he'd taken it off
shortly after Cecilia's suicide). Ms. D'Angelo tactfully pointed out
that the present condition of the house would not facilitate the sale,

but Mr. Lisbon responded, "I realize. I've got a guy coming in."

It turned out to be Mr. Hedlie, the English teacher from school.

Out of work for the summer, he arrived in his VW bug, its bumper sticker
still supporting the last failed Democratic candidate for President.
When he got out, he was wearing not his former schoolmaster's blazer and
trousers, but a bright green-andyellow dashiki and a pair of lizard
sandals. His hair covered his ears and he moved with the bohemian slouch
of teachers during vacation, resuming unruly lives. Despite his look of
a commune leader, he set to work in earnest, carting out over three days
a mountain of refuse from the Lisbon house. While Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon
went to stay in a motel, Mr. Hedlie took charge of the house, throwing
away snow skis, watercolor paints, bags of clothes, a Hula Hoop. He
dragged the worn-out brown sofa outside, cutting it in two when it
wouldn't fit through the doorway. He filled trash bags with potholders,
old coupons, heaps of accumulated twist-ties, superseded keys. We saw
him attacking the overgrowth of each room, hacking away with his
dustpan, and on the third day he began wearing a surgical mask because
of the dust. He never spoke to us anymore in obscure Greek phrases, or
took interest in our sandlot baseball games, but arrived every morning
with the hopeless expression of a man draining a swamp with a kitchen
sponge. As he lifted rugs and threw out towels, he unleashed the odors
of the house in waves, and many people thought he wore the surgical mask
to protect himself not from dust but from the exhalations of the Lisbon
girls that still lived in bedding and drapes, in peeling wallpaper, in
patches of carpet preserved brand-new beneath dressers and nightstands.
The first day Mr. Hedlie restricted himself to the first floor, but the
second day he ventured into the sacked seraglio of the Lisbon girls'
bedrooms, wading ankledeep in garments that gave off the music of a past
time. Pulling Cecilia's Nepalese scarf from behind a headboard, he was
greeted, at each fringy end, with the tinkling of green corroded bells.
Bedsprings sang two-note plaints when stood on end. Pillows snowed dead
skin.

He emptied six shelves from the upstairs closet, throwing out stacked
bath towels and washcloths, frayed mattress liners bearing rose or
lemon-colored stains, blankets sopped with the picnic of the girls'
spilled sleep. On the top shelf he found and pitched household medical
supplies-a hot-water bottle the texture of inflamed skin, a
midnight-blue jar of Vicks Vaporub fingerprinted inside, a shoe box full
of ointments for ringworm and conjunctivitis, salves applied to nether
regions, aluminum tubes dented, squeezed, or rolled up like party
favors. Also: orange baby aspirin the girls had chewed as candy, an old
thermometer (oral, alas) in its black plastic case, along with a variety
of other implements pressed, inserted, applied into or onto the girls'
bodies; in short, all the earthly concoctions Mrs. Lisbon had used over
the years to keep the girls alive and well.

This was when we found the albums of the Grand Rapids Gospelers, Tyrone
Little and the Believers, and the rest. Every evening when Mr. Hedlie
left, coated with a white film that aged him thirty years, we went
through the mixture of treasure and junk he set out at the curb. The
extraordinary latitude Mr. Lisbon had given him surprised us, for Mr.
Hedlie disposed of not only replaceable items such as shoe polish tins
(gouged to silver centers) but family photographs, a working Water Pik,
and a strip of butcher paper marking the growth of each Lisbon daughter
at one-year intervals. The last thing Mr. Hedlie threw out was the empty
television set, which Jim Crotte'r took up to his bedroom, only to find
inside the stuffed iguana Therese had taught biology with, its tail torn
off and the trapdoor in its abdomen missing, exposing various numbered
plastic organs. We, of course, took the family photographs and, after
organizing a permanent collection in our tree house, divided the rest by
choosing straws. Most of the photographs had been taken years before, in
what appears to be a happier time of almost endless family cookouts. One
photograph shows the girls sitting Indian style, balanced on the lawn's
seesaw (the photographer has tilted the camera) by the counterweight of
a smoking hibachi uphill. (We regret to say that this photograph,

Exhibit #47, was recently found missing from its envelope.) Another
favorite is the series of totem-pole shots, taken at a tourist
attraction, with each girl substituting her face for a sacred animal.

But despite all this new evidence of the girls' lives, and of the sudden
drop-off of family togetherness (the photos virtually cease about the
time Therese turned twelve), we learned little more about the girls than
we knew already. It felt as though the house could keep disgorging
debris forever, a tidal wave of unmatched slippers and dresses
scarecrowed on hangers, and after sifting through it all we would still
know nothing. There came an end to the outflow, however. Three days
after Mr. Hedlie forged into the house, he came out, opening the front
door for the first time and proceeding down the front steps to place
beside the FOR SALE sign another, smaller sign that read, GARAGE SALE.
That day, and for two days following, Mr. Hedlie offered up an inventory
that encompassed not only the chipped dishware of a garage sale but the
heavy durable goods offered at the liquidation of an estate. Everyone
went, not to buy but just to enter the Lisbon house, which had been
transformed into a clean spacious area smelling of pine cleaner. Mr.
Hedlie had thrown out all the linens, anything that had belonged to the
girls, anything broken, leaving only furniture, tables polished with
linseed oil, kitchen chairs, mirrors, beds, each item bearing a neat
white tag showing the price in his effeminate handwriting. The prices
were final; he did not haggle. We roamed the house, upstairs and down,
touching beds the girls would never sleep on again or mirrors that would
never again hold their images. Our parents didn't buy used furniture,
and certainly didn't buy furniture tainted with death, but they browsed
like the others who came in response to the newspaper ad. A bearded
Greek Orthodox priest showed up with a group of rotund widows. After
cawing like crows and turning up their noses at everything, the widows
furnished the priest's new rectory bedroom with Mary's canopy bed,
Therese's walnut dresser, Lux's Chinese lantern, and Cecilia's crucifix.
Others arrived, carting away the contents of the house bit by bit. Mrs.
Krieger found her son Kyle's retainer on a display table outside the

garage, and after failing to persuade Mr. Hedlie that it belonged to her
son, bought it back for three dollars. The last thing we saw was a man
with a paintbrush mustache loading the sailing ship model into the trunk
of his Eldorado.

Though the exterior of the house remained in disrepair, the interior was
presentable once again, and within the next few weeks Ms. D'Angelo
managed to sell the house to the young couple who live there now, though
they can no longer be called young. Back then, however, in the first
flush of having money to burn, they made an offer that Mr. Lisbon
accepted, despite its being far below what he had paid. The house was
almost completely empty at that point, the only thing left being
Cecilia's shrine, a woolly mass of candle drippings fused to the
windowsill, which Mr. Hedlie had superstitiously neglected to touch. We
thought we might never see Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon again, and even then we
began the impossible process of trying to forget about them. Our parents
seemed better able to do this, returning to their tennis foursomes and
cocktail cruises. They reacted to the final suicides with mild shock, as
though they'd been expecting them or something worse, as though they'd
seen it all before. Mr. Conley adjusted the tweed necktie he wore even
while cutting the grass and said, "Capitalism has resulted in material
well-being but spiritual bankruptcy." He went on to deliver a living
room lecture about human needs and the ravages of competition, and even
though he was the only Communist we knew, his ideas differed from
everyone else's only in degree. Something sick at the heart of the
country had infected the girls. Our parents thought it had to do with
our music, our godlessness, or the loosening of morals regarding sex we
hadn't even had. Mr. Hedlie mentioned that fin-de-sikle Vienna witnessed
a similar outbreak of suicides on the part of the young, and put the
whole thing down to the misfortune of living in a dying empire. It had
to do with the way the mail wasn't delivered on time, and how potholes
never got fixed, or the thievery at City Hall, or the race riots, or the
801 fires set around the city on Devil's night. The Lisbon girls became
a symbol of what was wrong with the country, the pain it inflicted on

even its most innocent citizens, and in order to make things better a
parents' group donated a bench in the girls' memory to our school.
Originally slated to commemorate just Cecilia (the project had been put
in motion eight months earlier, after the Day of Grieving), the bench
was rededicated just in time to include the other girls as well. It was
a small bench, made from a tree from the Upper Peninsula. "Virgin
timber," Mr. Krieger said, who had retooled the machinery at his
air-filter factory in order to make the bench. The plaque bore the
simple inscription In memory of the Lisbon girls, daughters of this
community.

Mary was still alive at this point, of course, but the plaque did not
acknowledge that fact. She returned from the hospital a few days later,
after a two-week stay. Knowing they wouldn't have come, Dr. Hornicker
hadn't even asked Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon to attend the therapy sessions. He
ran Mary through the same battery of tests Cecilia had taken, but found
no evidence of a psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia or
manic-depression. "Her scores showed her to be a relatively well
adjusted adolescent. Her future wasn't bright, of course. I recommended
ongoing therapy to deal with the trauma. But we had her serotonin up,
and she looked good." She came back to a house without furniture. Mr.
and Mrs. Lisbon, back from the motel, were camping out in the master
bedroom. Mary was also given a sleeping bag. Mr. Lisbon, understandably
reticent about the days following the triple suicide, told us little
about the condition Mary returned home in. Eleven years before, when the
girls were just children, the family had arrived at the house one week
before the moving van. They had had to camp out then, too, sleeping on
the floor and reading bedtime stories by a kerosene lantern, and, oddly,
that memory came back to Mr. Lisbon during his last days in the house.
"Sometimes, in the middle of the night, I'd forget everything that had
happened. I'd go down the hall, and for a moment, we'd just moved in
again. The girls were asleep in their tent in the living room."

Left alone on the other end of those days, Mary lay in her sleeping bag,

on the hard floor of the bedroom she no longer had to share. The
sleeping bag was the old kind, with pilled flannel lining picturing dead
ducks above red-capped hunters and a trout leaping with a hook in its
mouth. She zipped the bag up so that only the top of her face showed,
even though it was summer. She slept late, spoke little, and took six
showers a day.

From our viewpoint, the Lisbons' sadness was beyond comprehension, and
when we saw them in those last days, we were amazed at anything they
did. How could they actually sit down to eat? Or come out to the back
porch in the evening to enjoy the breeze? How could Mrs. Lisbon, as she
did one afternoon, stagger outside, and across her uncut lawn, to pick
one of Mrs. Bates's snapdragons? She held it to her nose, seemed
dissatisfied with its fragrance, tucked it into her pocket like a used
Kleenex, and walked to the street, squinting at the neighborhood without
her glasses. Mr. Lisbon, too, every afternoon, parked the station wagon
in the shade, opening the hood to pore over the engine. "You have to
keep busy," Mr. Eugene said, commenting on his behavior. "What else can
you do?"

Mary went down the street and took her first voice lesson from Mr.
Jessup in a year. She hadn't scheduled a lesson, but Mr. Jessup couldn't
turn her away. He sat at the piano, leading Mary through scales, and
then put his head in a metal trash can to demonstrate how it resonated
against his trained vibrato. Mary sang the Nazi song from Cabaret, the
one she and Lux had practiced the day the tragedies began, and Mr.
Jessup said that all her travails had lent her voice a dolefulness and
maturity beyond her years. "She left without paying for the lesson," he
said, "but it was the least I could do." It was full-fledged summer once
again, over a year from the time Cecilia had slit her wrists, spreading
the poison in the air. A spill at the River Rouge Plant increased
phosphates in the lake, producing a scum of algae so thick it clogged
outboard engines. Our beautiful lake began to look like a lily pond,
carpeted with an undulating foam. Fishermen tossed rocks from the bank,

knocking holes to lower their lines through. The swamp smell that arose
was outrageous amid the genteel mansions of the automotive families and
the green elevated paddle tennis courts and the graduation parties held
under illuminated tents. Debutantes cried over the misfortune of coming
out in a season everyone would remember for its bad smell. The
O'Connors, however, came up with the ingenious solution of making the
theme of their daughter Alice's debutante party "Asphyxiation." Guests
arrived in tuxedos and gas masks, evening gowns and astronaut helmets,
and Mr. O'Connor himself wore a deep-sea diver's suit, opening the glass
face mask to guzzle his bourbon and water. At the party's zenith, when
Alice was rolled out in an artificial lung rented for the night from
Henry Ford Hospital (Mr. O'Connor was on the board), the rotting smell
pervading the air seemed only a crowning touch of festive atmosphere.

Like everyone else, we went to Alice O'Connor's coming-out party to
forget about the Lisbon girls. The black bartenders in red vests served
us alcohol without asking for I. D., and in turn, around 3 a.m., we said
nothing when we saw them loading leftover cases of whiskey into the
trunk of a sagging Cadillac. Inside, we got to know girls who had never
considered taking their own lives. We fed them drinks, danced with them
until they became unsteady, and led them out to the screened-in veranda.
They lost their high heels on the way, kissed us in the humid darkness,
and then slipped away to throw up demurely in the outside bushes. Some
of us held their heads as they vomited, then let them rinse their mouths
with beer, after which we got back to kissing again. The girls were
monstrous in their formal dresses, each built around a wire cage. Pounds
of hair were secured atop their heads. Drunk, and kissing us, or passing
out in chairs, they were bound for college, husbands, child-rearing,
unhappiness only dimly perceived-bound, in other words, for life.

In the party glow, adult faces grew red. Mrs. O'Connor fell out of a
wing chair, her hooped skirt going over her head. Mr. O'Connor pulled
one of his daughter,s friends into the bathroom with him. Everyone from
the neighborhood passed through the O'Connor house that night, singing

the old-time songs the bald band played, or wandering back corridors,
through the dusty playroom, or into the elevator that no longer worked.
Raising champagne glasses, people said our industry was coming back, our
nation, our way of life. Guests strolled outside beneath Venetian
lanterns that led down to the lake. Under moonlight, the algae scum
looked like shag carpeting, the entire lake a sunken living room.
Someone fell in, was rescued, and laid on the pier. "I've had it," he
said, laughing. "Goodbye, cruel world!" He tried to roll into the lake
again, but his friends stopped him. "You don't understand me," he said.
"I'm a teenager. I've got problems!"

"Be quiet," a woman's voice scolded. "They'll hear 99 you.

The back of the Lisbon house was visible through clumped trees, but no
lights showed, probably because the electricity had been turned off by
then. We went back inside, where people were having a good time. The
waiters were serving small silver bowls of green ice cream. A tear-gas
canister was set off on the dance floor, propelling a harmless mist. Mr.
O'Connor danced with Alice. Everyone toasted her future.

We stayed until daybreak. As we came out into the first alcoholic dawn
of our lives (a bleachy fade-in, overused through the years now by the
one-note director), our lips were swollen from kissing and our mouths
throbbing with the taste of girls. Already we had been married and
divorced, in a sense, and Tom Faheem found a love letter left in his
pants pocket by the last person to rent the tux. The fish flies that had
hatched during the night were still quivering on trees and streetlights,
and made the sidewalk squishy under our feet, like walking through yams.
The day threatened to be muggy. We took off our jackets and shuffled
along, up the O'Connors' street, around the corner, and down our own. In
the distance, at the Lisbon house, the EMS truck sat, flashing its
lights. They hadn't bothered to use the siren.

That was the morning the paramedics appeared for the last time, moving

much too slowly in our opinion, and the fat one made the crack about its
not being TV. By this time they'd been to the house so often they didn't
even knock, just walked right in, past the fence that was no longer
there, into the kitchen to see if the gas oven was on, then down to the
basement where they found the beam clean, and finally upstairs where the
second bedroom they checked contained what they were looking for: the
last Lisbon daughter, in a sleeping bag, and full of sleeping pills.

She had on so much makeup that the paramedics had the odd feeling she
had already been prepared for viewing by an undertaker, and this
impression lasted until they saw that her lipstick and eyeshadow were
smudged. She had clawed herself a little, at the end. She was dressed in
a black dress and veil, which reminded some people of Jackie Kennedy's
widow's weeds, and it was true: the final procession out the front door,
with the two paramedics like uniformed pallbearers, and the sound of
post-holiday firecrackers going off on the next block over, did call to
mind the solemnity of a national figure being laid to rest. Neither Mr.
nor Mrs. Lisbon appeared, so it was up to us to send her off, and, for
the last time, we came and stood at attention. Vince Fusilli held up his
lighter as though at a rock concert. It was the best we could do for an
eternal flame.

For a while we tried to accept the general explanations, which qualified
the Lisbon girls' pain as merely historic, springing from the same
source as other teenage suicides, every death part of a trend. We tried
to go back to our old lives, to let the girls rest in peace, but a
haunted quality persisted about the Lisbon house, making us see,
whenever we looked, a flame shape arcing from the roof, or swinging in
an upstairs window. Many of us continued to have dreams in which the
Lisbon girls appeared to us more real than they had been in life, and we
awoke certain that their scent of the next world remained on our
pillows. Almost daily we met to go over the evidence once again,
reciting portions of Cecilia's journal (the description of Lux testing a
chilly sea, one knee up, flamingo-like, was popular with us then).

Nevertheless, we always ended these sessions with the feeling that we
were retracing a path that led nowhere, and we grew more and more sullen
and frustrated.

As luck would have it, on the day of Mary's suicide, the cemetery
workers' strike was settled after 409 days of arbitration. The strike's
length had caused mortuaries to fill up months ago, and the many bodies
awaiting burial now came back from out of state, in refrigerated trucks,
or by airplane, depending on the wealth of the deceased. On the Chrysler
Freeway one truck got into an accident, flipping over, and the front
page of the newspaper ran a photo showing metal caskets spilling from
the truck like ingots. No one attended the final mass burial of the
Lisbon girls other than Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon; Mr. Calvin Hormicutt, a
cemetery worker just back on the job; and Father Moody. Because of
limited available space, the girls' graves did not lie side by side but
widely separated, so that the funeral party had to make the rounds,
going from grave to grave at the excruciatingly slow speed of cemetery
traffic. Father Moody claimed the constant getting into and out of the
limousine made him lose track of which girl lay at which grave. "I had
to keep the eulogies sort of general," he said. "There was a lot of
confusion at the cemetery that day. You're talking a year's worth of
departed. The place was pretty well dug up." As for Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon,
tragedy had beaten them into mindless submission. They followed the
priest from graveside to greiveside, saying little. Mrs. Lisbon, under
sedation, kept looking up into the sky, as though at birds. Mr.
Honnicutt told us, "I'd been working seventeen hours straight by that
point, wired on No Doz. I'd buried over fifty people that shift alone.
Still, when I saw that lady, it broke me up." We saw Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon
when they returned from the cemetery. With dignity, they got out of the
limousine and walked toward their house, each one parting the front
shrubs to find access to the porch steps. They picked their way amid the
broken pieces of slate. For the first time ever, we noticed a similarity
between Mrs. Lisbon's face and the faces of her daughters, but that may
have been due to the black veil some people recall her as wearing. We

ourselves don't remember a veil, and think that detail only an
elaboration of romantic memory. Still, we do have the image of Mrs.
Lisbon turning toward the street and showing her face as never before,
to those of us kneeling at dining room windows or peering through gauzy
curtains, those of us sweating in Pitzenberger's attic, the rest of us
looking over car hoods or from troughs serving as first, second, and
third base, from behind barbecues or from the apex of a swing's arcshe
turned, she sent her blue gaze out in every direction, the same color
gaze the girls had had, icy and spectral and unknowable, and then she
turned back and followed her husband into the house.

Because no furniture remained, we didn't think the Lisbons would be
long. Nevertheless, three hours went by and they did not reappear. With
a fungo bat, Chase Buell hit a Wiffle ball into their yard, but came
back saying he didn't see a single living soul inside. Later he tried to
hit another Wiffle ball, but it got stuck in the trees. We didn't see
Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon come out the rest of that day, or evening. It was in
the middle of the night that they finally left. Nobody saw them go
except Uncle Tucker. Years later, when we interviewed him, he was
completely sober and recovered from his decades of abuse, and in
contrast to everyone else, including ourselves, who looked much the
worse for wear, Uncle Tucker looked much better. We asked him if he
remembered seeing the Lisbons leave and he said he did.

"I was outside, having a smoke. It was about two in the morning. I heard
the door open across the street and then they came out. The mother
looked bombed. The husband sort of helped her in. And then they drove
away. Fast. Got the hell out."

When we awoke the next morning, the Lisbon house was empty. It looked
even more run-down than ever and seemed to have collapsed from the
inside, like a lung. Once the new young couple took possession of the
house, we had time, amid the scraping, painting, and roofing, the
uprooting of bushes and planting of Asiatic ground cover, to coalesce

our intuitions and theories into a story we could live with. The new
young couple knocked out the front windows (still bearing our finger-
and noseprints) and installed sliding plateglass windows with airtight
seals. A team of men in white overalls and caps sandblasted the house,
then over the next two weeks sprayed it with a thick white paste. The
foreman, whose tag said "Mike," told us that "the new Kenitex method"
would eliminate the need to repaint once and for all. "Pretty soon
everybody's going to be Kenitexing," he said as the men moved about with
spray guns, coating the house. When they finished, the Lisbon house was
transformed into a giant wedding cake dripping frosting, but it took
less than a year, for chunks of Kenitex to begin falling off like gobs
of bird shit. We thought it just revenge on the new young couple who had
set themselves so purposefully to removing signs of the Lisbon girls we
still held dear- the slate roof, where Lux had made love, covered with
sandpapery shingles; the back flower bed, whose soil Therese had
analyzed for lead content, laid with red bricks so that the young wife
could pick flowers without getting her feet wet; the girls' rooms
themselves made into private spaces for the new young couple to pursue
their individual interests-a desk and computer in Lux and Therese's old
room, a loom in Mary and Bonnie's. The bathtub where our naiads once
floated, Lux poking cigarettes above the water like reeds to breathe
through, was ripped out to make room for a fiberglass Jacuzzi. At
curbside, we examined the tub, fighting the urge to lie down in it. The
little kids who did jump in couldn't appreciate the significance. The
new young couple turned the house into a sleek empty space for
meditation and serenity, covering with Japanese screens the shaggy
memories of the Lisbon girls.

It wasn't only the Lisbon house that changed but the street itself. The
Parks Department continued to cut down trees, removing a sick elm to
save the remaining twenty, then removing another to save the remaining
nineteen, and so on and so on until only the half-tree remained in front
of the Lisbons' old house. Nobody could bear to watch when they came for
it (Tim Winer compared the tree to the last speaker of Manx), but they

buzz-sawed it down like the rest, saving trees farther away, on other
streets. Everyone stayed inside during the execution of the Lisbons'
tree, but even in our dens we could feel how blinding the outside was
becoming, our entire neighborhood like an overexposed photograph. We got
to see how truly unimaginative our suburb was, everything laid out on a
grid whose bland uniformity the trees had hidden, and the old ruses of
differentiated architectural styles lost their power to make us feel
unique. The Kriegers' Tudor, the Buells' French colonial, the Bucks'
imitation Frank Lloyd Wright-all just baking roofs.

Not long after, the FBI arrested Sammy the Shark Baldino, who never made
it to his escape tunnel, and after a long trial, he went to prison. He
reportedly continued to run his crime operation from behind bars, and
the Baldino family remained in the house, though the men in bulletproof
limousines ceased to pay their respects on Sunday afternoons. The laurel
trees, untrimmed, burst into odd inharmonious shapes, and the terror the
family inspired decreased day by day until someone had the courage to
deface the stone lions beside their front steps. Paul Baldino began to
look like any other fat boy with rings around his eyes, and one day he
slipped, or was pushed, in the showers at school, and we saw him lying
on the tiles, nursing his foot. The convictions of other family members
followed, and finally the Baldinos moved, too, carting their Renaissance
art and three pool tables away in three trucks. An obscure millionaire
bought the house. He made the fence a foot higher.

Everyone we spoke to dated the demise of our neighborhood from the
suicides of the Lisbon girls. Though at first people blamed them,
gradually a sea change took place, so that the girls were seen not as
scapegoats but as seers. More and more, people forgot about the
individual reasons why the girls may have killed themselves, the stress
disorders and insufficient neurotransmitters, and instead put the deaths
down to the girls' foresight in predicting decadence. People saw their
clairvoyance in the wiped-out elms, the harsh sunlight, the continuing
decline of our auto industry. This transformation in thinking went

largely unnoticed, however, because we rarely ran into one another
anymore. Without trees, there were no leaves to rake, no piles of leaves
to bum. Winter snows continued to disappoint. We had no Lisbon girls to
spy on. Now and then, of course, as we were slowly carted into the
melancholic remainder of our lives (a place the Lisbon girls, wisely, it
began to seem, never cared to see), we would stop, mostly alone, to gaze
up at the whited sepulchre of the former Lisbon house.

The Lisbon girls made suicide familiar. Later, when other acquaintances
chose to end their lives-sometimes even borrowing a book the day
before-we always pictured them as taking off cumbersome boots to enter
the highly associative mustiness of a family cottage on a dune
overlooking the sea. Every one of them had read the signs of misery Old
Mrs. Karafilis had written, in Greek, in the clouds. On different paths,
with differentcolored eyes or jerkings of the head, they had deciphered
the secret to cowardice or bravery, whichever it was. And the Lisbon
girls were always there before them. They had killed themselves over our
dying forests, over manatees maimed by propellers as they surfaced to
drink from garden hoses; they had killed themselves at the sight of used
tires stacked higher than the pyramids; they had killed themselves over
the failure to find a love none of us could ever be. In the end, the
tortures tearing the Lisbon girls pointed to a simple reasoned refusal
to accept the world as it was handed down to them, so full of flaws.

But this came later. Immediately following the suicides, when our suburb
enjoyed its fleeting infamy, the subject of the Lisbon girls became
almost taboo. "It was like picking over a corpse after a while," Mr.
Eugene said. "And the liberal media distortion didn't help either. Save
the Lisbon girls. Save the snail darter. Bullshit!" Families moved away,
or splintered, everybody trying out a different spot in the Sun Belt,
and for a while it appeared that our only legacy would be desertion.
After deserting the city to escape its rot, we now deserted the green
banks of our waterlocked spit of land French explorers had named the
"Fat Tip" in a three-hundred-year-old dirty joke no one ever got. The

exodus was short-lived, however. One by one, people returned from their
sojourns in other communities, reestablishing the faulty memory bank
from which we have drawn for this investigation. Two years ago our last
great automotive mansion was razed to put up a subdivision. The Italian
marble lining the entrance hall-a rare rose shade found only in one
quarry in the world-was cut into blocks and sold piecemeal, as were the
gold-plated plumbing fixtures and ceiling frescoes. With the elms gone,
too, only the runt replacements remain. And us. We aren't even allowed
to barbecue any longer (city air-pollution ordinance), but if we were
allowed, we might still gather, who knows, a few of us at least, to
reminisce about the Lisbon house and the girls whose hair, clotted on
brushes we still faithfully keep, has begun to lookmore and more like
artificial animal fur in a natural museum exhibit. All of it is
going-Exhibits #1 through #97, arranged in five separate suitcases, each
bearing a photograph of the deceased like a Coptic headstone, and kept
in our refurbished tree house in one of our last trees: (#I) Ms.
D'Angelo's Polaroid of the house, scummed by a greenish patina that
looks like moss; (#18) Mary's old cosmetics drying out and turning to
beige dust; (#32) Cecilia's canvas high-tops yellowing beyond remedy of
toothbrush and dish soap; (#57) Bonnie's votive candles nibbled nightly
by mice; (#62) Therese's specimen slides showing new invading bacteria;
(#81) Lux's brassiere (Peter Sissen stole it from the crucifix, we might
as well admit it now) becoming as stiff and prosthetic as something a
grandmother might wear.

We haven't kept our tomb sufficiently airtight, and our sacred objects
are perishing.

In the end we had pieces of the puzzle, but no matter how we put them
together, gaps remained, oddly shaped emptinesses mapped by what
surrounded them, like countries we couldn't name. "All wisdom ends in
paradox," said Mr. Buell, just before we left him on our last interview,
and we felt he was telling us to forget about the girls, to leave them
in the hands of God. We knew that Cecilia had killed herself because she

was a misfit, because the beyond called to her, and we knew that her
sisters, once abandoned, felt her calling from that place, too. But even
as we make these conclusions we feel our throats plugging up, because
they are both true and untrue. So much has been written about the girls
in the newspapers, so much has been said over back-yard fences, or
related over the years in psychiatrists' offices, that we are certain
only of the insufficiency of explanations. Mr. Eugene, who told us that
scientists were on the verge of finding the "bad genes" that caused
cancer, depression, and other diseases, offered his hope that they would
soon "be able to find a gene for suicide, too." Unlike Mr. Hedlie, he
didn't see the suicides as a response to our historical moment. "Shit,"
he said, "what have kids got to be worried about now? If they want
trouble, they should,go live in Bangladesh,"

"It was the combination of many factors," Dr. Hornicker said in his last
report, written for no medical reason but just because he couldn't get
the girls out of his head. "With most people," he said, "suicide is like
Russian roulette. Only one chamber has a bullet. With the Lisbon girls,
the gun was loaded. A bullet for family abuse. A bullet for genetic
predisposition. A bullet for historical malaise. A bullet for inevitable
momentum. The other two bullets are impossible to name, but that doesn't
mean the chambers were empty." But this is all a chasing after the wind.
The essence of the suicides consisted not of sadness or mystery but
simple selfishness. The girls took into their own hands decisions better
left to God. They became too powerful to live among us, too
self-concerned, too visionary, too blind. What lingered after them was
not life, which always overcomes natural death, but the most trivial
list of mundane facts: a clock ticking on a wall, a room dim at noon,
and the outrageousness of a human being thinking only of herself. Her
brain going dim to all else, but flaming up in precise points of pain,
personal injury, lost dreams. Every other loved one receding as though
across a vast ice floe, shrinking to black dots waving tiny arms, out of
hearing. Then the rope thrown over the beam, the sleeping pill dropped
in the palm with the long, lying lifeline, the window thrown open, the

oven turned on, whatever. They made us participate in their own madness,
because we couldn't help but retrace their steps, rethink their
thoughts, and see that none of them led to us. We couldn't imagine the
emptiness of a creature who put a razor to her wrists and opened her
veins, the emptiness and the calm. And we had to smear our muzzles in
their last traces, of mud marks on the floor, trunks kicked out from
under them, we had to breathe forever the air of the rooms in which they
killed themselves. It didn't matter in the end how old they had been, or
that they were girls, but only that we had loved them, and that they
hadn't heard us calling, still do not hear us, up here in the tree
house, with our thinning hair and soft bellies, calling them out of
those rooms where they went to be alone for all time, alone in suicide,
which is deeper than death, and where we will never find the pieces to
put them back together.



