of that country. i find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
transylvania, moldavia and bukovina, in the midst of the carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of europe. i was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
castle dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own ordnance survey maps; but i found that bistritz, the post
town named by count dracula, is a fairly well-known place. i shall enter
here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when i talk over my
travels with mina.

in the population of transylvania there are four distinct nationalities:
saxons in the south, and mixed with them the wallachs, who are the
descendants of the dacians; magyars in the west, and szekelys in the
east and north. i am going among the latter, who claim to be descended
from attila and the huns. this may be so, for when the magyars conquered
 
 ___________________________
 
 to bistritz, which is a
very interesting old place. being practically on the frontier--for the
borgo pass leads from it into bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate
occasions. at the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war
proper being assisted by famine and disease.

count dracula had directed me to go to the golden krone hotel, which i
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course i wanted to see all i could of the ways of the country. i was
evidently expected, for when i got near the door i faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. when i came close she bowed and
said, "the herr englishman?" "yes,"
 
 ___________________________
 
 place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my german. this could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. he and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. he mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. when i asked him if he knew count dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,
and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
further. it was so near the time of starting that i had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means
comforting.

just before i was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a
very hysterical way:

"must you go? oh! young herr, must you go?" she was in such an excited
state that she seemed
 
 ___________________________
 
 wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. again he said:--

"welcome to my house. come freely. go safely; and leave something of the
happiness you bring!" the strength of the handshake was so much akin to
that which i had noticed in the driver, whose face i had not seen, that
for a moment i doubted if it were not the same person to whom i was
speaking; so to make sure, i said interrogatively:--

"count dracula?" he bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"i am dracula; and i bid you welcome, mr. harker, to my house. come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." as he was
speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before i could forestall him. i
protested but he insisted:--

"nay, sir, you are my guest. it is late, and my people are not
available. let me see to your comfort myself." he insisted on carryin
 
 ___________________________
 
s a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the count, and
as a last chance i cried out:--

"shut the door; i shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. with one sweep of his
powerful arm, the count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged
and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.

in silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two i went
to my own room. the last i saw of count dracula was his kissing his hand
to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that
judas in hell might be proud of.

when i was in my room and about to lie down, i thought i heard a
whispering at my door. i went to it softly and listened. unless my ears
deceived me, i heard the voice of the count:--

"back, back, to your own place! your time is not yet come. wait! have
patience! to-night is mine. to-morrow night is yours!" there was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere _are_ monsters in it. before i left him i
remembered what jonathan put in his diary of the professor's
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at
exeter; so, seeing that dr. seward keeps his newspapers, i borrowed the
files of "the westminster gazette" and "the pall mall gazette," and took
them to my room. i remember how much "the dailygraph" and "the whitby
gazette," of which i had made cuttings, helped us to understand the
terrible events at whitby when count dracula landed, so i shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps i shall get some new
light. i am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_dr. seward's diary._

_30 september._--mr. harker arrived at nine o'clock. he had got his
wife's wire just before starting. he is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. if this journal be true--and
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a man
of great nerve. that 
 
 ___________________________
 
better to wait till we see the professor and
the others after their investigations.

the day is running by more quickly than i ever thought a day could run
for me again. it is now three o'clock.


_mina harker's journal._

_5 october, 5 p. m._--our meeting for report. present: professor van
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan
harker, mina harker.

dr. van helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound count dracula made his escape:--

"as i knew that he wanted to get back to transylvania, i felt sure that
he must go by the danube mouth; or by somewhere in the black sea, since
by that way he come. it was a dreary blank that was before us. _omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the black sea last night. he was in sailing ship, since
madam mina tell of sails being set. these not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _times_, an
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the
river danube. they had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked galatz _via_ varna, i thocht i'd let it
lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. we
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor;
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came
aboard wi' an order, written to him from england, to receive a box
marked for one count dracula. sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. he had his papers a' reet, an' glad i was to be rid o' the
dam' thing, for i was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. if the deil
did have any luggage aboord the ship, i'm thinkin' it was nane ither
than that same!"

"what was the name of the man who took it?" asked dr. van helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"i'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "immanuel hildesheim." bu
 
 ___________________________
 
efore me....

       *       *       *       *       *

i do believe that under god's providence i have made a discovery. i
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

i am more than ever sure that i am right. my new conclusion is ready, so
i shall get our party together and read it. they can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


_mina harker's memorandum._

(entered in her journal.)

_ground of inquiry._--count dracula's problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) he must be _brought back_ by some one. this is evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some other way. he evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _how is he to be taken?_--here a process of exclusions may help
us. by road, by rail, by water?

1. _by r