tion. in my manner of doing
it there was, i now see, something of cruelty. i seemed to wish to keep
him to the point of his madness--a thing which i avoid with the patients
as i would the mouth of hell.

(_mem._, under what circumstances would i _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_omnia romæ venalia sunt._ hell has its price! _verb. sap._ if there be
anything behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so i had better commence to do so, therefore--

r. m. renfield, ætat 59.--sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which i
cannot make out. i presume that the sanguine temperament itself and the
disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. in selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves. what i think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
ba
 
 ___________________________
 
 next
the abbey. the sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey's hoofs up the paved road below.
the band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further
along the quay there is a salvation army meeting in a back street.
neither of the bands hears the other, but up here i hear and see them
both. i wonder where jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! i wish he
were here.


_dr. seward's diary._

_5 june._--the case of renfield grows more interesting the more i get to
understand the man. he has certain qualities very largely developed;
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. i wish i could get at what is the
object of the latter. he seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is i do not yet know. his redeeming quality is a love of
animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that i
sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. his pets are of odd
sorts. just now his hobby is catching flie
 
 ___________________________
 
      *

_10 p. m._--i have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. when i came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
i was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where i had found him. i shall see him in the morning early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 july._--visited renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. found him up and humming a tune. he was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. i
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. he replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
there were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. i said nothing, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--the attendant has just been to me to say that renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "my belief is,
doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--i gave renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. the thought
that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory
proved. my homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. i shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. he
gave many flies to one spider and
 
 ___________________________
 

he was english, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

"be assured that he is well cared for. he has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. he is truly getting on well, and i have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. but be careful of him for
safety's sake. there are, i pray god and st. joseph and ste. mary, many,
many, happy years for you both."


_dr. seward's diary._

_19 august._--strange and sudden change in renfield last night. about
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. the attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest
in him, encouraged him to talk. he is usually respectful to the
attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. would not condescend to talk with him at all. all he
would say was:--

     "i don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the master is at
     hand."

the attendant thi
 
 ___________________________
 
in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. it looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is god. these infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an omnipotent being. how these madmen give themselves
away! the real god taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the god created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. oh,
if men only knew!

for half an hour or more renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. i did not pretend to be watching him, but i kept strict
observation all the same. all at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. he became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. i thought i
would find out if his apa
 
 ___________________________
 
he modern morpheus--c_{2}hcl_{3}o. h_{2}o! i must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. no, i shall take none to-night! i have thought of
lucy, and i shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. if need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--glad i made the resolution; gladder that i kept to it. i had
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that renfield
had escaped. i threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. the attendant was waiting for me.
he said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. his
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. he
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at o
 
 ___________________________
 
t told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a
straight line, so i ran as quickly as i could. as i got through the belt
of trees i saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

i ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of carfax, in case our friend
might be dangerous. i got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall,
dropped down on the other side. i could see renfield's figure just
disappearing behind the angle of the house, so i ran after him. on the
far side of the house i found him pressed close against the old
ironbound oak door of the chapel. he was talking, apparently to some
one, but i was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
i might frighten him, and he should run off. chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping
is upon him! after a few minutes, however, i could see tha
 
 ___________________________
 
rives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and i love him more than ever. he _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but i doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did then. but this is nonsense. there he is, calling to me.
so no more just at present from your loving

"lucy.

"p. s.--mother sends her love. she seems better, poor dear. "p. p.
s.--we are to be married on 28 september."


_dr. seward's diary._

_20 august._--the case of renfield grows even more interesting. he has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
for the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. then one
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: "now i can wait; now i can wait." the attendant came to tell
me, so i ran down at once to have a look at him. he was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had s
 
 ___________________________
 
 the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. we shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. i have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. the poor soul's
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. hark!
the unexpected again! i am called; the patient has once more escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--another night adventure. renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. i sent word for the attendants to follow.
again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. when he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. as we were holding him a strange thing
happened. he suddenly redoubled his efforts, a
 
 ___________________________
 
so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and i love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, i send you simply his 'love' instead. good-bye, my dearest
lucy, and all blessings on you.

"yours,

"mina harker."


_report from patrick hennessey, m. d., m. r. c. s. l. k. q. c. p. i.,
etc., etc., to john seward, m. d._

"_20 september._

"my dear sir,--

"in accordance with your wishes, i enclose report of the conditions of
everything left in my charge.... with regard to patient, renfield, there
is more to say. he has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. this afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. the men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. i was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after d
 
 ___________________________
 
inner, and
saw one of them come up to the house. as he passed the window of
renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. the man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a
foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. i opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
min
 
 ___________________________
 
red me at the moment. just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. this recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: "love to madam mina; i shall
write so soon as ever i can."


_dr. seward's diary._

_26 september._--truly there is no such thing as finality. not a week
since i said "finis," and yet here i am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. until this afternoon i had no cause to
think of what is done. renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. he was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. i had a letter from arthur, written on sunday, and from it i
gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. quincey morris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from him i hear that
arthur is beginning to recover s
 
 ___________________________
 
hey are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. harker has got
the letters between the consignee of the boxes at whitby and the
carriers in london who took charge of them. he is now reading his wife's
typescript of my diary. i wonder what they make out of it. here it
is....

     strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be
     the count's hiding-place! goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from the conduct of the patient renfield! the bundle of letters
     relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript. oh,
     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor lucy!
     stop; that way madness lies! harker has gone back, and is again
     collating his material. he says that by dinner-time they will be
     able to show a whole connected narrative. he thinks that in the
     meantime i should see renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     index to the coming and going of the count. 
 
 ___________________________
 
i hardly see this yet,
     but when i get at the dates i suppose i shall. what a good thing
     that mrs. harker put my cylinders into type! we never could have
     found the dates otherwise....

     i found renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. at the moment he seemed as sane as any
     one i ever saw. i sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. he then, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my
     knowledge during his sojourn here. in fact, he spoke quite
     confidently of getting his discharge at once. i believe that, had i
     not had the chat with harker 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to stay there arter dark."

having been in the house, i could well believe him; but if he knew what
i know, he would, i think, have raised his terms.

of one thing i am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived at
whitby from varna in the _demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel at carfax. there should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from dr. seward's diary i fear.

i shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from carfax when
renfield attacked them. by following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--mina and i have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.


_mina harker's journal_

_30 september._--i am so glad that i hardly know how to contain myself.
it is, i suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which i have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on jonathan. i saw him leave for w
 
 ___________________________
 
 but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
carriers' men, of whom dr. hennessey had written to me. mrs. harker gave
us a cup of tea, and i can honestly say that, for the first time since i
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. when we had
finished, mrs. harker said:--

"dr. seward, may i ask a favour? i want to see your patient, mr.
renfield. do let me see him. what you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!" she looked so appealing and so pretty that i
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why i should; so
i took her with me. when i went into the room, i told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "why?"

"she is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it," i
answered. "oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a min
 
 ___________________________
 
 moment i thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; i remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and i took care to stand where i
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. she
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. she walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

"good-evening, mr. renfield," said she. "you see, i know you, for dr.
seward has told me of you." he made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. this look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

"you're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? you can't be,
you know, for she's dead." mrs. harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

"oh no! i have a husband of my own, to whom i was married before i ever
saw dr.
 
 ___________________________
 
u doing here?"

"my husband and i are staying on a visit with dr. seward."

"then don't stay."

"but why not?" i thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to mrs. harker, any more than it was to me, so i joined in:--

"how did you know i wanted to marry any one?" his reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from mrs.
harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

"what an asinine question!"

"i don't see that at all, mr. renfield," said mrs. harker, at once
championing me. he replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

"you will, of course, understand, mrs. harker, that when a man is so
loved and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of
interest in our little community. dr. seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of
them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and
effects. since i 
 
 ___________________________
 
' though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. isn't that true,
doctor?" i nodded assent, for i was so amazed that i hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to imagine that i had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. looking at my watch, i
saw that i should go to the station to meet van helsing, so i told mrs.
harker that it was time to leave. she came at once, after saying
pleasantly to mr. renfield: "good-bye, and i hope i may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

"good-bye, my dear. i pray god i may never see your sweet face again.
may he bless and keep you!"

when i went to the station to meet van helsing i left the boys behind
me. poor art seemed more cheerful than he has been since lucy first took
ill, and quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

van helsing stepped from th
 
 ___________________________
 
drance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. they have now gone off to carfax,
with means to get into the house.

manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! i shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_dr. seward's diary._

_1 october, 4 a. m._--just as we were about to leave the house, an
urgent message was brought to me from renfield to know if i would see
him at once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me.
i told the messenger to say that i would attend to his wishes in the
morning; i was busy just at the moment. the attendant added:--

"he seems very importunate, sir. i have never seen him so eager. i don't
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits." i knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so i said: "all right; i'll go now"; and i asked 
 
 ___________________________
 
uced his own
existing sanity. "i appeal to your friends," he said, "they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. by the way, you have
not introduced me." i was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that i at once made the introduction: "lord
godalming; professor van helsing; mr. quincey morris, of texas; mr.
renfield." he shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"lord godalming, i had the honour of seconding your father at the
windham; i grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. he was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, i have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on derby night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great
state. its reception into the union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereaf
 
 ___________________________
 
best and truest of
your friends." again he looked at us all keenly. i had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. van helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with the fixed concentration of his look. he said to renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when i thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

"can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? i will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--dr.
seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek." he shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant r
 
 ___________________________
 
solutely strong and well. i am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. we were, i think, all a
little upset by the scene with mr. renfield. when we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. then mr. morris said
to dr. seward:--

"say, jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic i ever saw. i'm not sure, but i believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." lord godalming and i were silent, but dr. van helsing added:--

"friend john, you know more of lunatics than i do, and i'm glad of it,
for i fear that 
 
 ___________________________
 
o cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. and now let us go home. the dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work. it may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

the house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from renfield's room. the poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

i came tiptoe into our own room, and found mina asleep, breathing so
softly that i had to put my ear down to hear it. she looks paler than
usual. i hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. i am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. it is too great a strain for a woman to bear. i did not
think so at first, but
 
 ___________________________
 
 had been crying twice in one morning--i, who never cried on my
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. i shall put a bold face on, and if i do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. i suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

i can't quite remember how i fell asleep last night. i remember hearing
the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying
on a very tumultuous scale, from mr. renfield's room, which is somewhere
under this. and then there was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and i got up and looked out of the window.
all was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house, seemed to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. last
night tired me more than if i had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 october 10 p. m._--last night i slept, but did not dream. i must have
slept soundly, for i was not waked by jonathan coming to bed; but the
sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day i feel terribly weak and
spiritless. i spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
in the afternoon mr. renfield asked if he might see me. poor man, he was
very gentle, and when i came away he kissed my hand and bade god bless
me. some way it affected me much; i am crying when i think of him. this
is a new weakness, of which i must be careful. jonathan would be
miserable if he knew i had been crying. he and the others were out till
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. i did what i could to brighten
them up, and i suppose that the effort did me good, for i forgot how
tired i was. after dinner th
 
 ___________________________
 
nity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. i am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

just a line. mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. she is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. to-morrow will, i hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in exeter. oh, but i am sleepy!


_dr. seward's diary._

_1 october._--i am puzzled afresh about renfield. his moods change so
rapidly that i find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. this morning, when i went to see him after his
repulse of van helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
he was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. he did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor
 
 ___________________________
 
anything
to help to pass the time. harker is out, following up clues; and so are
lord godalming and quincey. van helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. he does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. i would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only i thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. there was also another reason: renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and i were
alone.

i found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. when i
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

"what about souls?" it was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the
lunatic. i determined to have the matter out. "what 
 
 ___________________________
 
all at once, and shook his head. with a laugh he replied:--

"not much! flies are poor things, after all!" after a pause he added,
"but i don't want their souls buzzing round me, all the same."

"or spiders?" i went on.

"blow spiders! what's the use of spiders? there isn't anything in them
to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

"so, so!" i thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean?" renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

"i don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'rats and mice and such
small deer,' as shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they
might be called. i'm past all that sort of nonsense. you might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when i know of what is before
me."

"i see," i said. "yo
 
 ___________________________
 
lly:--

"forgive me, doctor; i forgot myself. you do not need any help. i am so
worried in my mind that i am apt to be irritable. if you only knew the
problem i have to face, and that i am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. i
want to think and i cannot think freely when my body is confined. i am
sure you will understand!" he had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came i told them not to mind, and they withdrew. renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

"dr. seward, you have been very considerate towards me. believe me that
i am very, very grateful to you!" i thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so i came away. there is certainly something to ponder over in
this man's state. several points seem to make what the american
interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order.
here they are:--

will not mention "dr
 
 ___________________________
 
int one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. he dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. then it is a human life he looks to!

and the assurance--?

merciful god! the count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--i went after my round to van helsing and told him my
suspicion. he grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to renfield. i did so. as we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. when we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. we tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. he
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. he had
got a scrap of paper and wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 the purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, count de ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

"we are, my lord,

"your lordship's humble servants,

"mitchell, sons & candy."


_dr. seward's diary._

_2 october._--i placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from renfield's room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. after dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire
in the study--mrs. harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts
and discoveries of the day. harker was the only one who had any result,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

before going to bed i went round to the patient's room and looked in
through the observation trap. he was sleeping soundly, and his h
 
 ___________________________
 
oking up some authorities on ancient medicine. the old
physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept,
and the professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

i sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--we have met again. we seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. i wonder if
renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. his moods have so
followed the doings of the count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. if we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. he is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... is he?---- that
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *
 
 ___________________________
 
       *

the attendant came bursting into my room and told me that renfield had
somehow met with some accident. he had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
i must go at once....




chapter xxi

dr. seward's diary


_3 october._--let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as i can remember it, since last i made an entry. not a detail that i
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness i must proceed.

when i came to renfield's room i found him lying on the floor on his
 
 ___________________________
 
alling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. but for the life of me i can't imagine how the two things
occurred. if his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it." i said to him:--

"go to dr. van helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. i want
him without an instant's delay." the man ran off, and within a few
minutes the professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. when
he saw renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. i think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

"ah, a sad accident! he will need very careful watching, and much
attention. i shall stay with you myself; but i shall first dress myself.
if you will remain i shall in a few minutes join you."

the patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury
 
 ___________________________
 
dalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

"we shall wait," said van helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing."

the minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. i had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from van helsing's face i gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. i dreaded
the words that renfield might speak. i was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as i have read of men
who have heard the death-watch. the poor man's breathing came in
uncertain gasps. each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. inured as i was to sick
beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. i could almost
hear the beating of my ow
 
 ___________________________
 
 the lips came a sigh of relief. he moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

"i'll be quiet, doctor. tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. i
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that i cannot
move. what's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." he tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so i gently put it back. then van
helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"tell us your dream, mr. renfield." as he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"that is dr. van helsing. how good it is of you to be here. give me some
water, my lips are dry; and i shall try to tell you. i dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed fainting, i called quietly to quincey--"the
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" he flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. we moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. it seemed, however, th
 
 ___________________________
 
was as sane then, except in that way, as
i am now. i was in an agony of despair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. then there came a sudden peace to me. my brain
seemed to become cool again, and i realised where i was. i heard the
dogs bark behind our house, but not where he was!" as he spoke, van
helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. he did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly
and said: "go on," in a low voice. renfield proceeded:--

"he came up to the window in the mist, as i had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. he was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. i wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though i knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
then he began promising me things--not in words but 
 
 ___________________________
 
the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and i was no one. he didn't even smell the same
as he went by me. i couldn't hold him. i thought that, somehow, mrs.
harker had come into the room."

the two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
they were both silent, but the professor started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. renfield went on without
noticing:--

"when mrs. harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

"i didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the
same. i don't care for the pale people; i like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. i didn't think of it
at the time; but when she went away i began to think, and it ma
 
 ___________________________
 
he had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. all the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the
cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames." here i interrupted. "thank god there is the
other copy in the safe!" his face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: "i ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. i looked
into renfield's room; but there was no trace there except----!" again he
paused. "go on," said harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow
is dead." mrs. harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us she said solemnly:--

"god's will be done!" i could not but feel that art was keeping back
something; but, as i took it that it was with a purpose, i said nothing.
van helsing turned to morris and asked:--

"and you, f
 
 ___________________________
 
riend quincey, have you any to tell?"

"a little," he answered. "it may be much eventually, but at present i
can't say. i thought it well to know if possible where the count would
go when he left the house. i did not see him; but i saw a bat rise from
renfield's window, and flap westward. i expected to see him in some
shape go back to carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. he
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. we must work to-morrow!"

he said the latter words through his shut teeth. for a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and i could fancy that i could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then van helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on mrs. harker'
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
the little things may teach us most. the teaching, big or little, could
not have landed mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. however,
we must trust and hope. poor mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that god will aid us
up to the end. the end! oh my god! what end?... to work! to work!

when dr. van helsing and dr. seward had come back from seeing poor
renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. first, dr. seward
told us that when he and dr. van helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. his face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

dr. seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. he said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then renfield
had 