torily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. she says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in whitby the habit came back,
and that once she walked out in the night and went to east cliff, where
miss murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. i am in doubt, and so have done the best thing i know of; i
have written to my old friend and master, professor van helsing, of
amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. i have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, i have mentioned to him who you are and your
relations to miss westenra. this, my dear fellow, is in obedience to
your wishes, for i am only too proud and happy to do anything i can for
her. van helsing would, i know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
 
 ___________________________
 
that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. i
tell you these facts that you may know why i have such confidence in
him. i have asked him to come at once. i shall see miss westenra
to-morrow again. she is to meet me at the stores, so that i may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"yours always,

"john seward."


_letter, abraham van helsing, m. d., d. ph., d. lit., etc., etc., to dr.
seward._

"_2 september._

"my good friend,--

"when i have received your letter i am already coming to you. by good
fortune i can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have
trusted, for i come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that 
 
 ___________________________
 
nts my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. but it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that i come.
have then rooms for me at the great eastern hotel, so that i may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it is likely that i may have to return here that
night. but if need be i shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. till then good-bye, my friend john.

 "van helsing."


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._

"_3 september._

"my dear art,--

"van helsing has come and gone. he came on with me to hillingham, and
found that, by lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. van helsing made a very careful examination of
the patient. he is to report to me, and i shall advise you, for of
course i was not present all the time. he is, i fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. when i told him of our frie
 
 ___________________________
 
s a
student here. i am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. in any case i am to have a letter.

"well, as to the visit. lucy was more cheerful than on the day i first
saw her, and certainly looked better. she had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. she was
very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though i could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. i believe van helsing saw it, too, for i saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that i knew of old. then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite
geniality that i could see poor lucy's pretense of animation merge into
reality. then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

"'my dear young miss, i have the so great pleasure because you are so
much beloved. that is much, my dear, ever were there that 
 
 ___________________________
 
p flies any more?"

"no," said he; "i am sick of all that rubbish!" he certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. i wish i could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
we shall see.


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

"_4 september._--patient still better to-day."


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

"_5 september._--patient greatly improved. good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back."


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

"_6 september._--terrible change for the worse. come at once; do not
lose an hour. i hold over telegram to holmwood till have seen you."




chapter x


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur h
 
 ___________________________
 
olmwood._

"_6 september._

"my dear art,--

"my news to-day is not so good. lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
there is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; mrs.
westenra was naturally anxious concerning lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. i took advantage of the opportunity, and told
her that my old master, van helsing, the great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that i would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in lucy's weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. we are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please god, we shall
come through them all right. if any need i shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that i am
 
 ___________________________
 
 simply waiting for
news. in haste

yours ever,

"john seward."


_dr. seward's diary._

_7 september._--the first thing van helsing said to me when we met at
liverpool street was:--

"have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?"

"no," i said. "i waited till i had seen you, as i said in my telegram. i
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as miss
westenra was not so well, and that i should let him know if need be."

"right, my friend," he said, "quite right! better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. i pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. and, m
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
which it would otherwise harm by contact. if this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

i used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. she assented readily, so readily that
i saw again the hand of nature fighting for life. van helsing and i were
shown up to lucy's room. if i was shocked when i saw her yesterday, i
was horrified when i saw her to-day. she was ghastly, chalkily pale; the
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of
her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. van helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were 
 
 ___________________________
 
all silent. then
van helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. the
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. "my god!" he said; "this is dreadful. there is no time
to be lost. she will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's
action as it should be. there must be transfusion of blood at once. is
it you or me?"

"i am younger and stronger, professor. it must be me."

"then
 
 ___________________________
 
 get ready at once. i will bring up my bag. i am prepared."

i went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at
the hall-door. when we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and arthur was stepping quickly in. he rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

"jack, i was so anxious. i read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. the dad was better, so i ran down here to see for
myself. is not that gentleman dr. van helsing? i am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming." when first the professor's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

"sir, you have come in time. you are the lover of our dear miss. she is
bad, very, very bad. nay, my child, do not go like that." for he

 
 ___________________________
 
an do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help."

"what can i do?" asked arthur hoarsely. "tell me, and i shall do it. my
life is hers, and i would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her." the professor has a strongly humorous side, and i could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

"my young sir, i do not ask so much as that--not the last!"

"what shall i do?" there was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. van helsing slapped him on the shoulder. "come!"
he said. "you are a man, and it is a man we want. you are better than
me, better than my friend john." arthur looked bewildered, and the
professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

"young miss is bad, very bad. she wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. my friend john and i have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. john was to 
 
 ___________________________
 
give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me"--here arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" arthur turned to him
and said:--

"if you only knew how gladly i would die for her you would
understand----"

he stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

"good boy!" said van helsing. "in the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. come now and be silent. you
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. say no word to madame; you know how it is with
her! there must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. come!"

we all went up to lucy's room. arthur by direction remained outside.
lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. she was not
asleep, but she was simply too
 
 ___________________________
 
 weak to make the effort. her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. van helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

"now, little miss, here is your medicine. drink it off, like a good
child. see, i lift you so that to swallow is easy. yes." she had made
the effort with success.

it astonished me how long the drug took to act. this, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. the time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. at last, h
 
 ___________________________
 
owever, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. when the professor was
satisfied he called arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. then he added: "you may take that one little kiss whiles i bring
over the table. friend john, help to me!" so neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

van helsing turning to me, said:

"he is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it."

then with swiftness, but with absolute method, van helsing performed the
operation. as the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor lucy's cheeks, and through arthur's growing pallor the joy
of his face seemed absolutely to shine. after a bit i began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on arthur, strong man as he
was. it gave me an idea of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 terrible strain lucy's system must
have undergone that what weakened arthur only partially restored her.
but the professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on arthur. i could hear my own
heart beat. presently he said in a soft voice: "do not stir an instant.
it is enough. you attend him; i will look to her." when all was over i
could see how much arthur was weakened. i dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when van helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

"the brave lover, i think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently." and as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient's head. as he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. arthur did not noti
 
 ___________________________
 
ce it, but i
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of van helsing's
ways of betraying emotion. he said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: "now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. he must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. he must not stay here. hold! a moment. i may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. you have saved her life this time
 
 ___________________________
 
, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. i shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. good-bye."

when arthur had gone i went back to the room. lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; i could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. by the bedside sat van helsing, looking at her intently.
the velvet band again covered the red mark. i asked the professor in a
whisper:--

"what do you make of that mark on her throat?"

"what do you make of it?"

"i have not examined it yet," i answered, and then and there proceeded
to loose the band. just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. there was no sign of
disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. it at once oc
 
 ___________________________
 
curred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but i abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. the whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

"well?" said van helsing.

"well," said i, "i can make nothing of it." the professor stood up. "i
must go back to amsterdam to-night," he said. "there are books and
things there which i want. you must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her."

"shall i have a nurse?" i asked.

"we are the best nurses, you and i. you keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. you must not sleep all
the night. later on we can sleep, you and i. i shall be back
 
 ___________________________
 
your charge. if you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!"


_dr. seward's diary--continued._

_8 september._--i sat up all night with lucy. the opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but i could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. when i told mrs. westenra
that dr. van helsing had directed that i should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. i was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. when her maid had prepared her for the
night i came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. she did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever i caught her eye. after a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effor
 
 ___________________________
 
asleep.

all night long i watched by her. she never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. there was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

in the early morning her maid came, and i left her in her care and took
myself back home, for i was anxious about many things. i sent a short
wire to van helsing and to arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. my own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when i was able to inquire about my
zoöphagous patient. the report was good; he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. a telegram came from van helsing at amsterdam whilst
i was at dinner, suggesting that i should be at hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and
 
 ___________________________
 
i passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, "gott in himmel!" needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. he raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. i felt my knees begin to tremble.

there on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. van helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "quick!" he said. "bring
the brandy." i flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
he wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. he felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

"it is not too late. it beats, though but feebly. all our work is
undone; we must begin 
 
 ___________________________
 
r here now; i have
to call on you yourself this time, friend john." as he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; i
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. there was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment's delay, we began the operation. after a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--van helsing
held up a warning finger. "do not stir," he said, "but i fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. but i shall precaution take. i shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia." he proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. the effect on lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. it was with a feeling of personal pride
that i could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
 
 ___________________________
 
w lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to
show for it. i think i must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for,
sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as the day before. when van helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that i was not to leave her for a moment. i could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. i tried to keep her amused and interested. when her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

"we owe you so much, dr. seward, fo
 
 ___________________________
 
ve done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. you are looking pale
yourself. you want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" as she spoke, lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. the reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. i smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

van helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. make yourself strong. i
stay here to-night, and i shall sit up with little miss myself. you and
i must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. i have grave
reasons. no, do not ask them; think what you will. do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. good-night."

in the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with mis
 
 ___________________________
 
s lucy. they implored me to let them; and
when i said it was dr. van helsing's wish that either he or i should sit
up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign
gentleman." i was much touched by their kindness. perhaps it is because
i am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on lucy's account, that
their devotion was manifested; for over and over again have i seen
similar instances of woman's kindness. i got back here in time for a
late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting
for sleep. it is coming.

       *
 
 ___________________________
 
       *       *       *       *

_11 september._--this afternoon i went over to hillingham. found van
helsing in excellent spirits, and lucy much better. shortly after i had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor. he opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"these are for you, miss lucy," he said.

"for me? oh, dr. van helsing!"

"yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. these are medicines." here
lucy made a wry face. "nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or i shall
point out to my friend arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. this is medicinal, but
you do not know how. i put him in your window, i make prett
 
 ___________________________
 
s! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. it smell so like the waters
of lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the conquistadores sought
for in the floridas, and find him all too late."

whilst he was speaking, lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling
them. now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and
half-disgust:--

"oh, professor, i believe you are only putting up a joke on me. why,
these flowers are only common garlic."

to my surprise, van helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

"no trifling with me! i never jest! there is grim purpose in all i do;
and i warn you that you do not thwart me. take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own." then seeing poor lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: "oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. i only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. see, i place them myself 
 
 ___________________________
 
n waited whilst lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. the last words he said to her were:--

"take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door."

"i promise," said lucy, "and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! oh, what have i done to be blessed with such
friends?"

as we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, van helsing said:--

"to-night i can sleep in peace, and sleep i want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. to-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which i have work. ho! ho!"

he seemed so confident that i, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. it mu
 
 ___________________________
 
st
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
i felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




chapter xi

_lucy westenra's diary._


_12 september._--how good they all are to me. i quite love that dear dr.
van helsing. i wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. he
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. and yet he must have been
right, for i feel comfort from them already. somehow, i do not dread
being alone to-night, and i can go to sleep without fear. i shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. oh, the terrible struggle that i
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! how bl
 
 ___________________________
 
essed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. well, here i am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden
strewments." i never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
there is peace in its smell; i feel sleep coming already. good-night,
everybody.


_dr. seward's diary._

_13 september._--called at the berkeley and found van helsing, as usual,
up to time. the carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. the
professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

let all be put down exactly. van helsing and i arrived at hillingham at
eight o'clock. it was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature's
annual work. the leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. when we entered we met
 
 ___________________________
 
re she usually breakfasted early. as
she had spoken, i watched the professor's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. he had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. but the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

then, for the first time in my life, i saw van helsing break down. he
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. "god! god!
god!" he said. "what have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? is there fate amongst us sti
 
 ___________________________
 
 such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. oh, how we are
beset! how are all the powers of the devils against us!" suddenly he
jumped to his feet. "come," he said, "come, we must see and act. devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same." he went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to lucy's room.

once again i drew up the blind, whilst van helsing went towards the bed.
this time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same
awful, waxen pallor as before. he wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

"as i expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. without a word he went and locked the door, and then
began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet another
operation of transfusion of blood. i had long ago recognised the
necessity, and begun to take off my coa
 
 ___________________________
 
t, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. "no!" he said. "to-day you must operate. i shall provide.
you are weakened already." as he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. this time i
watched whilst van helsing recruited himself and rested.

presently he took an opportunity of telling mrs. westenra that she must
not remove anything from lucy's room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

after another hour lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seeming
 
 ___________________________
 
gain that i hardly know myself. it is as if i had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. i have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. since,
however, dr. van helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from i know not where and
commanded me to do i know not what--have all ceased. i go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. i do not even try to keep awake. i have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
haarlem. to-night dr. van h
 
 ___________________________
 
elsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in amsterdam. but i need not be watched; i am well enough to be left
alone. thank god for mother's sake, and dear arthur's, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! i shall not even feel the change, for
last night dr. van helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. i found
him asleep twice when i awoke; but i did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against
the window-panes.


_"the pall mall gazette," 18 september._

                           the escaped wolf.

         perilous adventure of our interviewer.

         _interview with the keeper in the zoölogical gardens._

after many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using

 
 ___________________________
 
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. he was
easily secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite
placidly, simply repeating over and over again: "the blood is the life!
the blood is the life!"

i cannot afford to lose blood just at present; i have lost too much of
late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of lucy's
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. i am over-excited and
weary, and i need rest, rest, rest. happily van helsing has not summoned
me, so i need not forego my sleep; to-night i could not well do without
it.


_telegram, van helsing, antwerp, to seward, carfax._

(sent to carfax, sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

"_17 september._--do not fail to be at hillingham to-night. if not
watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival."


_dr. seward's diary._

 
 ___________________________
 
shall take this cylinder with
me, and then i can complete my entry on lucy's phonograph.


_memorandum left by lucy westenra._

_17 september. night._--i write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. this is an exact
record of what took place to-night. i feel i am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if i die in the
doing.

i went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as dr.
van helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

i was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on the cliff at whitby when mina saved me, and which now i
know so well. i was not afraid, but i did wish that dr. seward was in
the next room--as dr. van helsing said he would be--so that i might have
called him. i tried to go to sleep, but could not. then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and i determined to keep awake. perversely sleep
would try to come then when
 
 ___________________________
 
hile there was
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a
crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
the window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting
posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. amongst
other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that dr. van helsing
insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me. for a
second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange
and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy for a
moment or two. the room and all round seemed to spin round. i kept my
eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the broken

 
 ___________________________
 
 the
broken window, and the door slammed to. they lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after i
had got up. they were all so frightened and nervous that i directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. the door flew
open for an instant and closed again. the maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and i laid what flowers i had on my dear
mother's breast. when they were there i remembered what dr. van helsing
had told me, but i didn't like to remove them, and, besides, i would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. i was surprised that
the maids did not come back. i called them, but got no answer, so i went
to the dining-room to look for them.

my heart sank when i saw what had happened. they all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. the decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. i was suspicious,
and examined the decanter
 
 ___________________________
 
o which i had come, too
late? i knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and i went round the house to try if i could find by chance an entry
anywhere.

i could find no means of ingress. every window and door was fastened and
locked, and i returned baffled to the porch. as i did so, i heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. they stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later i met van helsing running up the avenue.
when he saw me, he gasped out:--

"then it was you, and just arrived. how is she? are we too late? did you
not get my telegram?"

i answered as quickly and coherently as i could that i had only got his
telegram early in the morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that i could not make any one in the house hear me. he paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

"then i fear we are too late. god's will be done!" with his usual
recuperative e
 
 ___________________________
 
ck the fastening of the sashes and
opened the window. i helped the professor in, and followed him. there
was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at
hand. we tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. there was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. van helsing and i looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: "we can attend to them later."
then we ascended to lucy's room. for an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. with white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

how shall i describe what we saw? on the bed lay two women, lucy and her
mother. the latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown 
 
 ___________________________
 
r lucy's breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

"it is not yet too late! quick! quick! bring the brandy!"

i flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which i found
on the table. the maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and i
fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. i did not stay to make sure,
but returned to van helsing. he rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. he said to me:--

"i can do this, all that can be at the present. you go wake those maids.
flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. this poor soul is nearly as cold as
that beside her. she will need be heated before we can do anything
more."

i went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
 
 ___________________________
 
y that i did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

"if that were all, i would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for i see no light in life over her horizon." he went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to
be of some effect. lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. van helsing's
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

"the first gain is ours! check to the king!"

we took lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. i noticed
that van helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. she was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

van helsing called in 
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

"we must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descended the
stairs. in the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he
closing the door carefully behind him. the shutters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of
death which the british woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. the room was, therefore, dimly dark. it was, however, light
enough for our purposes. van helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. he was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so i waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

"what are we to do now? where are we to turn for help? we must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's purchase. you are exhausted already; i am
exhausted too. i fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. what are we to do for some one who will op
 
 ___________________________
 
d a
glad look came into his eyes as i cried out: "quincey morris!" and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

"what brought you here?" i cried as our hands met.

"i guess art is the cause."

he handed me a telegram:--

"have not heard from seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
cannot leave. father still in same condition. send me word how lucy is.
do not delay.--holmwood."

"i think i came just in the nick of time. you know you have only to tell
me what to do."

van helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

"a brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. you're a man and no mistake. well, the devil may work against
us for all he's worth, but god sends us men when we want them."

once again we went through that ghastly operation. i have not the heart
to go through with the details. lucy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood w
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs improved, and van
helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. her faint became a profound slumber. the professor watched
whilst i went downstairs with quincey morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. i left quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. then a thought struck me, and i went back to the room where
lucy now was. when i came softly in, i found van helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. he had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. there was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
he handed me the paper saying only: "it dropped from lucy's breast when
we carried her to the bath."

when i had read it, i stood looking at the professor, and after a pause
asked him: "in god's name, what does it all mean? was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of h
 
 ___________________________
 
orrible danger is it?" i was so bewildered that i
did not know what to say more. van helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

"do not trouble about it now. forget it for the present. you shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. and now what
is it that you came to me to say?" this brought me back to fact, and i
was all myself again.

"i came to speak about the certificate of death. if we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. i am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if
 
 ___________________________
 
e undertaker."

"good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truly miss lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. one, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. ah yes, i know, friend john; i am not blind! i love you all the
more for it! now go."

in the hall i met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur telling him
that mrs. westenra was dead; that lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that van helsing and i were with her. i told him
where i was going, and he hurried me out, but as i was going said:--

"when you come back, jack, may i have two words with you all to
ourselves?" i nodded in reply and went out. i found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

when i got back quincey was waiting for me. i told him i would see him
as soon as i knew about lucy, and went up to 
 
 ___________________________
 
her? the dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; i can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
now i know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. but this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, i have done my part. is not that
so?"

"that's so," i said, and he went on:--

"i take it that both you and van helsing had done already what i did
to-day. is not that so?"

"that's so."

"and i guess art was in it too. when i saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. i have not seen anything pulled down so quick
since i was on the pampas and had a mare that i was fond of go to grass
all in a night. one of those big bats that they call vampires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and i had 
 
 ___________________________
 
t there could be no reason for not answering, so i answered
in the same phrase: "that's so."

"and how long has this been going on?"

"about ten days."

"ten days! then i guess, jack seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "what took it
out?"

i shook my head. "that," i said, "is the crux. van helsing is simply
frantic about it, and i am at my wits' end. i can't even hazard a guess.
there has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to lucy being properly watched. but these shall
not occur again. here we stay until all be well--or ill." quincey held
out his hand. "count me in," he said. "you and the dutchman will tell me
what to do, and i'll do it."

when she woke late in the afternoon, lucy's first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, 
 
 ___________________________
 
to my surprise, produced the paper which van helsing
had given me to read. the careful professor had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. her eye then lit on van
helsing and on me too, and gladdened. then she looked around the room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. we both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother's death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. doubtless sympathy eased her somewh
 
 ___________________________
 
at, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. we told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. towards dusk she fell
into a doze. here a very odd thing occurred. whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. van helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. all the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. van helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 september._--all last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om it. the professor and
i took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. quincey morris said nothing about his intention, but i knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

when the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor lucy's
strength. she was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. at times she
slept, and both van helsing and i noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. in the afternoon she asked for arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
quincey went off to meet
 
 ___________________________
 
 speak. in the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was possible
were shortened. arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. he too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

it was now nearly one o'clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with
her. i am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and i am entering
this on lucy's phonograph. until six o'clock they are to try to rest. i
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. god help us all.


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

(unopened by her.)

"_17 september._

"my dearest lucy,--

"it seems _an age_ since i heard from you, or indeed since i wrote. you
will pardon me, i know, for 
 
 ___________________________
 


"your loving

"mina harker."


_dr. seward's diary._

_20 september._--only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. i am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, that i would not care if i heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. and he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--lucy's mother
and arthur's father, and now.... let me get on with my work.

i duly relieved van helsing in his watch over lucy. we wanted arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. it was only when i told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. van helsing was very kind to him. "come, my child," he said;
"come with me. you are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. you
must not be alone; for
 
 ___________________________
 
t to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep." arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on lucy's
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. she lay
quite still, and i looked round the room to see that all was as it
should be. i could see that the professor had carried out in this room,
as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the
window-sashes reeked with it, and round lucy's neck, over the silk
handkerchief which van helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. in particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. i sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. at the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or
 
 ___________________________
 
t softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. there was a full moonlight,
and i could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now
and again struck the window with its wings. when i came back to my seat,
i found that lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. i replaced them as well as i could, and sat
watching her.

presently she woke, and i gave her food, as van helsing had prescribed.
she took but a little, and that languidly. there did not seem to be with
her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her illness. it struck me as curious that the moment she
became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. it was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. there was no possibil
 
 ___________________________
 
ity of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

at six o'clock van helsing came to relieve me. arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. when he saw lucy's face
i could hear the sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: "draw up the blind; i want light!" then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching lucy's, examined her carefully. he
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. as
he did so he started back, and i could hear his ejaculation, "mein
gott!" as it was smothered 
 
 ___________________________
 
in his throat. i bent over and looked, too,
and as i noticed some queer chill came over me.

the wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

for fully five minutes van helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. then he turned to me and said calmly:--

"she is dying. it will not be long now. it will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him."

i went to the dining-room and waked him. he was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expres
 
 ___________________________
 
 lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as i could that both van
helsing and i feared that the end was near. he covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. i took him by the hand and raised him up. "come," i
said, "my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best
and easiest for her."

when we came into lucy's room i could see that van helsing had, with
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. he had even brushed lucy's
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. when we
came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered
softly:--

"arthur! oh, my love, i am so glad you have come!" he was stooping to
kiss her, when van helsing motioned him back. "no," he whispered, "not
yet! hold her hand; it will comfort her more."

so arthur
 
 ___________________________
 
the strange change which i had noticed in
the night. her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. in a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice,
such as i had never heard from her lips:--

"arthur! oh, my love, i am so glad you have come! kiss me!" arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant van helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
i never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

"not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" and
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize h
 
 ___________________________
 
im he realised
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting.

i kept my eyes fixed on lucy, as did van helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took van helsing's great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. "my true friend," she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, "my true friend, and his! oh,
guard him, and give me peace!"

"i swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. then he turned to arthur, and said
to him: "come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once."

their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

l
 
 ___________________________
 
ucy's eyes closed; and van helsing, who had been watching closely, took
arthur's arm, and drew him away.

and then lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

"it is all over," said van helsing. "she is dead!"

i took arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

i went back to the room, and found van helsing looking at poor lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. some change had come over her body.
death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. it was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    "we thought her dying whilst she slept,
        and sleeping when she died."

i stood beside van h
 
 ___________________________
 
ll the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

"she makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. it's quite a privilege to
attend on her. it's not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!"

i noticed that van helsing never kept far away. this was possible from
the disordered state of things in the household. there were no relatives
at hand; and as arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. under the circumstances, van helsing and i took it upon
ourselves to examine papers, etc. he insisted upon looking over lucy's
papers himself. i asked him why, for i feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware o
 
 ___________________________
 
night. for me, i watch
here in the room and in miss lucy's old room all night, and i myself
search for what may be. it is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers."

i went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found
the name and address of mrs. westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. all the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. i had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, van helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

"can i help you, friend john? i am free, and if i may, my service is to
you."

"have you got what you looked for?" i asked, to which he replied:--

"i did not look for any specific thing. i only hoped to find, and find i
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. but i have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. i shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, i sh
 
 ___________________________
 
lord godalming. his coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. arthur was expected at five o'clock, so
a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. it was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. the undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and
there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits at
once. van helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as lord godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. the undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

poor fellow! he looked desperately sad and broken; even 
 
 ___________________________
 
his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. he had, i knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. with me he was warm as ever, and to van helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but i could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. the professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. i did so, and left him at the door of the room, as i
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

"you loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. i don't know how to
thank you for all you have d
 
 ___________________________
 
ath had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. it seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. i told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. he came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

i left him in the drawing-room, and told van helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men
to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. when he
came out of the room again i told him of arthur's question, and he
replied:--

"i am not surprised. just now i doubted for a moment myself!"

we all dined together, and i could see that poor art was trying to make
the best of things. van helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but
when we had lit our cigars he said--

"lord--
 
 ___________________________
 

be sure, she would have approved. i have them all here. i took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. i shall keep
them, if i may; even you may not see them yet, but i shall keep them
safe. no word shall be lost; and in the good time i shall give them back
to you. it's a hard thing i ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
lucy's sake?"

arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

"dr. van helsing, you may do what you will. i feel that in saying this i
am doing what my dear one would have approved. i shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes."

the old professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

"and you are right. there will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. we and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. but we must be brave of heart and unselfish, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd do our
duty, and all will be well!"

i slept on a sofa in arthur's room that night. van helsing did not go to
bed at all. he went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.


_mina harker's journal._

_22 september._--in the train to exeter. jonathan sleeping.

it seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between then, in whitby and all the world before me, jo
 
 ___________________________
 
l do more harm than good; but i must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. the time is come, i fear, when i
must open that parcel, and know what is written. oh, jonathan, you will,
i know, forgive me if i do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--a sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from van helsing, whoever he
may be:--

"you will be grieved to hear that mrs. westenra died five days ago, and
that lucy died the day before yesterday. they were both buried to-day."

oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! god help us all to bear our
troubles.


_dr. seward's diary._

_22 september._--it is all over. arthur has gone back to ring, and has
take
 
 ___________________________
 
n quincey morris with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! i believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral viking. if america
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. van helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. he goes over to amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. he is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in london which may take him some time. poor old
fellow! i fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength. all the time of the burial he was, i could see, putting
some terrible restraint 
 
 ___________________________
 
on himself. when it was all over, we were
standing beside arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in
the operation where his blood had been transfused to his lucy's veins; i
could see van helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really married
and that she was his wife in the sight of god. none of us said a word of
the other operations, and none of us ever shall. arthur and quincey went
away together to the station, and van helsing and i came on here. the
moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. he has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was on
 
 ___________________________
 
ink from it.... i shall be prepared. i shall get my typewriter
this very hour and begin transcribing. then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. and if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if i am ready,
poor jonathan may not be upset, for i can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. if ever jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and i can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how i may comfort him.


_letter, van helsing to mrs. harker._

"_24 september._

(_confidence_)

"dear madam,--

"i pray you to pardon my writing, in that i am so far friend as that i
sent to you sad news of miss lucy westenra's death. by the kindness of
lord godalming, i am empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them i find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, hel
 
 ___________________________
 
i see you? you can trust me. i am friend of dr. john seward and
of lord godalming (that was arthur of miss lucy). i must keep it private
for the present from all. i should come to exeter to see you at once if
you tell me i am privilege to come, and where and when. i implore your
pardon, madam. i have read your letters to poor lucy, and know how good
you are and how your husband suffer; so i pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. again your pardon, and forgive me.

"van helsing."


_telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing._

"_25 september._--come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. can see you any time you call.

"wilhelmina harker."

mina harker's journal.

_25 september._--i cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of dr. van helsing, for somehow i expect that
it will throw some light upon jonathan's sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. th
 
 ___________________________
 
ase the good god, all this may
not upset him again. i shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its
consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it is all true. it may be that it is the doubt
which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no matter
which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. dr. van helsing must be a
good man as well as a clever one if he is arthur's friend and dr.
seward's, and if they brought him all the way from holland to look after
lucy. i feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. when he comes to-morrow i shall ask him about jonathan;
and then, please god, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. i used to think i would like to practise interviewing; jonathan's
friend on "the exeter news" told him that memory was everything
 
 ___________________________
 
 in such
work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. here was a rare
interview; i shall try to record it _verbatim_.

it was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. i took my courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. in a few minutes mary opened the door, and
announced "dr. van helsing."

i rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. the poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. the face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitiv
 
 ___________________________
 
quire somewhere, and there was none to ask. i know that you were
with her at whitby. she sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, madam mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. in
great perplexity then i come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember."

"i can tell you, i think, dr. van helsing, all about it."

"ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? it is not always
so with young ladies."

"no, doctor, but i wrote it all down at the time. i can show it to you
if you like."

"oh, madam mina, i will be grateful; you will do me much favour." i
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--i suppose it is
some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so i handed him the shorthand diary. he took it with a grateful
bow, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
onathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. you must eat
now; afterwards you shall tell me all."

after lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

"and now tell me all about him." when it came to speaking to this great
learned man, i began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and i hesitated to go
on. but he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and i
trusted him, so i said:--

"dr. van helsing, what i have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. i have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that i
have even half believed some very strange things." he reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

"oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which
i am here, it is you who would laugh. i have learned not to think little
of any one's belief, no matt
 
 ___________________________
 
d you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at paddington before eight." he was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that i have made
up all the trains to and from exeter, so that i may help jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

so he took the papers with him and went away, and i sit here
thinking--thinking i don't know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_letter (by hand), van helsing to mrs. harker._

"_25 september, 6 o'clock._

"dear madam mina,--

"i have read your husband's so wonderful diary. you may sleep without
doubt. strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! i will pledge my
life on it. it may be worse for others; but for him and you there is no
dread. he is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that
room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
perm
 
 ___________________________
 
anence by a shock. his brain and his heart are all right; this i
swear, before i have even seen him; so be at rest. i shall have much to
ask him of other things. i am blessed that to-day i come to see you, for
i have learn all at once so much that again i am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and i must think.

"yours the most faithful,

"abraham van helsing."


_letter, mrs. harker to van helsing._

"_25 september, 6:30 p. m._

"my dear dr. van helsing,--

"a thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. and yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are in
the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in london! i fear to think. i have this moment, whilst writing, had a
wire from jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from
launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that i shall have no fear
to-night. will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please 
 
 ___________________________
 
early for you? you can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to paddington by 2:35. do not answer this, as i shall take it that,
if i do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"believe me,

"your faithful and grateful friend,

"mina harker."


_jonathan harker's journal._

_26 september._--i thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. when i got home last night mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of van helsing's visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. she showed me in the doctor's letter that all i wrote down was
true. it seems to have made a new man of me. it was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. i felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. but, now that i _know_, i am not afraid, even
of the count. he has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to london, and it was he i saw.
 
 ___________________________
 
 he has got younger, and how? van helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
mina says. we sat late, and talked it all over. mina is dressing, and i
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

he was, i think, surprised to see me. when i came into the room where he
was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

"but madam mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." it was
so f
 
 ___________________________
 
himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from him i hear that
arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. as for myself, i was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which i used to have for it, so that i might
fairly have said that the wound which poor lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end god only knows. i have an idea that van helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. he
went to exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. to-day he came
back, and almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "westminster gazette" into my hand.

"what do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

i looked over the paper, for i really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about c
 
 ___________________________
 
 strange matter. do i read
your lesson aright?"

"ah, you are my favourite pupil still. it is worth to teach you. now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. you think then that those so small holes in the children's
throats were made by the same that made the hole in miss lucy?"

"i suppose so." he stood up and said solemnly:--

"then you are wrong. oh, would it were so! but alas! no. it is worse,
far, far worse."

"in god's name, professor van helsing, what do you mean?" i cried.

he threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

"they were made by miss lucy!"




chapter xv

dr. seward's diary--_continued_.


for a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck lucy on the face. i smote the table hard and rose up as i said to
him:--

"dr. van helsing, are you mad?" he raised his head and looked at me, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ly ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, i believe, traced up in this direction. for a
week after, the children were playing nothing but red riding hood on the
heath and in every alley in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he
might go away. when she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the 'bloofer lady.'"

"i hope," said van helsing, "that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. these fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. but in any case i suppose you will
not let it away for some days?"

"certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed."

our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. when van h
 
 ___________________________
 
ng lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. it conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

van helsing went about his work systematically. holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of lucy's coffin. another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

"what are you going to do?" i asked.

"to open the coffin. you shall yet be convinced." straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath.
 
 ___________________________
 
ccustomed to
such things, and i drew back towards the door. but the professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. taking the
edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

i drew near and looked. the coffin was empty.

it was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
van helsing was unmoved. he was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. "are you satisfied now, friend
john?" he asked.

i felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
i answered him:--

"i am satisfied that lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing."

"and what is that, friend john?"

"that it is not there."

"that is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. but how do you--how
can you--account for it
 
 ___________________________
 
find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. all fell out
well. at the edge of hampstead heath we heard a policeman's heavy
tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until
he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. we heard his exclamation
of astonishment, and then we went away silently. by good chance we got a
cab near the "spaniards," and drove to town.

i cannot sleep, so i make this entry. but i must try to get a few hours'
sleep, as van helsing is to call for me at noon. he insists that i shall
go with him on another expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 september._--it was two o'clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. the funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
the sexton lock the gate after him. we knew then that we were safe till
morning did
 
 ___________________________
 
ings, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of
place; and i realised distinctly the perils of the law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. besides, i felt it was all so useless.
outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. i shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for van helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. he took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. the place was not so gruesome as
last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. van helsing walked over to lucy's coffin, and i followed.
he bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

there lay lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night bef
 
 ___________________________
 
. are you of belief now, friend
john?" once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. i _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which i was even at the moment ashamed, i said:--

"she may have been placed here since last night."

"indeed? that is so, and by whom?"

"i do not know. some one has done it."

"and yet she has been dead one week. most peoples in that time would not
look so." i had no answer for this, so was silent. van helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. he was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. then he turned to me and said:--

"here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded; here is
some dual life that is not as the common. she was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not kno
 
 ___________________________
 
e she
is un-dead, too. so it is that she differ from all other. usually when
the un-dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that was when she not un-dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. there is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that i must kill her in her sleep." this turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that i was accepting van helsing's
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? he looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

"ah, you believe now?"

i answered: "do not press me too hard all at once. i am willing to
accept. how will you do this bloody work?"

"i shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and i shall
drive a stake through her body." it made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the w
 
 ___________________________
 
oman whom i had loved. and yet the feeling
was not so strong as i had expected. i was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this un-dead, as van helsing
called it, and to loathe it. is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

i waited a considerable time for van helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

"i have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. if i
did simply follow my inclining i would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that are
thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. this is
simple. she have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take d
 
 ___________________________
 
hyard in my own way. to-morrow night you will come to me to the
berkeley hotel at ten of the clock. i shall send for arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of america that gave his blood. later we
shall all have work to do. i come with you so far as piccadilly and
there dine, for i must be back here before the sun set."

so we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to piccadilly.


_note left by van helsing in his portmanteau, berkeley hotel directed to
john seward, m. d._

(not delivered.)

"_27 september._

"friend john,--

"i write this in case anything should happen. i go alone to watch in
that churchyard. it pleases me that the un-dead, miss lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.
therefore i shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. she is young as un-dead,
and will heed. moreover, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t may be that
he will not attempt the place. there is no reason why he should; his
hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
un-dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch.

"therefore i write this in case.... take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great un-dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that the world may rest from him.

"if it be so, farewell.

"van helsing."



_dr. seward's diary._

_28 september._--it is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for
one. yesterday i was almost willing to accept van helsing's monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. i have no doubt that he believes it all. i wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. is it possible that
the professor can have done it hims
 
 ___________________________
 
elf? he is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. i am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that van
helsing was mad; but anyhow i shall watch him carefully. i may get some
light on the mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 september, morning._.... last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
arthur and quincey came into van helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. he began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. you were doubtless surprised at my letter?" this query was
directly addressed to lord godalming.

"i was. it rather upset me for a bit. there has been so much trouble
around my house of late that i could do without any more. i have bee
 
 ___________________________
 
ou know what it is i propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. therefore may i ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--i must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything."

"that's frank anyhow," broke in quincey. "i'll answer for the professor.
i don't quite see his drift, but i swear he's honest; and that's good
enough for me."

"i thank you, sir," said van helsing proudly. "i have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me." he held out a hand, which quincey took.

then arthur spoke out:--

"dr. van helsing, i don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they
say in scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a christian is concerned, i cannot make such a promise.
if you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then i give m
 
 ___________________________
 
y consent at once; though for the life of me, i
cannot understand what you are driving at."

"i accept your limitation," said van helsing, "and all i ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first
consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations."

"agreed!" said arthur; "that is only fair. and now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may i ask what it is we are to do?"

"i want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
kingstead."

arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

"where poor lucy is buried?" the professo
 
 ___________________________
 
e reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----" he fairly choked with indignation. the
professor looked pityingly at him.

"if i could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "god knows i
would. but this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"

arthur looked up with set white face and said:--

"take care, sir, take care!"

"would it not be well to hear what i have to say?" said van helsing.
"and then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. shall i go
on?"

"that's fair enough," broke in morris.

after a pause van helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

"miss lucy is dead; is it not so? yes! then there can be no wrong to
her. but if she be not dead----"

arthur jumped to his feet.

"good god!" he cried. "what do you mean? has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?" he groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

"i did not say she
 
 ___________________________
 
 it. i go no
further than to say that she might be un-dead."

"un-dead! not alive! what do you mean? is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?"

"there are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. believe me, we are now on the verge of one. but
i have not done. may i cut off the head of dead miss lucy?"

"heavens and earth, no!" cried arthur in a storm of passion. "not for
the wide world will i consent to any mutilation of her dead body. dr.
van helsing, you try me too far. what have i done to you that you should
torture me so? what did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? are you mad that speak such things, or
am i mad to listen to them? don't dare to think more of such a
desecration; i shall not give my consent to anything you do. i have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by god, i shall do
it!"

van helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
sai
 
 ___________________________
 
ffected
by it. he took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--

"oh, it is hard to think of it, and i cannot understand; but at least i
shall go with you and wait."




chapter xvi

dr. seward's diary--_continued_


it was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. the night was dark with occasional gleams
of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across
the sky. we all kept somehow close together, with van helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. when we had come close to the tomb i looked
well at arthur, for i feared that the proximity to a place laden with so
sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. i took it
that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way a counteractant
to his grief. the professor unlocked the door, and seeing a natural
hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by
entering first himself. the rest of us followed, and he cl
 
 ___________________________
 
osed the door.
he then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin. arthur stepped
forward hesitatingly; van helsing said to me:--

"you were with me here yesterday. was the body of miss lucy in that
coffin?"

"it was." the professor turned to the rest saying:--

"you hear; and yet there is no one who does not believe with me." he
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. he evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. when he saw the rent in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
van helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

the coffin was empty!

for several minutes no one spoke a word. the silence was broken by
quincey morris:--

"professor, i answered for you. your word is all i want. i wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--i wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
is this your doing?"

"i swear to you by all that i hold sacred that i have not removed nor
touched
 
 ___________________________
 
 sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to
hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city. each
in his own way was solemn and overcome. arthur was silent, and was, i
could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the
mystery. i was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to
throw aside doubt and to accept van helsing's conclusions. quincey
morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has to
stake. not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. as to van helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. first he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitis
 
 ___________________________
 
lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. i was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. arthur and quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. he answered:--

"i am closing the tomb, so that the un-dead may not enter."

"and is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked quincey.
"great scott! is this a game?"

"it is."

"what is that which you are using?" this time the question was by
arthur. van helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

"the host. i brought it from amsterdam. i have an indulgence." it was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the professor's, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was
impossible to distrust. in respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. i pitied the
 
 ___________________________
 
ting forward, but the professor's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. it was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. my own heart grew cold as ice,
and i could hear the gasp of arthur, as we recognised the features of
lucy westenra. lucy westenra, but yet how changed. the sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. van helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. van helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

we shuddered with horror. i could see by the tremulous light that even
van helsing's iron nerve had failed. art
 
 ___________________________
 
guorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

"come to me, arthur. leave these others and come to me. my arms are
hungry for you. come, and we can rest together. come, my husband, come!"

there was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. as for arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. she
was leaping for them, when van helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. she recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

when within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force. then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from van helsing's iron nerves. never did i see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, i t
 
 ___________________________
 
ur became livid, the eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of medusa's snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the greeks and japanese. if ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

and so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. van helsing broke the silence by asking arthur:--

"answer me, oh my friend! am i to proceed in my work?"

arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

"do as you will, friend; do as you will. there can be no horror like
this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. quincey and i
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. we could hear the
click of the closing lantern as van helsing held it down; coming close
to the tomb, he began to remove from
 
 ___________________________
 
ey morris, and myself--called for the professor. it was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. of
course, arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. we got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. van helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

when we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
professor to the tomb. he unlocked the door, and we entered, closing it
behind us. then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own
end
 
 ___________________________
 
s, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work
by. when he again lifted the lid off lucy's coffin we all looked--arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there in all its
death-beauty. but there was no love in my own heart, nothing but
loathing for the foul thing which had taken lucy's shape without her
soul. i could see even arthur's face grow hard as he looked. presently
he said to van helsing:--

"is this really lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?"

"it is her body, and yet not it. but wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is."

she seemed like a nightmare of lucy as she lay there; the pointed teeth,
the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a
devilish mockery of lucy's sweet purity. van helsing, with his usual
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his
 
 ___________________________
 
ut
three feet long. one end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. with this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. to
me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both arthur and quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. they both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

when all was ready, van helsing said:--

"before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the un-dead. when they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the un-dead becomes themselves un-dead, and prey
on their kind. and so the circle goes on ever widening
 
 ___________________________
 
 chosen, had it been to her to choose?' tell me if there be
such a one amongst us?"

we all looked at arthur. he saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

"my true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart i thank you. tell me
what i am to do, and i shall not falter!" van helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

"brave lad! a moment's courage, and it is done. this stake must be
driven through her. it will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. but you must not falter when once you have begun. only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time."

"go o
 
 ___________________________
 
ur hoarsely. "tell me what i am to do."

"take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--i shall read him, i have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in god's name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love and that the un-dead pass away."

arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. van helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and quincey and i followed as well as we
could. arthur placed the point over the heart, and as i looked i could
see its dint in the white flesh. then he struck with all his might.

the thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. the body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. true that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. one and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

van helsing came and laid his hand on arthur's shoulder, and said to
him:--

"and now, arthur my friend, dear lad, am i not forgiven?"

the reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man's hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"forgiven! god bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace." he put his hands on the professor's shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. when he r
 
 ___________________________
 
aised his head van helsing said to him:--

"and now, my child, you may kiss her. kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. for she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul thing for all eternity. no longer she is
the devil's un-dead. she is god's true dead, whose soul is with him!"

arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and quincey out of the
tomb; the professor and i sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. then we cut off the hea
 
 ___________________________
 
 the mouth with
garlic. we soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid,
and gathering up our belongings, came away. when the professor locked
the door he gave the key to arthur.

outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. there was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

before we moved away van helsing said:--

"now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. but there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. i have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. shall you not all help me? we have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? and since so, do we not see our duty? yes! and do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?"

each in
 
 ___________________________
 
r i have much to consult
about, and you can help me. to-night i leave for amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. and then begins our great quest. but first i
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread.
then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare we
must not draw back."




chapter xvii

dr. seward's diary--_continued_


when we arrived at the berkeley hotel, van helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     "am coming up by train. jonathan at whitby. important news.--mina
     harker."

the professor was delighted. "ah, that wonderful madam mina," he said,
"pearl among women! she arrive, but i cannot stay. she must go to your
house, friend john. you must meet her at the station. telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared."

when the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by jonathan harker when ab
 
 ___________________________
 
sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for mrs. harker.

in due time we arrived. she knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but i could see that she was unable to repress a shudder
when we entered.

she told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. so here i am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst i await her. as yet i have not had the chance of looking at
the papers which van helsing left with me, though they lie open before
me. i must get her interested in something, so that i may have an
opportunity of reading them. she does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. i must be careful not to frighten her. here
she is!


_mina harker's journal._

_29 september._--after i had tidied myself, i went down to dr. seward's
study. at the door i paused a moment, for i thought i heard him talking
with some one. as, however, he had pressed me to be qui
 
 ___________________________
 
 the holy ray of light that my dear, dear lucy
was at last at peace, i do not think i could have borne it without
making a scene. it is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if i
had not known jonathan's experience in transylvania i could not have
believed. as it was, i didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my
difficulty by attending to something else. i took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to dr. seward:--

"let me write this all out now. we must be ready for dr. van helsing
when he comes. i have sent a telegram to jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in london from whitby. in this matter dates are everything,
and i think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. you tell me that
lord godalming and mr. morris are coming too. let us be able to tell him
when they come." he accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and i
began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder. 
 
 ___________________________
 
--i am so glad that i hardly know how to contain myself.
it is, i suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which i have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on jonathan. i saw him leave for whitby with as brave a
face as i could, but i was sick with apprehension. the effort has,
however, done him good. he was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. it is just as that dear, good
professor van helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. he came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. i
feel myself quite wild with excitement. i suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the count. that is just it: this thing is not
human--not even beast. to read dr. seward's account of poor lucy's
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one's heart.

       *     
 
 ___________________________
 
fe through the medium of his
blood--relying, of course, upon the scriptural phrase, 'for the blood is
the life.' though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. isn't that true,
doctor?" i nodded assent, for i was so amazed that i hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to imagine that i had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. looking at my watch, i
saw that i should go to the station to meet van helsing, so i told mrs.
harker that it was time to leave. she came at once, after saying
pleasantly to mr. renfield: "good-bye, and i hope i may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

"good-bye, my dear. i pray god i may never see your sweet face again.
may he bless and keep you!"

when i went to the station to meet van helsing i left the boys behind
me. poor art seemed more cheerful than he has been since lucy first took
ill, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

van helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. he saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

"ah, friend john, how goes all? well? so! i have been busy, for i come
here to stay if need be. all affairs are settled with me, and i have
much to tell. madam mina is with you? yes. and her so fine husband? and
arthur and my friend quincey, they are with you, too? good!"

as i drove to the house i told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some u
 
 ___________________________
 
-

"i am told, madam mina, by my friend john that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment."

"not up to this moment, professor," she said impulsively, "but up to
this morning."

"but why not up to now? we have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. we have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it."

mrs. harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she
said:--

"dr. van helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. it
is my record of to-day. i too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. must it go in?" the professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

"it need not go in if you do not wish it; but i pray that it may. it can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love." she t
 
 ___________________________
 
sor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. the rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.


_mina harker's journal._

_30 september._--when we met in dr. seward's study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. professor van helsing took the head of the table, to
which dr. seward motioned him as he came into the room. he made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; jonathan sat
next to me. opposite us were lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr.
morris--lord godalming being next the professor, and dr. seward in the
centre. the professor said:--

"i may, i suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers." we all expressed assent, and he went on:--

"then i
 
 ___________________________
 
with you," said lord godalming, "for lucy's sake, if for no other
reason."

dr. seward simply nodded. the professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. i took
his right hand, and lord godalming his left; jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to mr. morris. so as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. i felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. we resumed our places, and dr. van helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. it was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

"well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. we have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to
act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
in fact, so far as our powers
 
 ___________________________
 
 an idiotic thing of me to do, and i ask your pardon, mrs.
harker, most sincerely; i fear i must have frightened you terribly. but
the fact is that whilst the professor was talking there came a big bat
and sat on the window-sill. i have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that i cannot stand them, and i went out to
have a shot, as i have been doing of late of evenings, whenever i have
seen one. you used to laugh at me for it then, art."

"did you hit it?" asked dr. van helsing.

"i don't know; i fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." without
saying any more he took his seat, and the professor began to resume his
statement:--

"we must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at hi
 
 ___________________________
 
guments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. "i appeal to your friends," he said, "they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. by the way, you have
not introduced me." i was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that i at once made the introduction: "lord
godalming; professor van helsing; mr. quincey morris, of texas; mr.
renfield." he shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"lord godalming, i had the honour of seconding your father at the
windham; i grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. he was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, i have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on derby night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great
state. its reception into the union was a preceden
 
 ___________________________
 
t which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the pole and the tropics may hold
alliance to the stars and stripes. the power of treaty may yet prove a
vast engine of enlargement, when the monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. what shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting van helsing? sir, i make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. when an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to
one of a class. you, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by
the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, i take to witness that i am as sane as at
least the majority of men w
 
 ___________________________
 
of duty. could you look,
sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which
animate me. nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends." again he looked at us all keenly. i had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. van helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with the fixed concentration of his look. he said to renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when i thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

"can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? i will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--dr.
s
 
 ___________________________
 
claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. you do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. if
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." he still shook
his head as he said:--

"dr. van helsing, i have nothing to say. your argument is complete, and
if i were free to speak i should not hesitate a moment; but i am not my
own master in the matter. i can only ask you to trust me. if i am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." i thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so i went
towards the door, simply saying:--

"come, my friends, we have work to do. good-night."

as, however, i got near the door, a new change came over the p
 
 ___________________________
 
atient. he
moved towards me so quickly that for the moment i feared that he was
about to make another homicidal attack. my fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. as he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. i glanced at van helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so i became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. i had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of
which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he
wanted a cat; and i was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. my expectation was not realised,
f
 
 ___________________________
 
at she can henceforth leave the rest to us. we were, i think, all a
little upset by the scene with mr. renfield. when we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. then mr. morris said
to dr. seward:--

"say, jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic i ever saw. i'm not sure, but i believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." lord godalming and i were silent, but dr. van helsing added:--

"friend john, you know more of lunatics than i do, and i'm glad of it,
for i fear that if it had been to me to decide i would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. but we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend quincey would say.
all is best as they are." dr. seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

"i don't know but that i agree with you. if that man had been an
ordinary lunatic i would have taken
 
 ___________________________
 
 door and barred and locked it, and
bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. we found
nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all
untouched save for my own footsteps when i had made my first visit.
never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

the morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
dr. van helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

"so far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. no harm has
come to us such as i feared might be and yet we have ascertained how
many boxes are missing. more than all do i rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet madam mina or
 
 ___________________________
 
 himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. he said to madam mina, as i see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. why do you smile, friend john?"

"excuse me," i said, "but the answer is here." i laid my hand on the
type-written matter. "when our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before mrs.
harker entered the room." van helsing smiled in turn. "good!" he said.
"your memory is true, friend john. i should have remembered. and yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. perhaps i may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than i shall from the teaching of the most wise.
who knows?" i went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. it seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
van helsing back in the study.
 
 ___________________________
 
it is needless; i have seen him!"

"well?"

"i fear that he does not appraise me at much. our interview was short.
when i entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. i spoke to him as cheerfully as i could, and with such a
measure of respect as i could assume. he made no reply whatever. "don't
you know me?" i asked. his answer was not reassuring: "i know you well
enough; you are the old fool van helsing. i wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. damn all thick-headed
dutchmen!" not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though i had not been in the room at
all. thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this so
clever lunatic; so i shall go, if i may, and cheer myself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul madam mina. friend john, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more 
 
 ___________________________
 
no more to be
worried with our terrible things. though we shall much miss her help, it
is better so."

"i agree with you with all my heart," i answered earnestly, for i did
not want him to weaken in this matter. "mrs. harker is better out of it.
things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her."

so van helsing has gone to confer with mrs. harker and harker; quincey
and art are all out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. i
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_mina harker's journal._

_1 october._--it is strange to me to be kept in the dark as i am to-day;
after jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. this
morning i slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
jonat
 
 ___________________________
 
 the windows of st. mary's
church. suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist
in the moonlight, and in my dream i must have fainted, for all became
black darkness. the last conscious effort which imagination made was to
show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. i must be
careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were
too much of them. i would get dr. van helsing or dr. seward to prescribe
something for me which would make me sleep, only that i fear to alarm
them. such a dream at the present time would become woven into their
fears for me. to-night i shall strive hard to sleep naturally. if i do
not, i shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. last
night tired me more than if i had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 october 1
 
 ___________________________
 
 go to bed.
the dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and i
came away. thank god, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

when i came down again i found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. in the train i had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when i had finished van helsing said:--

"this has been a great day's work, friend jonathan. doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. if we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. but if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death." we all sat silent awhile and all at once mr.
morris spoke:--

"say! how are we going to get into that house?"

"we got into the other," answered lord godalming quickly
 
 ___________________________
 
he is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. to-morrow will, i hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in exeter. oh, but i am sleepy!


_dr. seward's diary._

_1 october._--i am puzzled afresh about renfield. his moods change so
rapidly that i find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. this morning, when i went to see him after his
repulse of van helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
he was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. he did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. i
thought i would improve the occasion and learn something, so i asked
him:--

"what about the flies these times?" he smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of malvolio--as
he answered me:--
 
 ___________________________
 
 at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. after a short time i saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. he was sulky, and so i came away.

later in the day he sent for me. ordinarily i would not have come
without special reason, but just at present i am so interested in him
that i would gladly make an effort. besides, i am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. harker is out, following up clues; and so are
lord godalming and quincey. van helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. he does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. i would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only i thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. there was also another reason: renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and i were
alone.

i found him sitting out in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
re.

despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. he dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. then it is a human life he looks to!

and the assurance--?

merciful god! the count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--i went after my round to van helsing and told him my
suspicion. he grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to renfield. i did so. as we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. when we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. we tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, 
 
 ___________________________
 
tted to having "dozed" for
a while. it is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are
watched.

to-day harker is out following up his clue, and art and quincey are
looking after horses. godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. we must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. van helsing is off to the
british museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. the old
physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept,
and the professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

i sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--we have met again. we seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-morrow may be the be
 
 ___________________________
 
ould mark his face like that by
beating his own head on the floor. i saw a young woman do it once at the
eversfield asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. and i suppose he
might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. but for the life of me i can't imagine how the two things
occurred. if his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it." i said to him:--

"go to dr. van helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. i want
him without an instant's delay." the man ran off, and within a few
minutes the professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. when
he saw renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. i think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

"ah, a sad accident! he will need very careful watching, and much
attention. i shall stay with you
 
 ___________________________
 
 myself; but i shall first dress myself.
if you will remain i shall in a few minutes join you."

the patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury. van helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. he had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

"send the attendant away. we must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation." so i said:--

"i think that will do now, simmons. we have done all that we can at
present. you had better go your round, and dr. van helsing will operate.
let me know instantly if there be an
 
 ___________________________
 
ce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. the whole motor area seems affected. the suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late." as he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. i
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, arthur and
quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

"i heard your man call up dr. van helsing and tell him of an accident.
so i woke quincey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
these times. i've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as they have been. we'll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. may we come in?" i nodded, and held the door open
till they had entered; then i closed it again. when quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and n
 
 ___________________________
 
oted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

"my god! what has happened to him? poor, poor devil!" i told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time, at all events. he went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

"we shall wait," said van helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing."

the minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. i had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from van helsing's face i gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. i dreaded
the words that renfield might speak. i was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what w
 
 ___________________________
 
tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. i
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that i cannot
move. what's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." he tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so i gently put it back. then van
helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"tell us your dream, mr. renfield." as he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"that is dr. van helsing. how good it is of you to be here. give me some
water, my lips are dry; and i shall try to tell you. i dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed fainting, i called quietly to quincey--"the
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" he flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. we moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. it seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me p
 
 ___________________________
 
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. i wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though i knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." he
was interrupted by a word from the professor:--

"how?"

"by making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs." van helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

"the _acherontia aitetropos of the sphinges_--what you call the
'death's-head moth'?" the patient went on without stopping.

"then he began to whisper: 'rats, rats, rats! hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. all lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!' i laughed at him, for i wanted to see what he could do.
then the dogs howled, away be
 
 ___________________________
 
lord and master!' the rats were
all gone, but he slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the moon herself has often come in through
the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour."

his voice was weaker, so i moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval for his story was further advanced. i was about to call him
back to the point, but van helsing whispered to me: "let him go on. do
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought." he proceeded:--

"all day i waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up i was pretty angry with him.
when he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, i got mad with him. he sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes
 
 ___________________________
 
e had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. i held tight; and i thought i was going to win, for i didn't
mean him to take any more of her life, till i saw his eyes. they burned
into me, and my strength became like water. he slipped through it, and
when i tried to cling to him, he raised me up and flung me down. there
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door." his voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. van helsing stood up instinctively.

"we know the worst now," he said. "he is here, and we know his purpose.
it may not be too late. let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare." there was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. we all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the count's house. the professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointe
 
 ___________________________
 
d to them significantly as he said:--

"they never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. be wise also, my friends. it is no common enemy that we deal with.
alas! alas! that that dear madam mina should suffer!" he stopped; his
voice was breaking, and i do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

outside the harkers' door we paused. art and quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

"should we disturb her?"

"we must," said van helsing grimly. "if the door be locked, i shall
break it in."

"may it not frighten her terribly? it is unusual to break into a lady's
room!"

van helsing said solemnly, "you are always right; but this is life and
death. all chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. friend john, when i turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you
too, my friends. now!"

he turned the handle as he spoke, but th
 
 ___________________________
 
ch contained the sacred
wafer. the count suddenly stopped, just as poor lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. the moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. this, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open, had swung back to its old position. van helsing, art, and i moved
forward to mrs. harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. for a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with terror. then she 
 
 ___________________________
 
put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
count's terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. van helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. van helsing whispered to me:--

"jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the vampire can produce. we can
do nothing with poor madam mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself; i must wake him!" he dipped the end of a towel in cold water
and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart-breaking to hear. i raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. there was much moonshine; and as i looked i could see 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a look of wild amazement. he seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
started up. his wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,
however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held
her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

"in god's name what does this mean?" harker cried out. "dr. seward, dr.
van helsing, what is it? what has happened? what is wrong? mina, dear,
what is it? what does that blood mean? my god, my god! has it come to
this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. "good god help us! help her! oh, help her!" with a quick
movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the
man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "what has happened?
tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "dr. van helsing, you
love mina, i kn
 
 ___________________________
 
 through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly
forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

"no! no! jonathan, you must not leave me. i have suffered enough
to-night, god knows, without the dread of his harming you. you must stay
with me. stay with these friends who will watch over you!" her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

van helsing and i tried to calm them both. the professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

"do not fear, my dear. we are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can approach. you are safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take counsel together." she shuddered and was silent, holding down
her head on her husband's breast. when she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in 
 
 ___________________________
 
ut his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as i told how the ruthless hands of the count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. it interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. just as i had finished, quincey and godalming knocked at the door.
they entered in obedience to our summons. van helsing looked at me
questioningly. i understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of
their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband
and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. to which lord godalming
answered:--

"i could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. i
looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. he had,
however----" he stopped suddenl
 
 ___________________________
 
y, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. van helsing said gravely:--

"go on, friend arthur. we want here no more concealments. our hope now
is in knowing all. tell freely!" so art went on:--

"he had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. all the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the
cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames." here i interrupted. "thank god there is the
other
 
 ___________________________
 
n, but could see no sign of him. i looked
into renfield's room; but there was no trace there except----!" again he
paused. "go on," said harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow
is dead." mrs. harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us she said solemnly:--

"god's will be done!" i could not but feel that art was keeping back
something; but, as i took it that it was with a purpose, i said nothing.
van helsing turned to morris and asked:--

"and you, friend quincey, have you any to tell?"

"a little," he answered. "it may be much eventually, but at present i
can't say. i thought it well to know if possible where the count would
go when he left the house. i did not see him; but i saw a bat rise from
renfield's window, and flap westward. i expected to see him in some
shape go back to carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. he
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
east, and the
dawn is close. we must work to-morrow!"

he said the latter words through his shut teeth. for a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and i could fancy that i could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then van helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on mrs. harker's head:--

"and now, madam mina--poor, dear, dear madam mina--tell us exactly what
happened. god knows that i do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. for now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. the day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn."

the poor, dear lady shivered, and i could see the tension of her
 
 ___________________________
 
 nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to van helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. the other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
after a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

"i took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. i seemed to become more wakeful, and myriads
of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with deat
 
 ___________________________
 
hitening hair.

we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

of this i am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




chapter xxii

jonathan harker's journal


_3 october._--as i must do something or go mad, i write this diary. it
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for dr. van helsing and dr. seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. our best will be, god
knows, required to-day. i must keep writing at every chance, for i dare
not stop to think. all, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. the teaching, big or little, could
not have landed mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. however,
we must trust and hope. poor mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is i
 
 ___________________________
 
n trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that god will aid us
up to the end. the end! oh my god! what end?... to work! to work!

when dr. van helsing and dr. seward had come back from seeing poor
renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. first, dr. seward
told us that when he and dr. van helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. his face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

dr. seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. he said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then renfield
had called out loudly several times, "god! god! god!" after that there
was a sound of falling, and when he
 
 ___________________________
 
 entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. van helsing
asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. he could swear
to it, if required, that the word "god" was spoken by the patient. dr.
seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it. a
 
 ___________________________
 
 full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. she herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. "there must be no concealment," she said, "alas! we have had
too much already. and besides there is nothing in all the world that can
give me more pain than i have already endured--than i suffer now!
whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!"
van helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

"but dear madam mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?" her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

"ah no! for my mind is made up!"

"to what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. her answer
came with direct si
 
 ___________________________
 
may
have passed away from me." she was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. i told her that she was to have all
the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we
might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she had done before.
she was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could
be used in connection with so grim an interest.

as usual van helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

"it is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay
there. had we done so, the count must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that
 
 ___________________________
 
rough a doorway, he
must open the door like a mortal. and so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilise them. so we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure." here i started up for i
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with mina's life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. but van helsing held up
his hand warningly. "nay, friend jonathan," he said, "in this, the
quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. we shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come. but think, in
all probable the key of the situation is in that house in piccadilly.
the count may have many houses which he has bought. of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. he will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. there are many be
 
 ___________________________
 
; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work together. "as for me," she said, "i have no fear.
things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. go, my husband! god can, if
he wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." so i
started up crying out: "then in god's name let us come at once, for we
are losing time. the count may come to piccadilly earlier than we
think."

"not so!" said van helsing, holding up his hand.

"but why?" i asked.

"do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?"

did i forget! shall i ever--can i ever! can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. van helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. he had simply lost sight of 
 
 ___________________________
 
s he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

"no, i shall not forget, for it is well that i remember; and with it i
have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that i take it all
together. now, you must all be going soon. breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong."

breakfast was a strange meal to us all. we tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. when it was over, van helsing stood up and said:--

"now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" we all assured
him. "then it is well. now, madam mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if---- we shall
return! but before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. i
have myself, since you came down, prepare
 
 ___________________________
 
ment. pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"unclean! unclean! even the almighty shuns my polluted flesh! i must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the judgment day." they
all paused. i had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. for a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. then van helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that i could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:--

"it may be that you may have to bear that mark till god himself see fit,
as he most surely shall, on the judgment day, to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of his children that he has placed thereon. and oh, madam
mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of god's knowledge of what has been, shall
 
 ___________________________
 
d carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. it was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. we found no papers, or any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
dr. van helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

"and now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. we must sterilise this
earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. he has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. it was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
god." as he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and
very soon the top o
 
 ___________________________
 
ny danger
even of odium, but he went on: "besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. my title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. you had
better go with jack and the professor and stay in the green park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and
the smith has gone away, do you all come across. we shall be on the
lookout for you, and shall let you in."

"the advice is good!" said van helsing, so we said no more. godalming
and morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. at the corner
of arlington street our contingent got out and strolled into the green
park. my heart beat as i saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. we sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. the minutes 
 
 ___________________________
 
re not more at stake for us than for him? then why we not be even
more careful than him? by my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend arthur and quincey are on their way to us. to-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. see! there are
five of us when those absent ones return."

whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the
double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. we all moved out to the
hall with one impulse, and van helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. the boy handed in a
despatch. the professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"look out for d. he has just now, 12:45, come from carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the south. he seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: mina."

there was a pause, broken by jonathan harker's voice:--

"now, god be thanked, we shall soon meet!" van helsing tu
 
 ___________________________
 
rned to him
quickly and said:--

"god will act in his own way and time. do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings."

"i care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. i would sell my soul to do it!"

"oh, hush, hush, my child!" said van helsing. "god does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. but god is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear madam mina. think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. do not fear any of us, we are
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. the time is
coming for action; to-day this vampire is limit to the powers of man,
and till sunset he may not change. it will take hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall:--

"it is all right. we found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed them all!"

"destroyed?" asked the professor.

"for him!" we were silent for a minute, and then quincey said:--

"there's nothing to do but to wait here. if, however, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave mrs. harker
alone after sunset."

"he will be here before long now," said van helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. "_nota bene_, in madam's telegram he went
south from carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o'clock. that he went south has a meaning for us. he is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. you must have been at bermondsey only a
short time before him. that he is not here already shows that he 
 
 ___________________________
 
mire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. in all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, quincey morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and arthur and i had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. with a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. van helsing, harker, and i were
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
godalming behind and quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of the window. we waited in a suspense that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. the slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.

suddenly with a single bound he leaped 
 
 ___________________________
 
g here may be of use to him, if so that he
return." as he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

godalming and morris had rushed out into the yard, and harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the count. he had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. van helsing and i tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

it was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. we had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
professor when he said:--

"let us go back to madam mina--poor, poor dear madam mina. all we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. but we need
not despair. there is but one more earth-box, and we must try to 
 
 ___________________________
 
except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. oh, god, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come."

we men were all in tears now. there was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. she wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. van helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with their god.

before they retired the professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the vampire, and assured mrs. harker that she might rest in peace.
she tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband's sake, tried to seem content. it was a brave struggle; and was,
i think and believe, not without its reward. van helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 hurriedly:--

"go, call the professor. i want to see him at once."

"why?" i asked.

"i have an idea. i suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. he must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then i
shall be able to speak. go quick, dearest; the time is getting close." i
went to the door. dr. seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

"is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"no," i replied; "but mina wants to see dr. van helsing at once."

"i will go," he said, and hurried into the professor's room.

in two or three minutes later van helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and mr. morris and lord godalming were with dr. seward at
the door asking questions. when the professor saw mina a smile--a
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

"oh, my dear madam mina, this is indeed a change. see! friend jonathan,
we have got our dear madam mina, as of old, back to us to
 
 ___________________________
 
hen stopped, and i could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. there was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. raising his hand to
impose silence, the professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
they came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the
foot of the bed, looking on. mina appeared not to see them. the
stillness was broken by van helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break the current of her thoughts:--

"where are you?" the answer came in a neutral way:--

"i do not know. sleep has no place it can call its own." for several
minutes there was silence. mina sat rigid, and the professor stood
staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. the room
was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from mina's face, dr. van
helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. i did so, and the day s
 
 ___________________________
 
afraid to think. the answer came
quick:--

"oh, yes!"

"what else do you hear?"

"the sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. there is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the rachet."

"what are you doing?"

"i am still--oh, so still. it is like death!" the voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

by this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. dr. van helsing placed his hands on mina's shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. she lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see
us all around her. "have i been talking in my sleep?" was all she said.
she seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. the professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

"then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too 
 
 ___________________________
 
said sorrowfully:--

"because my dear, dear madam mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of hell!" she grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"why?"

"because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat."

i was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




chapter xxiv

dr. seward's phonograph diary, spoken by van helsing


this to jonathan harker.

you are to stay with your dear madam mina. we shall go to make our
search--if i can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. but do you stay and take care of her to-day.
this is your best and most holiest office. this day nothing can find him
here. let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for i have tell them. he, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his castle in transylvania. i know i
 
 ___________________________
 
e, he take hundreds of years to get so far as london; and yet in
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. he is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
but we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong
together. take heart afresh, dear husband of madam mina. this battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that god sits on high
to watch over his children. therefore be of much comfort till we return.

van helsing.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_4 october._--when i read to mina, van helsing's message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. already the
certainty that the count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. for my own part, now that his horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. even my own terrible experiences in castle dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. here in the crisp 
 
 ___________________________
 
ay
be! i shall try to think as she does. we have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. it is better to wait till we see the professor and
the others after their investigations.

the day is running by more quickly than i ever thought a day could run
for me again. it is now three o'clock.


_mina harker's journal._

_5 october, 5 p. m._--our meeting for report. present: professor van
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan
harker, mina harker.

dr. van helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound count dracula made his escape:--

"as i knew that he wanted to get back to transylvania, i felt sure that
he must go by the danube mouth; or by somewhere in the black sea, since
by that way he come. it was a dreary blank that was before us. _omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the black sea last night. he was in sailing ship, since
madam mina 
 
 ___________________________
 
ave seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. the box we seek is to be landed in
varna, and to be given to an agent, one ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
when he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. it must be done by us alone and in our own
way."

when dr. van helsing had done speaking, i asked him if he were certain
that the count had remained on board the ship. he replied: "we have the
best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance this
morning." i asked him again if it were really necessary that they should
pursue the count, for oh! i dread jonathan leaving me, and i know that
he would surely go if the others went. he answered in growing passion,
at first quietly. as he went on, however, he grew more angry and more
forceful, til
 
 ___________________________
 
rrible scar. we are to
meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. i see only one immediate difficulty, i know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet i fear
that in some mysterious way poor mrs. harker's tongue is tied. i _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been i can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. i have mentioned this to van helsing, and
he and i are to talk it over when we are alone. i suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. the
count had his own purposes when he gave her what van helsing called "the
vampire's baptism of blood." well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! one thing i know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor mrs. harker's silences, 
 
 ___________________________
 
then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. the same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. i dare not think
further; for so i should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

van helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. i shall
try to open the subject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--when the professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. i could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. after beating
about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

"friend john, there is something that you and i must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rat
 
 ___________________________
 
e. later, we may have to take the others into our
confidence"; then he stopped, so i waited; he went on:--

"madam mina, our poor, dear madam mina is changing." a cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. van helsing
continued:--

"with the sad experience of miss lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. i
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. it is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. but these are not all, there is to 
 
 ___________________________
 
t not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us." he wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. i knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if i told him that i also had come to the same conclusion; for at
any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. i told him, and the
effect was as i expected.

it is now close to the time of our general gathering. van helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. i
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--at the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both van helsing and myself. mrs. harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us.
 
 ___________________________
 
e shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." here quincey morris
added:--

"i understand that the count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. i propose that we add winchesters to
our armament. i have a kind of belief in a winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. do you remember, art, when we had the pack
after us at tobolsk? what wouldn't we have given then for a repeater
apiece!"

"good!" said van helsing, "winchesters it shall be. quincey's head is
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. in the meantime we
can do nothing here; and as i think that varna is not familiar to any of
us, why not go there more soon? it is as long to wait here as there.
to-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we
four can set out on our journey."

"we four?" said harker interrogatively, looking from o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne to another of
us.

"of course!" answered the professor quickly, "you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!" harker was silent for awhile and then said
in a hollow voice:--

"let us talk of that part of it in the morning. i want to consult with
mina." i thought that now was the time for van helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. i looked at him
significantly and coughed. for answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_5 october, afternoon._--for some time after our meeting this morning i
could not think. the new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. mina's determination not
to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as i could not
 
 ___________________________
 
 to promise me something on your word of honour. a
promise made to me, but made holily in god's hearing, and not to be
broken though i should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. quick, you must make it to me at once."

"mina," i said, "a promise like that, i cannot make at once. i may have
no right to make it."

"but, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it is i who wish it; and it is not for myself.
you can ask dr. van helsing if i am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise."

"i promise!" i said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
she said:--

"promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for
the campaign against the count. not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she

 
 ___________________________
 
retired
early. mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. thank god for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. i shall
try it. oh! for a dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 october, morning._--another surprise. mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring dr. van helsing. i thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the professor. he had evidently expected some such call, for i found
him dressed in his room. his door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. he came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked mina if the others might come, too.

"no," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary. you can tell
them just as well. i must go with you on your journey."

dr. van helsing
 
 ___________________________
 
as she spoke, and if there be indeed a recording angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. i could only clasp her
hand. i could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. she went on:--

"you men are brave and strong. you are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. besides, i may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even i myself do not know." dr. van helsing said
very gravely:--

"madam mina, you are, as always, most wise. you shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." when he had
spoken, mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. she had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when i had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. van helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. we went to his room, and within
a minute lord godalming, dr. seward, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 still. then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well."

"i shall not wait for any opportunity," said morris. "when i see the box
i shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if i am to be wiped out for it the next moment!" i
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
i think he understood my look; i hope he did.

"good boy," said dr. van helsing. "brave boy. quincey is all man. god
bless him for it. my child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. i do but say what we may do--what we must do. but,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. there are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. we shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack. now
let us to-day put all our affa
 
 ___________________________
 
st--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. but you must remember that i am not as you are.
there is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. oh, my friends, you
know as well as i do, that my soul is at stake; and though i know there
is one way out for me, you must not and i must not take it!" she looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

"what is that way?" asked van helsing in a hoarse voice. "what is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?"

"that i may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. i know, and you know, that were i
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor lucy's. were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way i would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. but death is not all. i cannot believe that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but i swear to you by all that i hold sacred and
dear that, should the time ever come, i shall not flinch from the duty
that you have set us. and i promise you, too, that i shall make all
certain, for if i am only doubtful i shall take it that the time has
come!"

"my true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

"i swear the same, my dear madam mina!" said van helsing.

"and i!" said lord godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. i followed, myself. then her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

"and must i, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?"

"you too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. "you must not shrink. you are nearest and dearest and
all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all 
 
 ___________________________
 
life and all
time. think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the
hands of the enemy. their hands did not falter any the more because
those that they loved implored them to slay them. it is men's duty
towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! and oh, my
dear, if it is to be that i must meet death at any hand, let it be at
the hand of him that loves me best. dr. van helsing, i have not
forgotten your mercy in poor lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right
to give her peace. if that time shall come again, i look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from the awful thrall upon me."

"again i swear!" came the professor's resonant voice. mrs. harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:-
 
 ___________________________
 
to this hotel--"the
odessus." the journey may have had incidents; i was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. until the _czarina catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
thank god! mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. she sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept
nearly all the time. before sunrise and sunset, however, she is very
wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for van helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. at first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. he seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. he
always asks her what she can see and hear. she answers to the first:--

"nothing; all is dark." and to the second:--

"i can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. canvas and cor
 
 ___________________________
 
therine_ had not been reported to lloyd's from
anywhere. he had arranged before leaving london that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. he
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.

we had dinner and went to bed early. to-morrow we are to see the
vice-consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. van helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sunrise and sunset. the count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. as he dare not change to man's form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. if, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor lucy,
before he wakes. what mercy he sh
 
 ___________________________
 
and got a half consent that he might open it at his own
risk. the owner gave him a paper telling the captain to give him every
facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at varna. we have seen the agent, who
was much impressed with godalming's kindly manner to him, and we are all
satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. we
have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. if the
count is there, van helsing and seward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. morris and godalming and i shall
prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. the professor says that if we can so treat the count's body,
it will soon after fall into dust. in such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. but
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be 
 
 ___________________________
 
 waiting. daily telegrams to godalming,
but only the same story: "not yet reported." mina's morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_telegram, october 24th._

_rufus smith, lloyd's, london, to lord godalming, care of h. b. m.
vice-consul, varna._

"_czarina catherine_ reported this morning from dardanelles."


_dr. seward's diary._

_25 october._--how i miss my phonograph! to write diary with a pen is
irksome to me; but van helsing says i must. we were all wild with
excitement yesterday when godalming got his telegram from lloyd's. i
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. mrs.
harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. after
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. in old days she would, i am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we mig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. the
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, van helsing and i are not satisfied. we
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. it
would break poor harker's heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a suspicion on the subject. van helsing examines, he tells me,
her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no active
danger of a change in her. if this change should come, it would be
necessary to take steps!... we both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. we should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
"euthanasia" is an excellent and a comforting wor
 
 ___________________________
 
o news yet of the ship's arrival. mrs. harker's
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. we men are all in a fever of
excitement, except harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago i found him whetting the edge of the great ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. it will be a bad lookout for the
count if the edge of that "kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

van helsing and i were a little alarmed about mrs. harker to-day. about
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. she
had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. when, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. she was breathing naturally and looked so
wel
 
 ___________________________
 
hich came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. we must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 october, noon._--most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
mrs. harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping
waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very
faint." the telegrams from london have been the same: "no further
report." van helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the count is escaping us. he added significantly:--

"i did not like that lethargy of madam mina's. souls and memories can do
strange things during trance." i was about to ask him more, but harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. we must try to-night
at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 october._--telegram. _rufus smith, london, to 
 
 ___________________________
 
rna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. none the less, however, was it a surprise. i suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. it was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. van helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with the almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. lord
godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. i was myself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. quincey morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which i knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant "action." mrs. harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seem
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of
the great kukri knife and rested there. "when does the next train start
for galatz?" said van helsing to us generally.

"at 6:30 to-morrow morning!" we all started, for the answer came from
mrs. harker.

"how on earth do you know?" said art.

"you forget--or perhaps you do not know, though jonathan does and so
does dr. van helsing--that i am the train fiend. at home in exeter i
always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. i found it so useful sometimes, that i always make a study of
the time-tables now. i knew that if anything were to take us to castle

 
 ___________________________
 
dracula we should go by galatz, or at any rate through bucharest, so i
learned the times very carefully. unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as i say."

"wonderful woman!" murmured the professor.

"can't we get a special?" asked lord godalming. van helsing shook his
head: "i fear not. this land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. moreover, we have something to prepare. we must think.
now let us organize. you, friend arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. do
you, friend jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in galatz, with authority to make search th
 
 ___________________________
 
delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since i am here
with madam to make report."

"and i," said mrs. harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as i used to do. something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and i feel freer than i have been of late!"
the three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but van helsing and i, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. we said nothing at the
time, however.

when the three men had gone out to their tasks van helsing asked mrs.
harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
harker's journal at the castle. she went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

"we mean the same! speak out!"

"there is some change. it is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us."

"quite so. do you kno
 
 ___________________________
 
we are in awful straits. i fear, as i never
feared before. we can only trust the good god. silence! here she comes!"

i thought that the professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when mrs. harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. as she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to van helsing. he looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. then holding the pages between his finger and
thumb he said:--

"friend john, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear madam mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. a half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but i fear to
let him loose his wings. here now, with more knowledge, i go back to
where that half-thought come from and i find that he be no half-thought
at al
 
 ___________________________
 
l a
'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. he came again better equipped for his work; and won.
so he came to london to invade a new land. he was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the danube
from turkey land."

"good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said van helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. a moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

"seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. i have hope." turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

"but go on. go on! there is more to tell if you will. be not afraid;
john and i know. i do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
speak, without fear!"

"i will try to; but you will forgive me if i seem egot
 
 ___________________________
 
xvi

dr. seward's diary


_29 october._--this is written in the train from varna to galatz. last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to galatz. when the usual time came round mrs.
harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more serious effort on the part of van helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

"i can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. i can hear
men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. a gun is fired somewhere; th
 
 ___________________________
 
e echo of it seems far away.
there is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. what is this? there is a gleam of light; i can feel the air
blowing upon me."

here she stopped. she had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. van helsing and i looked at each other with understanding.
quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his kukri. there
was a long pause. we all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

"would none of you like a cup of tea? you must all be so tired!" we
could only make her happy, and so acquie
 
 ___________________________
 
sced. she bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone van helsing said:--

"you see, my friends. _he_ is close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. but he has yet to get on shore. in the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. in such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at whitby. but if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. and if he be carried, then the customs 
 
 ___________________________
 

on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his
true self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered."

there was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from mrs. harker.

early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. the hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was
so short that we began to despair. van helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

"all is dark. i hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood." she paused, and the red sun shot up. we must wait till
to-night.

and so it is that we are travelling towards galatz in an agony of
expectation. we are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well af
 
 ___________________________
 
ke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. she could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 october, 7 a. m._--we are near galatz now, and i may not have time
to write later. sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
van helsing began his passes earlier than usual. they produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. the professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

"all is dark. i hear water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. cattle low far off. there is another sound, a
queer one like----" she stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"go on; go on! 
 
 ___________________________
 
speak, i command you!" said van helsing in an agonised
voice. at the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was reddening even mrs. harker's pale face. she opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
unconcern:--

"oh, professor, why ask me to do what you know i can't? i don't remember
anything." then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

"what have i said? what have i done? i know nothing, o
 
 ___________________________
 
 some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _czarina catherine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--lord godalming has returned. the consul is away, and the
vice-consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
he was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_30 october._--at nine o'clock dr. van helsing, dr. seward, and i called
on messrs. mackenzie & steinkoff, the agents of the london firm of
hapgood. they had received a wire from london, in answer to lord
godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. they were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _czarina catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbour. there we saw the captain, donelson by name, who told us of his
voyage. he said that in all his life he had ne
 
 ___________________________
 
st i inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, i thocht that if the
deil was minded to get us into the black sea quick, he was like to do it
whether we would or no. if we had a quick voyage it would be no to our
miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the old mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin' him." this mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused van helsing, who said:--

"mine friend, that devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!" the skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

"when we got past the bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them,
the roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started
frae london. i had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when 
 
 ___________________________
 

but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came
aboard wi' an order, written to him from england, to receive a box
marked for one count dracula. sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. he had his papers a' reet, an' glad i was to be rid o' the
dam' thing, for i was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. if the deil
did have any luggage aboord the ship, i'm thinkin' it was nane ither
than that same!"

"what was the name of the man who took it?" asked dr. van helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"i'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "immanuel hildesheim." burgen-strasse
16 was the address. we found out that this was all the captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

we found hildesheim in his office, a hebrew of rather the adelphi
theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. his arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little
bargaining he told us 
 
 ___________________________
 
uite; astray doing the work if i had to write
with a pen....

it is all done; poor dear, dear jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. he lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. his brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and i can
see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. oh!
if i could only help at all.... i shall do what i can.

i have asked dr. van helsing, and he has got me all the papers that i
have not yet seen.... whilst they are resting, i shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps i may arrive at some conclusion. i shall try to
follow the professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

       *       *       *       *       *

i do believe that under god's providence i have made a discovery. i
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

i am more than ever sure
 
 ___________________________
 


of course it may not be either the sereth or the pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. now of these two, the pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the sereth is, at fundu, joined by the bistritza
which runs up round the borgo pass. the loop it makes is manifestly as
close to dracula's castle as can be got by water.


_mina harker's journal--continued._

when i had done reading, jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. the
others kept shaking me by both hands, and dr. van helsing said:--

"our dear madam mina is once more our teacher. her eyes have been where
we were blinded. now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. he has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he perish. this he knows, and w
 
 ___________________________
 
chances, this time; we
shall, not rest until the count's head and body have been separated, and
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." he looked at jonathan as he
spoke, and jonathan looked at me. i could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... vampire. (why did i hesitate to write the word?) he was
silent awhile, and during his silence dr. van helsing spoke:--

"friend jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. first, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the
last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yours. be not afraid for madam mina; she
will be my care, if i may. i am old. my legs are not so quick to run as
once; and i am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. but i can be of other servic
 
 ___________________________
 
ave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where jonathan went,--from bistritz
over the borgo, and find our way to the castle of dracula. here, madam
mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we are near
that fateful place. there is much to be done, and other places to be
made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated." here
jonathan interrupted him hotly:--

"do you mean to say, professor van helsing, that you would bring mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil's illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? not for the world! not for heaven or
hell!" he became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

"do you know what the place is? have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo?
have you felt the vampire's lips upon your 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd it so freely. for if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. it is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now lord godalming and jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. dr. seward
and mr. morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. we have
all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. professor
van helsing and i are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for veresti,
where we are to get a carriage to drive to the borgo pass. we are
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and
horses. we shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in the matter. the professor knows something of a great many languages,
so we shall get on all right. we have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; jonathan would not be happy unless i was armed like
the rest. alas!
 
 ___________________________
 
 i cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my
forehead forbids that. dear dr. van helsing comforts me by telling me
that i am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--it took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. we may
never meet again. courage, mina! the professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. there must be no tears now--unless it may be that
god will let them fall in gladness.


_jonathan harke
 
 ___________________________
 
 that good fellow would not
wake me. he says it would have been a sin to, for i slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. it seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. i am a new
man this morning; and, as i sit here and watch him sleeping, i can do
all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. i can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to
me. i wonder where mina is now, and van helsing. they should have got to
veresti about noon on wednesday. it would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the borgo pass. god guide and help them! i am
afraid to think what may happen. if we could only go faster! but we
cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. i wonder how
dr. seward and mr. morris are getting on. there seem to be endless
streams running down the mountains into this river,
 
 ___________________________
 
 miles before us. the country is lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to
see it all. if jonathan and i were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. to stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! but, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--dr. van helsing has returned. he has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. the
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. the professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. he has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. there will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       
 
 ___________________________
 
at i
loved him and honoured him more than i can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be always for him.




chapter xxvii

mina harker's journal


_1 november._--all day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. the
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go
willingly their full stage at best speed. we have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. dr. van helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to bistritz, and pays them well
to make the exchange of horses. we get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. it is a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable
kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qualities. they are _very, very_ superstitious. in the first
house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar on my
forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers
 
 ___________________________
 
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. the
professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. at sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that i answered as usual "darkness, lapping water and creaking
wood"; so our enemy is still on the river. i am afraid to think of
jonathan, but somehow i have now no fear for him, or for myself. i write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. dr.
van helsing is sleeping, poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep
he is instinct with resolution. when we have well started i must make
him rest whilst i drive. i shall tell him that we have days before us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... all is ready; we are off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 november, morning._--i was successful, and we took turns driving
 
 ___________________________
 
 all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. there is a strange
heaviness in the air--i say heaviness for want of a better word; i mean
that it oppresses us both. it is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. at dawn van helsing hypnotised me; he says i answered
"darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as
they ascend. i do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in god's hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 november, night._--all day long driving. the country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the carpathians, which at veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tow
 
 ___________________________
 
er in front. we both seem in good spirits; i think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. dr.
van helsing says that by morning we shall reach the borgo pass. the
houses are very few here now, and the professor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. he
got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. the dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no
trouble. we are not worried with other travellers, and so even i can
drive. we shall get to the pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive
before. so 
 
 ___________________________
 
each a long rest in turn. oh, what
will to-morrow bring to us? we go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. god grant that we may be guided aright, and
that he will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. as for me, i am not worthy in his
sight. alas! i am unclean to his eyes, and shall be until he may deign
to let me stand forth in his sight as one of those who have not incurred
his wrath.


_memorandum by abraham van helsing._

_4 november._--this to my old and true friend john seward, m.d., of
purfleet, london, in case i may not see him. it may explain. it is
morning, and i write by a fire which all the night i have kept
alive--madam mina aiding me. it is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. it seems to have
affected madam mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like hersel
 
 ___________________________
 
. madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. and i like it
not. and i am afraid, afraid, afraid!--i am afraid of all things--even
to think but i must go on my way. the stake we play for is life and
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 november, morning._--let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and i have seen some strange things together, you may at the first think
that i, van helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long
strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

all yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. there are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. madam mina still sleep and sleep; and though i
did have hunger and appeased it, i could not waken her--even for food. i
began to fear that the fatal spell of the pla
 
 ___________________________
 
rounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. the snow is falling lightly
and there is a strange excitement in the air. it may be our own
feelings, but the depression is strange. far off i hear the howling of
wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains, and there are
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. the horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. we ride to death of some one. god alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_dr. van helsing's memorandum._

_5 november, afternoon._--i am at least sane. thank god for that mercy
at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. when i left
madam mina sleeping within the holy circle, i took my way to the castle.
the blacksmith hammer which i took in the carriage from veresti was
useful; though the doors were all open i broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered i might not get out. jonathan's bitter experi
 
 ___________________________
 
yes of the fair
woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a
kiss--and man is weak. and there remain one more victim in the vampire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the un-dead!...

there is some fascination, surely, when i am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such
as the lairs of the count have had. yes, i was moved--i, van helsing,
with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--i was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my
very soul. it may have been that the need of natural sleep, and the
strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. certain it
was that i was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the soun
 
 ___________________________
 
 the angle of perspective of the
carpathian mountains was far below it. we saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. there was something wild and uncanny about the place. we
could hear the distant howling of wolves. they were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. i knew from the way dr. van helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. the rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.

in a little while the professor signalled to me, so i got up and joined
him. he had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. he took me by the
hand and drew me in: "see!" he said, "here you will be in shelter; and

 
 ___________________________
 
aste of desolation.

when we got home we were talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for godalming and seward are both happily
married. i took the papers from the safe where they had been ever since
our return so long ago. we were struck with the fact, that in all the
mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one
authentic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later
note-books of mina and seward and myself, and van helsing's memorandum.
we could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as
proofs of so wild a story. van helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

"we want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! this boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

jonathan harker.

                         