ke some of the gold with
me, lest i want it later. i may find a way from this dreadful place.

and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

at least god's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. at its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
good-bye, all! mina!




chapter v

_letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra._


"_9 may._

"my dearest lucy,--

"forgive my long delay in writing, but i have been simply overwhelmed
with work. the life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
i am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. i have been working very hard
lately, because i want to keep up with jonathan's studies, and i have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. when we are married i shall
be able to be useful to
 
 ___________________________
 
ried lines from jonathan
from transylvania. he is well, and will be returning in about a week. i
am longing to hear all his news. it must be so nice to see strange
countries. i wonder if we--i mean jonathan and i--shall ever see them
together. there is the ten o'clock bell ringing. good-bye.

"your loving

"mina.

"tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me anything for
a long time. i hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_17, chatham street_,

"_wednesday_.

"my dearest mina,--

"i must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. i
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. besides, i have nothing to tell you. there is really nothing
to interest you. town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. as to the
tall, curly-haired man, i suppose it was the one who
 
 ___________________________
 
ndressing, as we used to sit; and i would try to tell you what i feel.
i do not know how i am writing this even to you. i am afraid to stop,
or i should tear up the letter, and i don't want to stop, for i _do_ so
want to tell you all. let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. mina, i must stop. good-night. bless me in your
prayers; and, mina, pray for my happiness.

"lucy.

"p.s.--i need not tell you this is a secret. good-night again.

"l."

_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_24 may_.

"my dearest mina,--

"thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. it was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

"my dear, it never rains but it pours. how true the old proverbs are.
here am i, who shall be twenty in september, and yet i never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day i have had three.
just fancy! three proposals in one day! isn't it awful! i feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for t
 
 ___________________________
 
rained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded
room. his cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

"i shall be patient, master. it is coming--coming--coming!"

so i took the hint, and came too. i was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and i feel i shall get some sleep to-night.




chapter ix


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

"_buda-pesth, 24 august._

"my dearest lucy,--

"i know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at whitby. well, my dear, i got to hull
all right, and caught the boat to hamburg, and then the train on here. i
feel that i can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that i
knew i was coming to jonathan, and, that as i should have to do some
nursing, i had better get all the sleep i could.... i found my dear one,
oh, so thin and
 
 ___________________________
 
e you too may be all happy as i am. my dear,
please almighty god, your life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. i must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but i do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as i am _now_. good-bye, my dear. i shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. i must stop, for jonathan
is waking--i must attend to my husband!

"your ever-loving

"mina harker."


_letter, lucy westenra to mina harker._

"_whitby, 30 august._

"my dearest mina,--

"oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. i wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. the strong air would soon restore jonathan; it has
quite restored me. i have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. you will be glad to know that i have quite given
up walking in my sleep. i think i have not stirred out of my bed for a
wee
 
 ___________________________
 
s it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. the patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

"you needn't tie me; i shall go quietly!" without trouble we came back
to the house. i feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_lucy westenra's diary_

_hillingham, 24 august._--i must imitate mina, and keep writing things
down. then we can have long talks when we do meet. i wonder when it will
be. i wish she were with me again, for i feel so unhappy. last night i
seemed to be dreaming again just as i was at whitby. perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. it is all dark and horrid to me,
for i can remember nothing; but i am full of vague fear, and i feel so
weak and worn out. when arthur came to lunch he looke
 
 ___________________________
 
you must stay
here. i shall leave this door open and my door too. you can lie on the
sofa for i know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. if i want anything i
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." i could not but
acquiesce, for i was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had i tried.
so, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
i lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_lucy westenra's diary._

_9 september._--i feel so happy to-night. i have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. somehow arthur feels very,
very close to me. i seem to feel his presence warm about me. i suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where
 
 ___________________________
 
 to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. to-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which i have work. ho! ho!"

he seemed so confident that i, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. it must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
i felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




chapter xi

_lucy westenra's diary._


_12 september._--how good they all are to me. i quite love that dear dr.
van helsing. i wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. he
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. and yet he must have been
right, for i feel comfort from them already. somehow, i do not dread
being alone to-night, and i can go to sleep without fear. i shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. oh, the terrible struggle that i
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
e of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

after another hour lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal.

what does it all mean? i am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_lucy westenra's diary._

_17 september._--four days and nights of peace. i am getting so strong
again that i hardly know myself. it is as if i had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. i have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising b
 
 ___________________________
 
eptember._--just off for train to london. the arrival of van
helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. a whole night lost, and i know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. i shall take this cylinder with
me, and then i can complete my entry on lucy's phonograph.


_memorandum left by lucy westenra._

_17 september. night._--i write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. this is an exact
record of what took place to-night. i feel i am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if i die in the
doing.

i went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as dr.
van helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

i was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walk
 
 ___________________________
 
e since we arrived. he too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

it was now nearly one o'clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with
her. i am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and i am entering
this on lucy's phonograph. until six o'clock they are to try to rest. i
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. god help us all.


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

(unopened by her.)

"_17 september._

"my dearest lucy,--

"it seems _an age_ since i heard from you, or indeed since i wrote. you
will pardon me, i know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. well, i got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, mr. hawkins. he took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. after
 
 ___________________________
 
ey are as
follows:--jack smollet, of dudding's rents, king george's road, great
walworth, and thomas snelling, peter farley's row, guide court, bethnal
green. they are both in the employment of harris & sons, moving and
shipment company, orange master's yard, soho.

"i shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

"believe me, dear sir,

"yours faithfully,

"patrick hennessey."


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra_.

(unopened by her.)

"_18 september._

"my dearest lucy,--

"such a sad blow has befallen us. mr. hawkins has died very suddenly.
some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. i never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me.
jonathan is greatly distressed. it is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his
 
 ___________________________
 
, if i am ready,
poor jonathan may not be upset, for i can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. if ever jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and i can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how i may comfort him.


_letter, van helsing to mrs. harker._

"_24 september._

(_confidence_)

"dear madam,--

"i pray you to pardon my writing, in that i am so far friend as that i
sent to you sad news of miss lucy westenra's death. by the kindness of
lord godalming, i am empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them i find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, help me. it is
for others' good that i ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. may it
be that i see you? you can trust m
 
 ___________________________
 
sing at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. he
said to me:--

"mrs. harker, is it not?" i bowed assent.

"that was miss mina murray?" again i assented.

"it is mina murray that i came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child lucy westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead i come."

"sir," i said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of lucy westenra." and i held out my hand. he took
it and said tenderly:--

"oh, madam mina, i knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but i had yet to learn----" he finished his speech with a courtly
bow. i asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"i have read your letters to miss lucy. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir-haired child. there was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. we
were starting forward, but the professor's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. it was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. my own heart grew cold as ice,
and i could hear the gasp of arthur, as we recognised the features of
lucy westenra. lucy westenra, but yet how changed. the sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. van helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. van helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained