ttempted. i shall take some of the gold with
me, lest i want it later. i may find a way from this dreadful place.

and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

at least god's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. at its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
good-bye, all! mina!




chapter v

_letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra._


"_9 may._

"my dearest lucy,--

"forgive my long delay in writing, but i have been simply overwhelmed
with work. the life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
i am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. i have been working very hard
lately, because i want to keep up with jonathan's studies, and i have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. when we are married i shall
b
 
 ___________________________
 
onathan
from transylvania. he is well, and will be returning in about a week. i
am longing to hear all his news. it must be so nice to see strange
countries. i wonder if we--i mean jonathan and i--shall ever see them
together. there is the ten o'clock bell ringing. good-bye.

"your loving

"mina.

"tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me anything for
a long time. i hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_17, chatham street_,

"_wednesday_.

"my dearest mina,--

"i must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. i
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. besides, i have nothing to tell you. there is really nothing
to interest you. town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. as to the
tall, curly-haired man, i suppose it was the one who was with me at
 
 ___________________________
 
used to sit; and i would try to tell you what i feel.
i do not know how i am writing this even to you. i am afraid to stop,
or i should tear up the letter, and i don't want to stop, for i _do_ so
want to tell you all. let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. mina, i must stop. good-night. bless me in your
prayers; and, mina, pray for my happiness.

"lucy.

"p.s.--i need not tell you this is a secret. good-night again.

"l."

_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_24 may_.

"my dearest mina,--

"thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. it was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

"my dear, it never rains but it pours. how true the old proverbs are.
here am i, who shall be twenty in september, and yet i never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day i have had three.
just fancy! three proposals in one day! isn't it awful! i feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor 
 
 ___________________________
 
t heart
that god has made and the best worth winning. we promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. we shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. come!

"yours, as ever and always,

"quincey p. morris."


_telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey p. morris._

"_26 may._

"count me in every time. i bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

"art."




chapter vi

mina murray's journal


_24 july. whitby._--lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the crescent in
which they have rooms. this is a lovely place. the little river, the
esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the
harbour. a great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems somehow further away than it really is. the valley is
beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on the
 
 ___________________________
 
whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly i began a new record. so it will be until the great
recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. oh, lucy, lucy, i cannot be angry with you, nor can i be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but i must only wait on
hopeless and work. work! work!

if i only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.


_mina murray's journal._

_26 july._--i am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it
is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time. and
there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. i am unhappy about lucy and about jonathan. i
had not heard from jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear mr. hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. i had written asking him if he had heard, and he said
 
 ___________________________
 
; "she's a russian, by the look of her;
but she's knocking about in the queerest way. she doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. look there again! she is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. we'll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow."




chapter vii

cutting from "the dailygraph," 8 august


(_pasted in mina murray's journal._)

from a correspondent.

_whitby_.

one of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. the weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
august. saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to mulgrave woods,
robin hood's bay, rig mill, runswick, staithes, and the various trips in
the neighbourhood 
 
 ___________________________
 
 then brought back to tate hill pier and up the abbey
steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. the owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

no trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, i
believe, be adopted by the town. to-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more "mystery of the sea."


_mina murray's journal._

_8 august._--lucy was very restless all night, and i, too, could not
sleep. the storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. when a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. strangely enough, lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed herself. fortunately, each time i awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. it
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as
 
 ___________________________
 
ight, i am sure. the
whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead
man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the
touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all
afford material for her dreams.

i think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so i
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to robin hood's bay and
back. she ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.




chapter viii

mina murray's journal


_same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--oh, but i am tired! if it were not that i
had made my diary a duty i should not open it to-night. we had a lovely
walk. lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, i think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse,
and frightened the wits out of us. i believe we forgot everything
except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. we had a capital "severe 
 
 ___________________________
 
urs,

"samuel f. billington & son."_


_letter, messrs. carter, paterson & co., london, to messrs. billington &
son, whitby._

"_21 august._

"dear sirs,--

"we beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. goods are
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel
in main hall, as directed.

"we are, dear sirs,

"yours respectfully.

"_pro_ carter, paterson & co."


_mina murray's journal._

_18 august._--i am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. lucy is ever so much better. last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. the roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. if she
were in any way anæmic i could understand it, but she is not. she is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. all the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just rem
 
 ___________________________
 
 it lies. it is of
jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. my journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. i am only taking one change of
dress; lucy will bring my trunk to london and keep it till i send for
it, for it may be that ... i must write no more; i must keep it to say
to jonathan, my husband. the letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_letter, sister agatha, hospital of st. joseph and ste. mary,
buda-pesth, to miss wilhelmina murray._

"_12 august._

"dear madam,--

"i write by desire of mr. jonathan harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to god and st. joseph
and ste. mary. he has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. he wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post i write for him to mr. peter hawkins,
exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is complete
 
 ___________________________
 
that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tightens. the forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. he
said to me:--

"mrs. harker, is it not?" i bowed assent.

"that was miss mina murray?" again i assented.

"it is mina murray that i came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child lucy westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead i come."

"sir," i said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of lucy westenra." and i held out my hand. he took
it and said tenderly:--

"oh, madam mina, i knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but i had yet to learn----" he finished his speech with a courtly
bow. i asked