out the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, jonathan. you
will tell him, because i would, if i were in your place, certainly tell
arthur. a woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and i must be fair. men like women, certainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and women, i am afraid, are not always
quite as fair as they should be. well, my dear, number one came just
before lunch. i told you of him, dr. john seward, the lunatic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. he was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all the same. he had evidently been schooling
himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do
when they are cool, and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept
playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. he spoke to
me, mina, very straightforwardly. he told me how d
 
 ___________________________
 
and the
kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. i
tell you these facts that you may know why i have such confidence in
him. i have asked him to come at once. i shall see miss westenra
to-morrow again. she is to meet me at the stores, so that i may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"yours always,

"john seward."


_letter, abraham van helsing, m. d., d. ph., d. lit., etc., etc., to dr.
seward._

"_2 september._

"my good friend,--

"when i have received your letter i am already coming to you. by good
fortune i can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have
trusted, for i come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly t
 
 ___________________________
 
d that i would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in lucy's weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. we are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please god, we shall
come through them all right. if any need i shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that i am simply waiting for
news. in haste

yours ever,

"john seward."


_dr. seward's diary._

_7 september._--the first thing van helsing said to me when we met at
liverpool street was:--

"have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?"

"no," i said. "i waited till i had seen you, as i said in my telegram. i
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as miss
westenra was not so well, and that i should let him know if need be."

"right, my friend," he said, "quite right! better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall
 
 ___________________________
 
you which will not be dear to me. jonathan asks me to send his
'respectful duty,' but i do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm hawkins & harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and i love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, i send you simply his 'love' instead. good-bye, my dearest
lucy, and all blessings on you.

"yours,

"mina harker."


_report from patrick hennessey, m. d., m. r. c. s. l. k. q. c. p. i.,
etc., etc., to john seward, m. d._

"_20 september._

"my dear sir,--

"in accordance with your wishes, i enclose report of the conditions of
everything left in my charge.... with regard to patient, renfield, there
is more to say. he has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. this afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will r
 
 ___________________________
 
ess of
lord godalming, i am empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them i find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, help me. it is
for others' good that i ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. may it
be that i see you? you can trust me. i am friend of dr. john seward and
of lord godalming (that was arthur of miss lucy). i must keep it private
for the present from all. i should come to exeter to see you at once if
you tell me i am privilege to come, and where and when. i implore your
pardon, madam. i have read your letters to poor lucy, and know how good
you are and how your husband suffer; so i pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. again your pardon, and forgive me.

"van helsing."


_telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing._
 
 ___________________________
 
g over me ever since, all came in a tumult. i suppose i
was hysterical, for i threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. he took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

"my life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that i have not
had much time for friendships; but since i have been summoned to here by
my friend john seward i have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that i feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. believe, me, then, that i come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what i
am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. i am glad, glad, that i may here be of some
use to you; for
 
 ___________________________
 
the
berkeley hotel at ten of the clock. i shall send for arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of america that gave his blood. later we
shall all have work to do. i come with you so far as piccadilly and
there dine, for i must be back here before the sun set."

so we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to piccadilly.


_note left by van helsing in his portmanteau, berkeley hotel directed to
john seward, m. d._

(not delivered.)

"_27 september._

"friend john,--

"i write this in case anything should happen. i go alone to watch in
that churchyard. it pleases me that the un-dead, miss lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.
therefore i shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. she is young as un-dead,
and will heed. moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they
may not prev
 
 ___________________________
 
 we go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. god grant that we may be guided aright, and
that he will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. as for me, i am not worthy in his
sight. alas! i am unclean to his eyes, and shall be until he may deign
to let me stand forth in his sight as one of those who have not incurred
his wrath.


_memorandum by abraham van helsing._

_4 november._--this to my old and true friend john seward, m.d., of
purfleet, london, in case i may not see him. it may explain. it is
morning, and i write by a fire which all the night i have kept
alive--madam mina aiding me. it is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. it seems to have
affected madam mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself. she sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! she who is usual
so ale