here are we to turn for help? we must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's purchase. you are exhausted already; i am
exhausted too. i fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. what are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?"

"what's the matter with me, anyhow?"

the voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of quincey morris. van
helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as i cried out: "quincey morris!" and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

"what brought you here?" i cried as our hands met.

"i guess art is the cause."

he handed me a telegram:--

"have not heard from seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
cannot leave. father still in same condition. send me word how lucy is.
do not delay.--holmwood."

"i think i came ju
 
 ___________________________
 
cy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. however, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and van
helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. her faint became a profound slumber. the professor watched
whilst i went downstairs with quincey morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. i left quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. then a thought struck me, and i went back to the room where
lucy now was. when i came softly in, i found van helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. he had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. there was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. let us
fill up the certificate at once, and i shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker."

"good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truly miss lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. one, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. ah yes, i know, friend john; i am not blind! i love you all the
more for it! now go."

in the hall i met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur telling him
that mrs. westenra was dead; that lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that van helsing and i were with her. i told him
where i was going, and he hurried me out, but as i was going said:--

"when you come back, jack, may i have two words with you all to
ourselves?" i nodded in reply and went out. i found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the cof
 
 ___________________________
 
ring, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. van helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 september._--all last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. the professor and
i took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. quincey morris said nothing about his intention, but i knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

when the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor lucy's
strength. she was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. at times she
slept, and both van helsing and i noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was sof
 
 ___________________________
 
whoever he
may be:--

"you will be grieved to hear that mrs. westenra died five days ago, and
that lucy died the day before yesterday. they were both buried to-day."

oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! god help us all to bear our
troubles.


_dr. seward's diary._

_22 september._--it is all over. arthur has gone back to ring, and has
taken quincey morris with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! i believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral viking. if america
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. van helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. he goes over to amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. h
 
 ___________________________
 
inality. not a week
since i said "finis," and yet here i am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. until this afternoon i had no cause to
think of what is done. renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. he was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. i had a letter from arthur, written on sunday, and from it i
gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. quincey morris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from him i hear that
arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. as for myself, i was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which i used to have for it, so that i might
fairly have said that the wound which poor lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. everything is, however, now reopened; and what is t
 
 ___________________________
 
s a grave duty to be done
there. you were doubtless surprised at my letter?" this query was
directly addressed to lord godalming.

"i was. it rather upset me for a bit. there has been so much trouble
around my house of late that i could do without any more. i have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. quincey and i talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now i can say for myself
that i'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."

"me too," said quincey morris laconically.

"oh," said the professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend john here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin."

it was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

"i want your permission to do what i think good this night. it is, i
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is i propose to do 
 
 ___________________________
 
 when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. he evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. when he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
van helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

the coffin was empty!

for several minutes no one spoke a word. the silence was broken by
quincey morris:--

"professor, i answered for you. your word is all i want. i wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--i wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
is this your doing?"

"i swear to you by all that i hold sacred that i have not removed nor
touched her. what happened was this: two nights ago my friend seward and
i came here--with good purpose, believe me. i opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, a
 
 ___________________________
 
aters, my child. by this time to-morrow you will, please god, have
passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. till then i shall not ask you to forgive me."

arthur and quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. we had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 september, night._--a little before twelve o'clock we three--arthur,
quincey morris, and myself--called for the professor. it was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. of
course, arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. we got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. van helsi
 
 ___________________________
 
d, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when i
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. a brave man's hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music.

when the professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and i
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

"i answer for mina and myself," he said.

"count me in, professor," said mr. quincey morris, laconically as usual.

"i am with you," said lord godalming, "for lucy's sake, if for no other
reason."

dr. seward simply nodded. the professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. i took
his right hand, and lord godalming his left; jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to mr. morris. so as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. i felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back
 
 ___________________________
 
 his
violent fits." i knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so i said: "all right; i'll go now"; and i asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as i had to go and see my "patient."

"take me with you, friend john," said the professor. "his case in your
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_
case. i should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is
disturbed."

"may i come also?" asked lord godalming.

"me too?" said quincey morris. "may i come?" said harker. i nodded, and
we all went down the passage together.

we found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than i had ever seen him. there was an
unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything i had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would
prevail with others entirely sane. we all four went into the room, but
none of the others at first said anything. his request w
 
 ___________________________
 
 his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. "i appeal to your friends," he said, "they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. by the way, you have
not introduced me." i was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that i at once made the introduction: "lord
godalming; professor van helsing; mr. quincey morris, of texas; mr.
renfield." he shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"lord godalming, i had the honour of seconding your father at the
windham; i grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. he was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, i have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on derby night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great
state. its reception into the union was a precedent which may have
fa
 
 ___________________________
 
tly as we saw the
workman come out and bring in his bag. then he held the door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock.
this he finally handed to lord godalming, who took out his purse and
gave him something. the man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole
transaction.

when the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. it was immediately opened by quincey morris, beside whom stood
lord godalming lighting a cigar.

"the place smells so vilely," said the latter as we came in. it did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the count had been using the
place pretty freely. we moved to explore the house, all keeping together
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the count might not be in the
house. in the din
 
 ___________________________
 
 bundle;
deeds of the purchase of the houses at mile end and bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. all were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. there were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. when we had examined this last find, lord godalming
and quincey morris taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the
houses in the east and the south, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. the rest of us
are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of
the count.




chapter xxiii

dr. seward's diary


_3 october._--the time seemed terrible long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of godalming and quincey morris. the professor tried to keep
our minds active by usi
 
 ___________________________
 
rly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the professor's heart and mine beat loudly. we looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. van
helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. the gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw lord godalming and quincey morris. they came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall:--

"it is all right. we found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed them all!"

"destroyed?" asked the professor.

"for him!" we were silent for a minute, and then quincey said:--

"there's nothing to do but to wait here. if, however, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave mrs. harker
alone after sunset."

"he will be here befo
 
 ___________________________
 
 way. believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. we should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. hush, there is no time now. have all your
arms! be ready!" he held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall door.

i could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. in all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, quincey morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and arthur and i had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. with a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. van helsing, harker, and i were
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
god
 
 ___________________________
 
 perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. it may
be! i shall try to think as she does. we have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. it is better to wait till we see the professor and
the others after their investigations.

the day is running by more quickly than i ever thought a day could run
for me again. it is now three o'clock.


_mina harker's journal._

_5 october, 5 p. m._--our meeting for report. present: professor van
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan
harker, mina harker.

dr. van helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound count dracula made his escape:--

"as i knew that he wanted to get back to transylvania, i felt sure that
he must go by the danube mouth; or by somewhere in the black sea, since
by that way he come. it was a dreary blank that was before us. _omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the black sea las
 
 ___________________________
 
e, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the count can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. thus, in order to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. then we shall at any rate
be in varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." here quincey morris
added:--

"i understand that the count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. i propose that we add winchesters to
our armament. i have a kind of belief in a winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. do you remember, art, when we had the pack
after us at tobolsk? what wouldn't we have given then for a repeater
apiece!"

"good!" said van helsing, "winchesters it shall be. quincey's head is
level at all times, but most so when there 
 
 ___________________________
 
not as we should know
that they will be. transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. it was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. van helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with the almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. lord
godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. i was myself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. quincey morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which i knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant "action." mrs. harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of
the great kukri knife and rested there. "when does the next tra
 
 ___________________________
 
 thanked that all has not been in vain! see! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! the curse has passed away!"

and, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




                                  note


seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. it
is an added joy to mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the same
day as that on which quincey morris died. his mother holds, i know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into
him. his bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him quincey.

in the summer of this year we made a journey to transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. it was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths.