disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. in selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves. what i think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
balanced with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of
accidents can balance it.


_letter, quincey p. morris to hon. arthur holmwood._

"_25 may._

"my dear art,--

"we've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another's wounds after trying a landing at the marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of titicaca. there are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. won't you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? i have no hesitation in asking
you, as i know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. there will o
 
 ___________________________
 
too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that god has made and the best worth winning. we promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. we shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. come!

"yours, as ever and always,

"quincey p. morris."


_telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey p. morris._

"_26 may._

"count me in every time. i bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

"art."




chapter vi

mina murray's journal


_24 july. whitby._--lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the crescent in
which they have rooms. this is a lovely place. the little river, the
esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the
harbour. a great viaduct runs across
 
 ___________________________
 
, she is
naturally anxious about lucy, and she tells me that her husband, lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. lucy is to be married in the
autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. i sympathise with her, for i do the same, only jonathan
and i will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. mr. holmwood--he is the hon. arthur holmwood, only
son of lord godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and i think dear lucy is
counting the moments till he comes. she wants to take him up to the seat
on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of whitby. i daresay it
is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he
arrives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 july._--no news from jonathan. i am getting quite uneasy about him,
thoug
 
 ___________________________
 
ve been falling
asleep. there was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, but i
did not mind it, and as i remember no more, i suppose i must then have
fallen asleep. more bad dreams. i wish i could remember them. this
morning i am horribly weak. my face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains
me. it must be something wrong with my lungs, for i don't seem ever to
get air enough. i shall try to cheer up when arthur comes, or else i
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_letter, arthur holmwood to dr. seward._

"_albemarle hotel, 31 august._

"my dear jack,--

"i want you to do me a favour. lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. i have
asked her if there is any cause; i do not dare to ask her mother, for to
disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. mrs. westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor lucy does not know i
 
 ___________________________
 
l task for you, i know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
i must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. you are to come to lunch at
hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
mrs. westenra, and after lunch lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. i shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; i
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as i
can after you have seen her. do not fail!

"arthur."


_telegram, arthur holmwood to seward._

"_1 september._

"am summoned to see my father, who is worse. am writing. write me fully
by to-night's post to ring. wire me if necessary."


_letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood._

"_2 september._

"my dear old fellow,--

"with regard to miss westenra's health i hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any malady
that i know of. at the same time, i am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is w
 
 ___________________________
 
 great fortune could do. but it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that i come.
have then rooms for me at the great eastern hotel, so that i may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it is likely that i may have to return here that
night. but if need be i shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. till then good-bye, my friend john.

 "van helsing."


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._

"_3 september._

"my dear art,--

"van helsing has come and gone. he came on with me to hillingham, and
found that, by lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. van helsing made a very careful examination of
the patient. he is to report to me, and i shall advise you, for of
course i was not present all the time. he is, i fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. when i told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he s
 
 ___________________________
 
 helsing, amsterdam._

"_4 september._--patient still better to-day."


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

"_5 september._--patient greatly improved. good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back."


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

"_6 september._--terrible change for the worse. come at once; do not
lose an hour. i hold over telegram to holmwood till have seen you."




chapter x


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._

"_6 september._

"my dear art,--

"my news to-day is not so good. lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
there is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; mrs.
westenra was naturally anxious concerning lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. i took advantage of the opportunity, and told
her that my old master, van helsing, the great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that i would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and 
 
 ___________________________
 
rdale. he was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. during lunch he told us that mrs. westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of lucy's father's which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to arthur holmwood. when he had
told us so much he went on:--

"frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out
her wishes. of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. we were
right in pr