ome of the gold with
me, lest i want it later. i may find a way from this dreadful place.

and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

at least god's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. at its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
good-bye, all! mina!




chapter v

_letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra._


"_9 may._

"my dearest lucy,--

"forgive my long delay in writing, but i have been simply overwhelmed
with work. the life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
i am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. i have been working very hard
lately, because i want to keep up with jonathan's studies, and i have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. when we are married i shall
be able to be useful to
 
 ___________________________
 
 lines from jonathan
from transylvania. he is well, and will be returning in about a week. i
am longing to hear all his news. it must be so nice to see strange
countries. i wonder if we--i mean jonathan and i--shall ever see them
together. there is the ten o'clock bell ringing. good-bye.

"your loving

"mina.

"tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me anything for
a long time. i hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_17, chatham street_,

"_wednesday_.

"my dearest mina,--

"i must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. i
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. besides, i have nothing to tell you. there is really nothing
to interest you. town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. as to the
tall, curly-haired man, i suppose it was the one who
 
 ___________________________
 
ssing, as we used to sit; and i would try to tell you what i feel.
i do not know how i am writing this even to you. i am afraid to stop,
or i should tear up the letter, and i don't want to stop, for i _do_ so
want to tell you all. let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. mina, i must stop. good-night. bless me in your
prayers; and, mina, pray for my happiness.

"lucy.

"p.s.--i need not tell you this is a secret. good-night again.

"l."

_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

"_24 may_.

"my dearest mina,--

"thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. it was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

"my dear, it never rains but it pours. how true the old proverbs are.
here am i, who shall be twenty in september, and yet i never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day i have had three.
just fancy! three proposals in one day! isn't it awful! i feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for t
 
 ___________________________
 
 me a letter from
him. i had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. it is only a line dated from castle dracula,
and says that he is just starting for home. that is not like jonathan;
i do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. then, too, lucy,
although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided
that i am to lock the door of our room every night. mrs. westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and
along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over
with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about lucy, and she tells me that her husband, lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. lucy is to be married in the
autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how h
 
 ___________________________
 
"severe tea" at robin hood's
bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over
the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. i believe we should have
shocked the "new woman" with our appetites. men are more tolerant, bless
them! then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. lucy was
really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
the young curate came in, however, and mrs. westenra asked him to stay
for supper. lucy and i had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; i
know it was a hard fight on my part, and i am quite heroic. i think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new
class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. lucy is asleep and
breathing softly. she has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. if mr. holmwood fell in love wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. when i apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_same day, night._--we passed a happy day. the air was clear, and the
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. we took our lunch to mulgrave
woods, mrs. westenra driving by the road and lucy and i walking by the
cliff-path and joining her at the gate. i felt a little sad myself, for
i could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
jonathan been with me. but there! i must only be patient. in the evening
we strolled in the casino terrace, and heard some good music by spohr
and mackenzie, and went to bed early. lucy seems more restful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. i shall lock the door
and secure the key
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, and he's chained to the wall in the padded
room. his cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

"i shall be patient, master. it is coming--coming--coming!"

so i took the hint, and came too. i was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and i feel i shall get some sleep to-night.




chapter ix


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

"_buda-pesth, 24 august._

"my dearest lucy,--

"i know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at whitby. well, my dear, i got to hull
all right, and caught the boat to hamburg, and then the train on here. i
feel that i can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that i
knew i was coming to jonathan, and, that as i should have to do some
nursing, i had better get all the sleep i could.... i found my dear one,
oh, so thin and
 
 ___________________________
 
u too may be all happy as i am. my dear,
please almighty god, your life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. i must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but i do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as i am _now_. good-bye, my dear. i shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. i must stop, for jonathan
is waking--i must attend to my husband!

"your ever-loving

"mina harker."


_letter, lucy westenra to mina harker._

"_whitby, 30 august._

"my dearest mina,--

"oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. i wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. the strong air would soon restore jonathan; it has
quite restored me. i have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. you will be glad to know that i have quite given
up walking in my sleep. i think i have not stirred out of my bed for a
wee
 
 ___________________________
 
 looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. the patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

"you needn't tie me; i shall go quietly!" without trouble we came back
to the house. i feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_lucy westenra's diary_

_hillingham, 24 august._--i must imitate mina, and keep writing things
down. then we can have long talks when we do meet. i wonder when it will
be. i wish she were with me again, for i feel so unhappy. last night i
seemed to be dreaming again just as i was at whitby. perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. it is all dark and horrid to me,
for i can remember nothing; but i am full of vague fear, and i feel so
weak and worn out. when arthur came to lunch he looke
 
 ___________________________
 
 cheer up when arthur comes, or else i
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_letter, arthur holmwood to dr. seward._

"_albemarle hotel, 31 august._

"my dear jack,--

"i want you to do me a favour. lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. i have
asked her if there is any cause; i do not dare to ask her mother, for to
disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. mrs. westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor lucy does not know it yet. i
am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl's mind. i am
almost distracted when i think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. i
told her i should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at
first--i know why, old fellow--she finally consented. it will be a
painful task for you, i know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
i must not hesitate to ask, or you to a
 
 ___________________________
 
ct. you are to come to lunch at
hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
mrs. westenra, and after lunch lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. i shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; i
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as i
can after you have seen her. do not fail!

"arthur."


_telegram, arthur holmwood to seward._

"_1 september._

"am summoned to see my father, who is worse. am writing. write me fully
by to-night's post to ring. wire me if necessary."


_letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood._

 
 ___________________________
 

"_2 september._

"my dear old fellow,--

"with regard to miss westenra's health i hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any malady
that i know of. at the same time, i am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when i saw
her last. of course you must bear in mind that i did not have full
opportunity of examination such as i should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. i had better t
 
 ___________________________
 
ell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. i shall then say what i have
done and propose doing.

"i found miss westenra in seemingly gay spirits. her mother was present,
and in a few seconds i made up my mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. i have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is.
we lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. then mrs. westenra went to lie down, and lucy was left with
me. we went into her 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed out in the night and went to east cliff, where
miss murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. i am in doubt, and so have done the best thing i know of; i
have written to my old friend and master, professor van helsing, of
amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. i have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, i have mentioned to him who you are and your
relations to miss westenra. this, my dear fellow, is in obedience to
your wishes, for i am only too proud and happy to do anything i can for
her. van helsing would, i know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
wishes. he is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows
what he is talking about better than any one else. he is a philosopher
and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists of his day;
and he has, i believe, an absolu
 
 ___________________________
 
open mind. this, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the
kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. i
tell you these facts that you may know why i have such confidence in
him. i have asked him to come at once. i shall see miss westenra
to-morrow again. she is to meet me at the stores, so that i may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"yours always,

"john seward."


_letter, abraham van helsing, m. d., d. ph., d. lit., etc., etc., to dr.
seward._

"_2 september._

"my good friend,--

"when i have received your letter i am already coming to you. by good
fortune i can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. were fortune other, then it were bad for those wh
 
 ___________________________
 
 good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? i think it would be good for me."

"and the flies?" i said.

"yes! the flies like it, too, and i like the flies; therefore i like
it." and there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. i procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, i suppose, any in the world. i wish i could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_midnight._--another change in him. i had been to see miss westenra,
whom i found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at our
own gate looking at the sunset, when once more i heard him yelling. as
his room is on this side of the house, i could hear it better than in
the morning. it was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over london, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
bu
 
 ___________________________
 
doubts and surmises.
hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. we
learn from failure, not from success!"

when i described lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. he took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, the
equipment of a professor of the healing craft. when we were shown in,
mrs. westenra met us. she was alarmed, but not nearly so much as i
expected to find her. nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some
cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. it is
something like the way dame nature gathers round a foreign body an
envelope of som
 
 ___________________________
 

"remember, she is your charge. if you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!"


_dr. seward's diary--continued._

_8 september._--i sat up all night with lucy. the opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but i could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. when i told mrs. westenra
that dr. van helsing had directed that i should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. i was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. when her maid had prepared her for the
night i came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. she did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever i caught her eye. after a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sl
 
 ___________________________
 
must stay
here. i shall leave this door open and my door too. you can lie on the
sofa for i know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. if i want anything i
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." i could not but
acquiesce, for i was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had i tried.
so, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
i lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_lucy westenra's diary._

_9 september._--i feel so happy to-night. i have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. somehow arthur feels very,
very close to me. i seem to feel his presence warm about me. i suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where
 
 ___________________________
 
follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. to-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which i have work. ho! ho!"

he seemed so confident that i, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. it must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
i felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




chapter xi

_lucy westenra's diary._


_12 september._--how good they all are to me. i quite love that dear dr.
van helsing. i wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. he
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. and yet he must have been
right, for i feel comfort from them already. somehow, i do not dread
being alone to-night, and i can go to sleep without fear. i shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. oh, the terrible struggle that i
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
sual,
up to time. the carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. the
professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

let all be put down exactly. van helsing and i arrived at hillingham at
eight o'clock. it was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature's
annual work. the leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. when we entered we met
mrs. westenra coming out of the morning room. she is always an early
riser. she greeted us warmly and said:--

"you will be glad to know that lucy is better. the dear child is still
asleep. i looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest i
should disturb her." the professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. he
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

"aha! i thought i had diagnosed the case. my treatment is working," to
which she answered:--

"you must not take all the credit to yourse
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. "no!" he said. "to-day you must operate. i shall provide.
you are weakened already." as he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. this time i
watched whilst van helsing recruited himself and rested.

presently he took an opportunity of telling mrs. westenra that she must
not remove anything from lucy's room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

after another hour lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal.

what does it all mean? i am beginning to 
 
 ___________________________
 
wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_lucy westenra's diary._

_17 september._--four days and nights of peace. i am getting so strong
again that i hardly know myself. it is as if i had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. i have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising b
 
 ___________________________
 
mber._--just off for train to london. the arrival of van
helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. a whole night lost, and i know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. i shall take this cylinder with
me, and then i can complete my entry on lucy's phonograph.


_memorandum left by lucy westenra._

_17 september. night._--i write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. this is an exact
record of what took place to-night. i feel i am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if i die in the
doing.

i went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as dr.
van helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

i was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walk
 
 ___________________________
 
 it all in good time; but it will be later. and now what
is it that you came to me to say?" this brought me back to fact, and i
was all myself again.

"i came to speak about the certificate of death. if we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. i am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor lucy, if nothing else did. i know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that mrs. westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. let us
fill up the certificate at once, and i shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker."

"good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truly miss lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. one, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. ah yes, i know, friend john; i am not blind! i love you all the
more for it! now go."

in
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hall i met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur telling him
that mrs. westenra was dead; that lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that van helsing and i were with her. i told him
where i was going, and he hurried me out, but as i was going said:--

"when you come back, jack, may i have two words with you all to
ourselves?" i nodded in reply and went out. i found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

when i got back quincey was
 
 ___________________________
 
nce we arrived. he too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

it was now nearly one o'clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with
her. i am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and i am entering
this on lucy's phonograph. until six o'clock they are to try to rest. i
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. god help us all.


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

(unopened by her.)

"_17 september._

"my dearest lucy,--

"it seems _an age_ since i heard from you, or indeed since i wrote. you
will pardon me, i know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. well, i got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, mr. hawkins. he took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. after
 
 ___________________________
 
re as
follows:--jack smollet, of dudding's rents, king george's road, great
walworth, and thomas snelling, peter farley's row, guide court, bethnal
green. they are both in the employment of harris & sons, moving and
shipment company, orange master's yard, soho.

"i shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

"believe me, dear sir,

"yours faithfully,

"patrick hennessey."


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra_.

(unopened by her.)

"_18 september._

"my dearest lucy,--

"such a sad blow has befallen us. mr. hawkins has died very suddenly.
some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. i never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me.
jonathan is greatly distressed. it is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his
 
 ___________________________
 
ok the memorandum which had been
in lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

"when you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late mrs.
westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. for me, i watch
here in the room and in miss lucy's old room all night, and i myself
search for what may be. it is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers."

i went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found
the name and address of mrs. westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. all the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. i had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, van helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

"can i help you, friend john? i am free, and if i may, my service is to
you."

"have you got what you looked for?" i asked, to which he replied:--

"i did not look for any specific thing. i only hoped to find, and find i
have, all that there was--o
 
 ___________________________
 
 surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. now we must wait."

he went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

the forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: mr.
marquand, of wholeman, sons, marquand & lidderdale. he was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. during lunch he told us that mrs. westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of lucy's father's which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to arthur holmwood. when he had
told us so much he went on:--

"frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain cont
 
 ___________________________
 
from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others and for her
dear sake to whom i swore to protect."

"and, indeed, indeed, sir," said arthur warmly, "i shall in all ways
trust you. i know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
jack's friend, and you were hers. you shall do what you like."

the professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

"may i ask you something now?"

"certainly."

"you know that mrs. westenra left you all her property?"

"no, poor dear; i never thought of it."

"and as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. i
want you to give me permission to read all miss lucy's papers and
letters. believe me, it is no idle curiosity. i have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. i have them all here. i took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. i shall keep
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 abroad. the time is come, i fear, when i
must open that parcel, and know what is written. oh, jonathan, you will,
i know, forgive me if i do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--a sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from van helsing, whoever he
may be:--

"you will be grieved to hear that mrs. westenra died five days ago, and
that lucy died the day before yesterday. they were both buried to-day."

oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! god help us all to bear our
troubles.


_dr. seward's diary._

_22 september._--it is all over. arthur has gone back to ring, and has
taken quincey morris with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! i believe
in my
 
 ___________________________
 
 i am ready,
poor jonathan may not be upset, for i can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. if ever jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and i can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how i may comfort him.


_letter, van helsing to mrs. harker._

"_24 september._

(_confidence_)

"dear madam,--

"i pray you to pardon my writing, in that i am so far friend as that i
sent to you sad news of miss lucy westenra's death. by the kindness of
lord godalming, i am empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them i find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, help me. it is
for others' good that i ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. may it
be that i see you? you can trust m
 
 ___________________________
 
 at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. he
said to me:--

"mrs. harker, is it not?" i bowed assent.

"that was miss mina murray?" again i assented.

"it is mina murray that i came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child lucy westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead i come."

"sir," i said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of lucy westenra." and i held out my hand. he took
it and said tenderly:--

"oh, madam mina, i knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but i had yet to learn----" he finished his speech with a courtly
bow. i asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"i have read your letters to miss lucy. 
 
 ___________________________
 
. the professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, i was in quite a mixup as to
locality. as we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. at last we reached the wall of
the churchyard, which we climbed over. with some little difficulty--for
it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the westenra tomb. the professor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to
precede him. there was a delicious irony in the offer, in the
courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. my
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring,
one. in the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking
 
 ___________________________
 
aired child. there was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. we
were starting forward, but the professor's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. it was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. my own heart grew cold as ice,
and i could hear the gasp of arthur, as we recognised the features of
lucy westenra. lucy westenra, but yet how changed. the sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. van helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. van helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained
 
 ___________________________
 
so that we can open the door, we need not break house
by the window, as before at miss lucy's."

dr. seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. we pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. it was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
dr. seward's diary of the opening of miss westenra's tomb; i fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. the professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.

"_in manus tuas, domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. we closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. the
professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be i