chapter i

jonathan harker's journal

(_kept in shorthand._)


_3 may. bistritz._--left munich at 8:35 p. m., on 1st may, arriving at
vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. buda-pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which i
got of it from the train and the little i could walk through the
streets. i feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near the correct time as possible. the
impression i had was that we were leavi
 
 ___________________________
 
ted me to go to the golden krone hotel, which i
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course i wanted to see all i could of the ways of the country. i was
evidently expected, for when i got near the door i faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. when i came close she bowed and
said, "the herr englishman?" "yes," i said, "jonathan harker." she
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves,
who had followed her to the door. he went, but immediately returned with
a letter:--

     "my friend.--welcome to the carpathians. i am anxiously expecting
     you. sleep well to-night. at three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. at the borgo
     pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. i trust
     that your journey from london has been a 
 
 ___________________________
 
inable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete
darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. we kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. suddenly, i became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.




chapter ii

jonathan harker's journal--_continued_


_5 may._--i must have been asleep, for certainly if i had been fully
awake i must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. in
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than
it really is. i have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

when the cal√®che stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. again i could not bu
 
 ___________________________
 
ted in
everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. he clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much
more than i did. when i remarked this, he answered:--

"well, but, my friend, is it not needful that i should? when i go there
i shall be all alone, and my friend harker jonathan--nay, pardon me, i
fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend
jonathan harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. he will be
in exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my
other friend, peter hawkins. so!"

we went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
purfleet. when i had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
mr. hawkins, he began to ask me how i had come across so suitable a
place. i read to him the notes which i had made at th
 
 ___________________________
 
h is a sea of green tree
tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. here and
there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through
the forests.

but i am not in heart to describe beauty, for when i had seen the view i
explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. in no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

the castle is a veritable prison, and i am a prisoner!




chapter iii

jonathan harker's journal--_continued_


when i found that i was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over me.
i rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window i could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other feelings. when i look back after a
few hours i think i must have been mad for the time, for i behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. when, however, the conviction had come to me
that i was helpless i sat down quietly--as q
 
 ___________________________
 
lf-smothered child. the women closed round, whilst i was aghast with
horror; but as i looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. there was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. they simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for i could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

then the horror overcame me, and i sank down unconscious.




chapter iv

jonathan harker's journal--_continued_


i awoke in my own bed. if it be that i had not dreamt, the count must
have carried me here. i tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. to be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not my habit. my watch was still unwound, and i am
rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. but these things ar
 
 ___________________________
 
rt. my journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. i am only taking one change of
dress; lucy will bring my trunk to london and keep it till i send for
it, for it may be that ... i must write no more; i must keep it to say
to jonathan, my husband. the letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_letter, sister agatha, hospital of st. joseph and ste. mary,
buda-pesth, to miss wilhelmina murray._

"_12 august._

"dear madam,--

"i write by desire of mr. jonathan harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to god and st. joseph
and ste. mary. he has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. he wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post i write for him to mr. peter hawkins,
exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is completed. he will require some few
weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to-night from
launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that i shall have no fear
to-night. will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not too early for you? you can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to paddington by 2:35. do not answer this, as i shall take it that,
if i do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"believe me,

"your faithful and grateful friend,

"mina harker."


_jonathan harker's journal._

_26 september._--i thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. when i got home last night mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of van helsing's visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. she showed me in the doctor's letter that all i wrote down was
true. it seems to have made a new man of me. it was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. i
 
 ___________________________
 
eley hotel, van helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     "am coming up by train. jonathan at whitby. important news.--mina
     harker."

the professor was delighted. "ah, that wonderful madam mina," he said,
"pearl among women! she arrive, but i cannot stay. she must go to your
house, friend john. you must meet her at the station. telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared."

when the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by jonathan harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of mrs. harker's diary at whitby. "take these," he
said, "and study them well. when i have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. you will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. what
is here told," he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet of
papers as he spoke, "may be 
 
 ___________________________
 
he
     chapel door of the deserted house he always spoke of "master." this
     all seems confirmation of our idea. however, after a while i came
     away; my friend is just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with questions. he might begin to think,
     and then--! so i came away. i mistrust these quiet moods of his; so
     i have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_29 september, in train to london._--when i received mr. billington's
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power i
thought it best to go down to whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as i wanted. it was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the count's to its place in london. later, we may be able to deal
with it. billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that i m
 
 ___________________________
 
ehave more discreetly."

he suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. then,
without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on the side of the
bed. the collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as i had
expected.

when i was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

"you will, i trust, dr. seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that i did what i could to convince you to-night."




chapter xix

jonathan harker's journal


_1 october, 5 a. m._--i went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for i think i never saw mina so absolutely strong and well. i am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her p
 
 ___________________________
 
iate of some kind, as i had not slept well the night
before. he very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... i
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. i hope
i have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that i may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. i might want it. here comes sleep. good-night.




chapter xx

jonathan harker's journal


_1 october, evening._--i found thomas snelling in his house at bethnal
green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. the
very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. i
learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he
was only the assistant to smollet, who of the two mates was the
responsible person. so off i drove to walworth, and found
 
 ___________________________
 
face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

of this i am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




chapter xxii

jonathan harker's journal


_3 october._--as i must do something or go mad, i write this diary. it
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for dr. van helsing and dr. seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. our best will be, god
knows, required to-day. i must keep writing at every chance, for i dare
not stop to think. all, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. the teaching, b
 
 ___________________________
 
k of the telegraph boy. we all moved out to the
hall with one impulse, and van helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. the boy handed in a
despatch. the professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"look out for d. he has just now, 12:45, come from carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the south. he seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: mina."

there was a pause, broken by jonathan harker's voice:--

"now, god be thanked, we shall soon meet!" van helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

"god will act in his own way and time. do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings."

"i care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. i would sell my soul to do it!"

"oh, hush, hush, my child!" said van helsing. "god does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the devil, though h
 
 ___________________________
 
 without its reward. van helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
when they had retired, quincey, godalming, and i arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. the first watch falls to quincey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. now that my work is done i, too, shall go
to bed.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_3-4 october, close to midnight._--i thought yesterday would never end.
there was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for the better. before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. all we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that the count alone knew where it was. if he
chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; an
 
 ___________________________
 
ecause my dear, dear madam mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of hell!" she grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"why?"

"because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat."

i was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




chapter xxiv

dr. seward's phonograph diary, spoken by van helsing


this to jonathan harker.

you are to stay with your dear madam mina. we shall go to make our
search--if i can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. but do you stay and take care of her to-day.
this is your best and most holiest office. this day nothing can find him
here. let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for i have tell them. he, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his castle in transylvania. i know it so well, as if a great hand
 
 ___________________________
 
 of years to get so far as london; and yet in
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. he is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
but we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong
together. take heart afresh, dear husband of madam mina. this battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that god sits on high
to watch over his children. therefore be of much comfort till we return.

van helsing.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_4 october._--when i read to mina, van helsing's message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. already the
certainty that the count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. for my own part, now that his horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. even my own terrible experiences in castle dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. here in the crisp autumn air in the brigh
 
 ___________________________
 
one to another of
us.

"of course!" answered the professor quickly, "you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!" harker was silent for awhile and then said
in a hollow voice:--

"let us talk of that part of it in the morning. i want to consult with
mina." i thought that now was the time for van helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. i looked at him
significantly and coughed. for answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_5 october, afternoon._--for some time after our meeting this morning i
could not think. the new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. mina's determination not
to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as i could not
argue the matter with her, i could only guess. i am as far as ever from
a solution now. the way the others received it, too, puzzled me; the
last time we talked of the subject we agreed that t
 
 ___________________________
 
 something on her mind which the
time of exact sunset will reveal. these occasions are becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, however, may in god's will be means to a
good end. i write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

she is calling to me.




chapter xxv

dr. seward's diary


_11 october, evening._--jonathan harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

i think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see mrs.
harker a little before the time of sunset. we have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. this mood or condition
begins some half hour or more be
 
 ___________________________
 
ause, he read the simple and beautiful service from the burial
of the dead. i--i cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

she was right in her instinct. strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed mrs. harker's coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_15 october, varna._--we left charing cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
orient express. we travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o'clock. lord godalming went to the consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the
odessus." the journey may have had incidents; i was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. until the _czarina cat
 
 ___________________________
 

vice-consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _czarina catherine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--lord godalming has returned. the consul is away, and the
vice-consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
he was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_30 october._--at nine o'clock dr. van helsing, dr. seward, and i called
on messrs. mackenzie & steinkoff, the agents of the london firm of
hapgood. they had received a wire from london, in answer to lord
godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. they were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _czarina catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbour. there we saw the captain, donelson by name, who 
 
 ___________________________
 
r. van helsing comforts me by telling me
that i am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--it took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. we may
never meet again. courage, mina! the professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. there must be no tears now--unless it may be that
god will let them fall in gladness.


_jonathan harker's journal._

_october 30. night._--i am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch: lord godalming is firing up. he is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the thames, and another on the norfolk broads. regarding our
plans, we finally decided that mina's guess was correct, and that if any
waterway was chosen for the count's escape back to his castle, the
sereth and then the bistritza at its junction, would be the one. w
 
 ___________________________
 
t she made
no response, none at all; and the day broke. i fear yet to stir. i have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. to-day i have
much to do here, and i keep waiting till the sun is up high; for there
may be places where i must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

i will strengthen me with breakfast, and then i will to my terrible
work. madam mina still sleeps; and, god be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_jonathan harker's journal._

_4 november, evening._--the accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear mina would have been free. i fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. we have got horses, and we
follow on the track. i note this whilst godalming is getting ready. we
have our arms. the szgany must look out if they mean fight. oh, if only
morris and seward were with us. we must only hope! if i 
 
 ___________________________
 
f mina and seward and myself, and van helsing's memorandum.
we could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as
proofs of so wild a story. van helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

"we want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! this boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

jonathan harker.

                                the end
