ngratulations from a goodly
number outside of the author's social connections.

doubtless the thousands of colored sunday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and his company

xvi. after the battle

xvii. flames in the school-room

xviii. searching for lost ones

xix. striking contrasts

xx. a revelation

xxi. a home for mother

xxii. further lifting of the veil

xxiii. delightful reunions

xxiv. norther
 
 ___________________________
 
e's mistake

xxix. visitors from the south

xxx. friends in council

xxxi. dawning affections

xxxii. wooing and wedding

xxxiii. conclusion

note




chapter i.


mystery of market speech and prayer-meeting.

"good mornin', bob; how's butter dis mornin'?"

"fresh; just as fresh, as fresh can be."

"oh, glory!" said the questioner, whom we shall call thomas anderson,
although he was known among his acquaintances as marster anderson's tom.

his informant regarding the condition of the market was robert johnson,
who had been separated from his mother in his childhood and reared by
his mistress as a favorite slave. she had fondled him as a pet animal,
and even taught him to read. notwithstanding their relation as mistress
and slave, they had strong personal likings for each other.

tom anderson was the servant of a wealthy planter, who lived in the city
of c----, north carolina. this planter was quite advanced in life, but
in his earlier days he had spent much of his time in talking politics in
his sta
 
 ___________________________
 
te and national capitals in winter, and in visiting pleasure
resorts and watering places in summer. his plantations were left to the
care of overseers who, in their turn, employed negro drivers to aid them
in the work of cultivation and discipline. but as the infirmities of age
were pressing upon him he had withdrawn from active life, and given the
management of his affairs into the hands of his sons. as robert johnson
and thomas anderson passed homeward from the market, having bought
provisions for their respective homes, they seemed to be very
light-hearted and careless, chatting and joking with each other; but
every now and then, after looking furtively around, one would drop into
the ears of the other some news of the battle then raging between the
north and south which, like two great millstones, were grinding slavery
to powder.

as they passed along, they were met by another servant, who said in
hurried
 
 ___________________________
 
it is
just the same if a slave runs away from the secesh to the union lines.
he is called a contraband, just the same as if he were an ox or a horse.
they wouldn't send the horses back, and they won't send us back."

"is dat so?" said uncle daniel, a dear old father, with a look of
saintly patience on his face. "well, chillen, what do you mean to do?"

"go, jis' as soon as we kin git to de army," said tom anderson.

"what else did the generals say? and how did you come to hear them,
tom?" asked robert johnson.

"well, yer see, marster's too ole and feeble to go to de war, but his
heart's in it. an' it makes him feel good all ober when dem big ginerals
comes an' tells him all 'bout it. well, i war laying out on de porch
fas' asleep an' snorin' drefful hard. oh, i war so soun' asleep dat wen
marster wanted some ice-water he had to shake me drefful hard to wake me
up. an' all de time i war wide 'wake as he war."

"what did they say?" asked robert, who was always on the lookout for
news from the battle-
 
 ___________________________
 
 cried myself to sleep, thinking about her, and when i get
free i mean to hunt her up."

"well, i ain't tole you all. de gemman said he war 'cruiting for de
army; dat massa linkum hab set us all free, an' dat he wanted some more
sogers to put down dem secesh; dat we should all hab our freedom, our
wages, an' some kind ob money. i couldn't call it like he did."

"bounty money," said robert.

"yes, dat's jis' what he called it, bounty money. an' i said dat i war
in for dat, teeth and toe-nails."

robert johnson's heart gave a great bound. was that so? had that army,
with freedom emblazoned on its banners, come at last to offer them
deliverance if they would accept it? was it a bright, beautiful dream,
or a blessed reality soon to be grasped by his willing hands? his heart
grew buoyant with hope; the lightness of his heart gave elasticity to
his step and sent the blood rejoicingly through his veins. freedom was
almost in his grasp, and the future was growing rose-tinted and
rainbow-hued. all the ties w
 
 ___________________________
 
en he said he'd hab her whipped."

"did he do it?"

"i don't know. but he's mean 'nough to do enythin'. why, dey say she
war sole seben times in six weeks, 'cause she's so putty, but dat she
war game to de las'."

"well, tom," said robert, "getting that girl away was one of the best
things you ever did in your life."

"i think so, too. not dat i specs enytin' ob it. i don't spose she would
think ob an ugly chap like me; but it does me good to know dat marse tom
ain't got her."




chapter vi.


robert johnson's promotion and religion.

robert johnson, being able to meet the army requirements, was enlisted
as a substitute to help fill out the quota of a northern regiment. with
his intelligence, courage, and prompt obedience, he rose from the ranks
and became lieutenant of a colored company. he was daring, without being
rash; prompt, but not thoughtless; firm, without being harsh. kind and
devoted to the company he drilled, he soon won the respect of his
superior officers and the love of his comrades.
 
 ___________________________
 
rmine who should have the opportunity
to enlist in an enterprise so fraught with danger. harry was one on whom
the lot fell.

grant crossed the river below, coiled his forces around vicksburg like
a boa-constrictor, and held it in his grasp. after forty-seven days of
endurance the city surrendered to him. port hudson, after the surrender
of vicksburg, gave up the unequal contest, and the mississippi was open
to the gulf.




chapter xv.


robert and his company.

"good morning, gentlemen," said robert johnson, as he approached colonel
robinson, the commander of the post, who was standing at the door of his
tent, talking with captain sybil.

"good morning," responded colonel robinson, "i am glad you have come. i
was just about to send for you. how is your company getting on?"

"first rate, sir," replied robert.

"in good health?"

"excellent. they are all in good health and spirits. our boys are used
to hardship and exposure, and the hope of getting their freedom puts new
snap into them."

"i am glad
 
 ___________________________
 
eath. on his
way to the conference, the bishop had an engagement to dedicate a
church, near the city of c----, in north carolina. iola was quite
willing to stop there a few days, hoping to hear something of robert
johnson's mother. soon after she had seated herself in the cars she was
approached by a gentleman, who reached out his hand to her, and greeted
her with great cordiality. iola looked up, and recognized him
immediately as one of her last patients at the hospital. it was none
other than robert johnson.

"i am so glad to meet you," he said. "i am on my way to c---- in search
of my mother. i want to see the person who sold her last, and, if
possible, get some clew to the direction in which she went."

"and i," said iola, "am in search of _my_ mother. i am convinced that
when we find those for whom we are searching they will prove to be very
nearly related. mamma said, before we were parted, that her brother had
a red spot on his temple. if i could see that spot i should rest assured
that my mo
 
 ___________________________
 
 so much alone i had no
opportunity to study it, except on our own plantation. my father and
mother were very kind to their slaves. but it was slavery, all the same,
and i hate it, root and branch."

just then the conductor called out the station.

"we stop here," said robert. "i am going to see mrs. johnson, and hunt
up some of my old acquaintances. where do you stop?"

"i don't know," replied iola. "i expect that friends will be here to
meet us. bishop b----, permit me to introduce you to mr. robert johnson,
whom i have every reason to believe is my mother's brother. like myself,
he is engaged in hunting up his lost relatives."

"and i," said robert, "am very much pleased to know that we are not
without favorable clues."

"bishop," said iola, "mr. johnson wishes to know where i am to stop. he
is going on an exploring expedition, and wishes to let me know the
result."

"we stop at mrs. allston's, 313 new street," said the bishop. "if i can
be of any use to you, i am at your service."

"thank you," 
 
 ___________________________
 
ht and flaky as ever. her jelly
was as bright as amber, and her preserves were perfectly delicious.
after she had set the table she stood looking in silent admiration,
chuckling to herself: "ole mistus can't set sich a table as dat. she
ought'er be yere to see it. specs 'twould make her mouf water. well, i
mus' let by-gones be by-gones. but dis yere freedom's mighty good."

aunt linda had invited uncle daniel, and, wishing to give him a pleasant
surprise, she had refrained from telling him that robert johnson was the
one she wished him to meet.

"do you know dis gemmen?" said aunt linda to uncle daniel, when the
latter arrived.

"well, i can't say's i do. my eyes is gittin dim, an i disremembers
him."

"now jis' you look right good at him. don't yer 'member him?"

uncle daniel looked puzzled and, slowly scanning robert's features,
said: "he do look like somebody i used ter know, but i can't make him
out ter save my life. i don't know whar to place him. who is de gemmen,
ennyhow?"

"why, uncle dan'el
 
 ___________________________
 
but we are older now."

"yes, yer older, but i wouldn't put it pas' yer eben now, ef yer foun'
out whar it war."

"yes," said iola, laughing, "they say 'caution is the parent of
safety.'"

"money's a mighty tempting thing," said robert, smiling.

"but, robby, dere's nothin' like a klar conscience; a klar conscience,
robby!"

just then aunt linda, who had been completing the preparations for her
supper, entered the room with her husband, and said, "salters, let me
interdoos you ter my fren', mr. robert johnson, an' his niece, miss
leroy."

"why, is it possible," exclaimed robert, rising, and shaking hands,
"that you are aunt linda's husband?"

"dat's what de parson sed," replied salters.

"i thought," pursued robert, "that your name was john andrews. it was
such when you were in my company."

"all de use i'se got fer dat name is ter git my money wid it; an' wen
dat's done, all's done. got 'nuff ob my ole marster in slave times,
widout wearin' his name in freedom. wen i got done wid him, i got done
wi
 
 ___________________________
 
en of many prayers and tears, and i want to make her last
days as happy as possible. the south has not been a paradise to you all
the time, and i should think you would be willing to leave it."

"yes, that is so. iola needs rest and change, and she would be such a
comfort to mother. i suppose, for her sake, i will consent to have her
go back with you, at least for awhile."

in a few days, with many prayers and tears, marie, half reluctantly,
permitted iola to start for the north in company with robert johnson,
intending to follow as soon as she could settle her business and see
harry in a good boarding place.

very joyful was the greeting of the dear grandmother. iola soon nestled
in her heart and lent additional sunshine to her once checkered life,
and robert, who had so long been robbed of kith and kin, was delighted
with the new accession to his home life.




chapter xxiv.


northern experience.

"uncle robert," said iola, after she had been north several weeks, "i
have a theory that every woman
 
 ___________________________
 
o happy. excuse me a
few minutes," she said, and left the room. iola soon returned, bringing
with her her mother and grandmother.

"these," said iola, introducing her mother and grandmother, "are the
once-severed branches of our family; and this gentleman you have seen
before," continued iola, as robert entered the room.

dr. gresham looked scrutinizingly at him and said: "your face looks
familiar, but i saw so many faces at the hospital that i cannot just now
recall your name."

"doctor," said robert johnson, "i was one of your last patients, and i
was with tom anderson when he died."

"oh, yes," replied dr. gresham; "it all comes back to me. you were
wounded at the battle of five forks, were you not?"

"yes," said robert.

"i saw you when you were recovering. you told me that you thought you
had a clue to your lost relatives, from whom you had been so long
separated. how have you succeeded?"

"admirably! i have been fortunate in finding my mother, my sister, and
her children."

"ah, indeed! i am d