nd well formed, with
dark, expressive eyes, full of thought and feeling. neither hair nor
complexion show the least hint of blood admixture."

"i am glad of it," said iola. "every person of unmixed blood who
succeeds in any department of literature, art, or science is a living
argument for the capability which is in the race."

"yes," responded harry, "for it is not the white blood which is on trial
before the world. well, i will bring her around this evening."

in the evening harry brought miss delany to call on his sister and
mother. they were much pleased with their visitor. her manner was a
combination of suavity and dignity. during the course of the evening
they learned that she was a graduate of the university of a----. one day
she saw in the newspapers that colored women were becoming unfit to be
servants for white people. she then thought that if they are not fit to
be servants for white people, they are unfit to be mothers to their own
children, and she conceived the idea of opening 
 
 ___________________________
 
her work was soon crowned with gratifying success. she had enlarged
her quarters, increased her teaching force, and had erected a large and
commodious school-house through her own exertions and the help of
others.

marie cordially invited her to call again, saying, as she rose to go: "i
am very glad to have met you. young women like you always fill my heart
with hope for the future of our race. in you i see reflected some of the
blessed possibilities which lie within us."

"thank you," said miss delany, "i want to be classed among those of whom
it is said, 'she has done what she could.'"

very pleasant was the acquaintance which sprang up between miss delany
and iola. although she was older than iola, their tastes were so
congenial, their views of life and duty in such unison, that their
acquaintance soon ripened into strong and lasting friendship. there were
no foolish rivalries and jealousies between them. their lives were too
full of zeal and earnestness for them to waste in selfishness th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir
power to be moral and spiritual forces among a people who so much needed
their helping hands. miss delany gave iola a situation in her school;
but before the term was quite over she was force to resign, her health
having been so undermined by the fearful strain through which she had
passed, that she was quite unequal to the task. she remained at home,
and did what her strength would allow in assisting her mother in the
work of canning and preserving fruits.

in the meantime, iola had been corresponding with robert. she had told
him of her success in finding her mother and brother, and had received

 
 ___________________________
 
dian belongs to an old
race and looks gloomily back to the past, and that the negro belongs to
a young race and looks hopefully towards the future."

"if that be so," replied marie, "our race-life corresponds more to the
follies of youth than the faults of maturer years."

on dr. latimer's next visit he was much pleased to see a great change in
marie's appearance. her eye had grown brighter, her step more elastic,
and the anxiety had faded from her face. harry had arrived, and with him
came miss delany.

"good evening, dr. latimer," said iola, cheerily, as she entered the
room with miss lucille delany. "this is my friend, miss delany, from
georgia. were she not present i would say she is one of the grandest
women in america."

"i am very much pleased to meet you," said dr. latimer, cordially; "i
have heard miss leroy speak of you. we were expecting you," he added,
with a smile.

just then harry entered the room, and iola presented him to dr. latimer,
saying, "this is my brother, about whom ma
 
 ___________________________
 
mma was so anxious."

"had you a pleasant journey?" asked dr. latimer, after the first
greetings were over.

"not especially," answered miss delany. "southern roads are not always
very pleasant to travel. when mr. leroy entered the cars at a----, where
he was known, had he taken his seat among the white people he would have
been remanded to the colored."

"but after awhile," said harry, "as miss delany and myself were sitting
together, laughing and chatting, a colored man entered the car, and,
mistaking me for a white man, asked the conductor to have me removed,
and i had to insist that i was colored in order to be permitted to
remain. it would be ludicrous, if it were not vexatious, to be too white
to be black, and too black to be white."

"caste plays such fantastic tricks in this country," said dr. latimer.

"i tell mr. leroy," said miss delany, "that when he returns he must put
a label on
 
 ___________________________
 
nor, of north
carolina, "for the redemption of africa, but i see no reason for
expatriating ourselves because some persons do not admire the color of
our skins."

"i do not believe," said mr. stillman, "in emptying on the shores of
africa a horde of ignorant, poverty-stricken people, as missionaries of
civilization or christianity. and while i am in favor of missionary
efforts, there is need here for the best heart and brain to work in
unison for justice and righteousness."

"america," said miss delany, "is the best field for human development.
god has not heaped up our mountains with such grandeur, flooded our
rivers with such majesty, crowned our valleys with such fertility,
enriched our mines with such wealth, that they should only minister to
grasping greed and sensuous enjoyment."

"climate, soil, and physical environments," said professor gradnor,
"have much to do with shaping national characteristics. if in africa,
under a tropical sun, the negro has lagged behind other races in the
ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 be teaching
in the south, if every field of labor in the north was as accessible to
us as to the whites? it has been estimated that a million young white
men have left the south since the war, and, had our chances been equal
to theirs, would we have been any more willing to stay in the south with
those who need us than they? but this prejudice, by impacting us
together, gives us a common cause and brings our intellect in contact
with the less favored of our race."

"i do not believe," said miss delany, "that the southern white people
themselves desire any wholesale exodus of the colored from their labor
fields. it would be suicidal to attempt their expatriation."

"history," said professor langhorne, "tells that spain was once the
place where barbarian europe came to light her lamp. seven hundred years
before there was a public lamp in london you might have gone through the
streets of cordova amid ten miles of lighted lamps, and stood there on
solidly paved land, when hundreds of years after
 
 ___________________________
 
ars ago
the life of a roman citizen in palestine was in danger from mob
violence. that pagan government threw around him a wall of living clay,
consisting of four hundred and seventy men, when more than forty jews
had bound themselves with an oath that they would neither eat nor drink
until they had taken the life of the apostle paul. does not true
patriotism demand that citizenship should be as much protected in
christian america as it was in heathen rome?"

"i would have our people," said miss delany, "more interested in
politics. instead of forgetting the past, i would have them hold in
everlasting remembrance our great deliverance. hitherto we have never
had a country with tender, precious memories to fill our eyes with
tears, or glad reminiscences to thrill our hearts with pride and joy. we
have been aliens and outcasts in the land of our birth. but i want my
pupils to do all in their power to make this country worthy of their
deepest devotion and loftiest patriotism. i want them to feel
 
 ___________________________
 
kindly favored us with a poem, called the "rallying
cry." in her letter she says that, although she is no longer young, she
feels that in the conflict for the right there's room for young as well
as old. she hopes that we will here unite the enthusiasm of youth with
the experience of age, and that we will have a pleasant and profitable
conference. is it your pleasure that the poem be read at this stage of
our proceedings, or later on?"

"let us have it now," answered harry, "and i move that miss delany be
chosen to lend to the poem the charm of her voice."

"i second the motion," said iola, smiling, and handing the poem to miss
delany.

miss delany took the poem and read it with fine effect. the spirit of
the poem had entered her soul.

              a rallying cry.

    oh, children of the tropics,
           amid our pain and wrong
    have you no other mission
           than music, dance, and song?

    when through the weary ages
           our dripping tears still fall,
    is this a ti
 
 ___________________________
 
nguish
           i see the only light,
    to flood with peace and gladness
           earth's sorrow, pain, and night.

    arrayed in christly armor
           'gainst error, crime, and sin,
    the victory can't be doubtful,
           for god is sure to win.

the next paper was by miss iola leroy, on the "education of mothers."

"i agree," said rev. eustace, of st. mary's parish, "with the paper. the
great need of the race is enlightened mothers."

"and enlightened fathers, too," added miss delany, quickly. "if there is
anything i chafe to see it is a strong, hearty man shirking his burdens,
putting them on the shoulders of his wife, and taking life easy for
himself."

"i always pity such mothers," interposed iola, tenderly.

"i think," said miss delany, with a flash in her eye and a ring of
decision in her voice, "that such men ought to be drummed out of town!"
as she spoke, there was an expression which seemed to say, "and i would
like to help do it!"

harry smiled, and gave her a quic
 
 ___________________________
 
 the marriage relation. we
must instill into our young people that the true strength of a race
means purity in women and uprightness in men; who can say, with sir
galahad:--

    'my strength is the strength of ten,
       because my heart is pure.'

and where this is wanting neither wealth nor culture can make up the
deficiency."

"there is a field of christian endeavor which lies between the
school-house and the pulpit, which needs the hand of a woman more in
private than in public," said miss delany.

"yes, i have often felt the need of such work in my own parish. we need
a union of women with the warmest hearts and clearest brains to help in
the moral education of the race," said rev. eustace.

"yes," said iola, "if we would have the prisons empty we must make the
homes more attractive."

"in civilized society," replied dr. latimer, "there must be restraint
either within or without. if parents fail to teach restraint within,
society has her check-reins without in the form of chain-gangs, 
 
 ___________________________
 
utions, i cannot despair of the future of the race."

"just now," said dr. latimer, "we have the fearful grinding and friction
which comes in the course of an adjustment of the new machinery of
freedom in the old ruts of slavery. but i am optimistic enough to
believe that there will yet be a far higher and better christian
civilization than our country has ever known."

"and in that civilization i believe the negro is to be an important
factor," said rev. cantnor.

"i believe it also," said miss delany, hopefully, "and this thought has
been a blessed inspiration to my life. when i come in contact with
christless prejudices, i feel that my life is too much a part of the
divine plan, and invested with too much intrinsic worth, for me to be
the least humiliated by indignities that beggarly souls can inflict. i
feel more pitiful than resentful to those who do not know how much they
miss by living mean, ignoble lives."

"my heart," said iola, "is full of hope for the future. pain and
suffering are
 
 ___________________________
 
 day after
day she was filling a larger place in his heart. the touch of her hand
thrilled him with emotion. her lightest words were an entrancing melody
to his ear. her noblest sentiments found a response in his heart. in
their desire to help the race their hearts beat in loving unison. one
grand and noble purpose was giving tone and color to their lives and
strengthening the bonds of affection between them.




chapter xxxii.


wooing and wedding.

harry's vacation had been very pleasant. miss delany, with her fine
conversational powers and ready wit, had added much to his enjoyment.
robert had given his mother the pleasantest room in the house, and in
the evening the family would gather around her, tell her the news of the
day, read to her from the bible, join with her in thanksgiving for
mercies received and in prayer for protection through the night. harry
was very grateful to dr. latimer for the kindly interest he had shown in
accompanying miss delany and himself to places of interest a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
amusement. he was grateful, too, that in the city of p---- doors were
open to them which were barred against them in the south.

the bright, beautiful days of summer were gliding into autumn, with its
glorious wealth of foliage, and the time was approaching for the
departure of harry and miss delany to their respective schools, when dr.
latimer received several letters from north carolina, urging him to come
south, as physicians were greatly needed there. although his practice
was lucrative in the city of p----, he resolved he would go where his
services were most needed.

a few evenings before he started he called at the house, and made an
engagement to drive iola to the park.

at the time appointed he drove up to the door in his fine equipage.
iola stepped gracefully in and sat quietly b
 
 ___________________________
 
ola, a glad light coming into her eyes. "come,
lucille, let us go into the parlor."

"oh, no," interposed harry, shrugging his shoulders and catching
lucille's hand. "he didn't ask for you. when we went to the concert we
were told three's a crowd. and i say one good turn deserves another."

"oh, harry, you are so full of nonsense. let lucille go!" said iola.

"indeed i will not. i want to have a good time as well as you," said
harry.

"oh, you're the most nonsensical man i know," interposed miss delany.
yet she stayed with harry.

"you're looking very bright and happy," said dr. latimer to iola, as she
entered.

"my ride in the park was so refreshing! i enjoyed it so much! the day
was so lovely, the air delicious, the birds sang so sweetly, and the
sunset was so magnificent."

"i am glad of it. why, iola, your home is so happy your heart should be
as light as a school-girl's."

"doctor," she replied, "i must be prematurely old. i have scarcely known
what it is to be light-hearted since my fat
 
 ___________________________
 
ditions. fearful as
the awakening was, it was better than to have slept through life."

"best for you and best for me," said dr. latimer. "there are souls that
never awaken; but if they miss the deepest pain they also lose the
highest joy."

dr. latimer went south, after his engagement, and through his medical
skill and agreeable manners became very successful in his practice. in
the following summer, he built a cosy home for the reception of his
bride, and came north, where, with harry and miss delany as attendants,
he was married to iola, amid a pleasant gathering of friends, by rev.
carmicle.




chapter xxxiii.


conclusion.

it was late in the summer when dr. latimer and his bride reached their
home in north carolina. over the cottage porch were morning-glories to
greet the first flushes of the rising day, and roses and jasmines to
distill their fragrance on the evening air. aunt linda, who had been
apprised of their coming, was patiently awaiting their arrival, and
uncle daniel was plea
 
 ___________________________
 
re dem
dat can."

"well, aunt linda, i am going to teach in the sunday-school, help in the
church, hold mothers' meetings to help these boys and girls to grow up
to be good men and women. won't you get a pair of spectacles and learn
to read?"

"oh, yer can't git dat book froo my head, no way you fix it. i knows
nuff to git to hebben, and dat's all i wants to know." aunt linda was
kind and obliging, but there was one place where she drew the line, and
that was at learning to read.

harry and miss delany accompanied iola as far as her new home, and
remained several days. the evening before their departure, harry took
miss delany a drive of several miles through the pine barrens.

"this thing is getting very monotonous," harry broke out, when they had
gone some distance.

"oh, i enjoy it!" replied miss delany. "these stately pines look so
grand and solemn, they remind me of a procession of hooded monks."

"what in the world are you talking about, lucille?" asked harry, looking
puzzled.

"about t
 
 ___________________________
 
hose pine-trees," replied miss delany, in a tone of surprise.

"pshaw, i wasn't thinking about them. i'm thinking about iola and
frank."

"what about them?" asked lucille.

"why, when i was in p----, dr. latimer used to be first-rate company,
but now it is nothing but what iola wants, and what iola says, and what
iola likes. i don't believe that there is a subject i could name to him,
from spinning a top to circumnavigating the globe, that he wouldn't
somehow contrive to bring iola in. and i don't believe you could talk
ten minutes