johnson, being able to meet the army requirements, was enlisted
as a substitute to help fill out the quota of a northern regiment. with
his intelligence, courage, and prompt obedience, he rose from the ranks
and became lieutenant of a colored company. he was daring, without being
rash; prompt, but not thoughtless; firm, without being harsh. kind and
devoted to the company he drilled, he soon won the respect of his
superior officers and the love of his comrades.

"johnson," said a young officer, captain sybil, of maine, who had become
attached to robert, "what is the use of your saying you're a colored
man, when you are as white as i am, and as brave a man as there is among
us. why not quit this company, and take your place in the army just the
same as a white man? i know your chances for promotion would be better."

"captain, you may doubt my word, but to-day i would rather be a
lieutenant in my company than a captain in yours."

"i don't understand you."

"well, captain, when a man's been colored 
 
 ___________________________
 
aint, named aunt kizzy. she was a happy soul. she had seen hard times,
but was what i call a living epistle. i've heard her tell how her only
child had been sold from her, when the man who bought herself did not
want to buy her child. poor little fellow! he was only two years old. i
asked her one day how she felt when her child was taken away. 'i felt,'
she said, 'as if i was going to my grave. but i knew if i couldn't get
justice here, i could get it in another world.'"

"that was faith," said captain sybil, as if speaking to himself, "a
patient waiting for death to redress the wrongs of life."

"many a time," continued robert, "have i heard her humming to herself in
the kitchen and saying, 'i has my trials, ups and downs, but it won't
allers be so. i specs one day to wing and wing wid de angels,
hallelujah! den i specs to hear a voice sayin', "poor ole kizzy, she's
done de bes' she kin. go down, gabriel, an' tote her in." den i specs to
put on my golden slippers, my long white robe, an' my starry
 
 ___________________________
 
 crown, an'
walk dem golden streets, hallelujah!' i've known that dear, old soul to
travel going on two miles, after her work was done, to have some one
read to her. her favorite chapter began with, 'let not your heart be
troubled, ye believe in god, believe also in me.'"

"i have been deeply impressed," said captain sybil, "with the child-like
faith of some of these people. i do not mean to say that they are
consistent christians, but i do think that this faith has in a measure
underlain the life of the race. it has been a golden thread woven amid
the sombre tissues of their lives. a ray of light shimmering amid the
gloom of their condition. and what would they have been without it?"

"i don't know. but i know what she was with it. and i believe if there
are any saints in glory, aunt kizzy is one of them."

"she
 
 ___________________________
 
as going to
the front, that i expected to be killed, but i went to free the slave.
it went hard with her. but i thought that i ought to come, and i believe
my mother's prayers are following me."

"captain," said robert, rising, "i am glad that i have heard your story.
i think that some of these northern soldiers do two things--hate slavery
and hate niggers."

"i am afraid that is so with some of them. they would rather be whipped
by rebels than conquer with negroes. oh, i heard a soldier," said
captain sybil, "say, when the colored men were being enlisted, that he
would break his sword and resign. but he didn't do either. after colonel
shaw led his charge at fort wagner, and died in the conflict, he got
bravely over his prejudices. the conduct of the colored troops there and
elsewhere has done much to turn public opinion in their favor. i suppose
any white soldier would rather have his black substitute receive the
bullets than himself."




chapter vii.


tom anderson's death.

"where is tom?" aske
 
 ___________________________
 
d captain sybil; "i have not seen him for several
hours."

"he's gone down the sound with some of the soldiers," replied robert.
"they wanted tom to row them."

"i am afraid those boys will get into trouble, and the rebs will pick
them off," responded sybil.

"o, i hope not," answered robert.

"i hope not, too; but those boys are too venturesome."

"tom knows the lay of the land better than any of us," said robert. "he
is the most wide-awake and gamiest man i know. i reckon when the war is
over tom will be a p
 
 ___________________________
 
erty, ignorance, and slavery?
i think if anybody should be grateful, it is the people who have
enslaved us and lived off our labor for generations. captain, i used to
know a poor old woman who couldn't bear to hear any one play on the
piano."

"is that so? why, i always heard that colored people were a musical
race."

"so we are; but that poor woman's daughter was sold, and her mistress
took the money to buy a piano. her mother could never bear to hear a
sound from it."

"poor woman!" exclaimed captain sybil, sympathetically; "i suppose it
seemed as if the wail of her daughter was blending with the tones of the
instrument. i think, robert, there is a great deal more in the colored
people than we give them credit for. did you know captain sellers?"

"the officer who escaped from prison and got back to our lines?" asked
robert.

"yes. well, he had quite an experience in trying to escape. he came to
an aged couple, who hid him in their cabin and shared their humble food
with him. they gave him some co
 
 ___________________________
 
 bran. but he said that he never ate a meal
that he relished more than the one he took with them. just before he
went they knelt down and prayed with him. it seemed as if his very hair
stood on his head, their prayer was so solemn. as he was going away the
man took some shingles and nailed them on his shoes to throw the
bloodhounds off his track. i don't think he will ever cease to feel
kindly towards colored people. i do wonder what has become of the boys?
what can keep them so long?"

just as captain sybil and robert were wondering at the delay of tom and
the soldiers they heard the measured tread of men who were slowly
bearing a burden. they were carrying tom anderson to the hospital,
fearfully wounded, and nigh to death. his face was distorted, and the
blood was streaming from his wounds. his respiration was faint, his
pulse hurried, as if life were trembling on its frailest cords.

robert and captain sybil hastened at once towards the wounded man. on
robert's face was a look of intense anguish
 
 ___________________________
 
, as he bent pityingly over
his friend.

"o, this is dreadful! how did it happen?" cried robert.

captain sybil, pressing anxiously forward, repeated robert's question.

"captain," said one of the young soldiers, advancing and saluting his
superior officer, "we were all in the boat when it struck against a mud
bank, and there was not strength enough among us to shove her back into
the water. just then the rebels opened fire upon us. for awhile we lay
down in the boat, but still they kept firing. tom took in the whole
situation, and said: 'someone must die to get us out of this. i
mought's well be him as 
 
 ___________________________
 
l me, it is nuthin'.' so tom leaped out to shove the boat into the
water. just then the rebel bullets began to rain around him. he received
seven or eight of them, and i'm afraid there is no hope for him."

"o, tom, i wish you hadn't gone. o, tom! tom!" cried robert, in tones of
agony.

a gleam of grateful recognition passed over the drawn features of tom,
as the wail of his friend fell on his ear. he attempted to speak, but
the words died upon his lips, and he became unconscious.

"well," said captain sybil, "put him in one of the best wards. give him
into miss leroy's care. if good nursing can win him back to life, he
shall not want for any care or pains that she can bestow. send
immediately for dr. gresham."

robert followed his friend into the hospital, tenderly and carefully
helped to lay him down, and remained awhile, gazing in silent grief upon
the sufferer. then he turned to go, leaving him in the hands of iola,
but hoping against hope that his wounds would not be fatal.

with tender devoti
 
 ___________________________
 
rossed the river below, coiled his forces around vicksburg like
a boa-constrictor, and held it in his grasp. after forty-seven days of
endurance the city surrendered to him. port hudson, after the surrender
of vicksburg, gave up the unequal contest, and the mississippi was open
to the gulf.




chapter xv.


robert and his company.

"good morning, gentlemen," said robert johnson, as he approached colonel
robinson, the commander of the post, who was standing at the door of his
tent, talking with captain sybil.

"good morning," responded colonel robinson, "i am glad you have come. i
was just about to send for you. how is your company getting on?"

"first rate, sir," replied robert.

"in good health?"

"excellent. they are all in good health and spirits. our boys are used
to hardship and exposure, and the hope of getting their freedom puts new
snap into them."

"i am glad of it," said colonel robinson. "they make good fighters and
very useful allies. last night we received very valuable intelligence
f
 
 ___________________________
 
lines. i do not
think many of the northern people realize the service they have been to
us in bringing information and helping our boys when escaping from rebel
prisons. i never knew a full-blooded negro to betray us. a month ago,
when we were encamped near the rebel lines, a colored woman managed
admirably to keep us posted as to the intended movements of the enemy.
she was engaged in laundry work, and by means of hanging her sheets in
different ways gave us the right signals."

"i hope," said captain sybil, "that the time will come when some
faithful historian will chronicle all the deeds of daring and-service
these people have performed during this struggle, and give them due
credit therefor."

"our great mistake," said colonel robinson, "was our long delay in
granting them their freedom, and even what we have done is only partial.
the border states still retain their slaves. we ought to have made a
clean sweep of the whole affair. slavery is a serpent which we nourished
in its weakness, and now
 
 ___________________________
 
 it is stinging us in its strength."

"i think so, too," said captain sybil. "but in making his proclamation
of freedom, perhaps mr. lincoln went as far as he thought public opinion
would let him."

"it is remarkable," said colonel robinson, "how these secesh hold out.
it surprises me to see how poor white men, who, like the negroes, are
victims of slavery, rally around the stripes and bars. these men, i
believe, have been looked down on by the aristocratic slaveholders, and
despised by the well-fed and comfortable slaves, yet they follow their
leaders into the very ja
 
 ___________________________
 
ws of death; face hunger, cold, disease, and
danger; and all for what? what, under heaven, are they fighting for?
now, the negro, ignorant as he is, has learned to regard our flag as a
banner of freedom, and to look forward to his deliverance as a
consequence of the overthrow of the rebellion."

"i think," said captain sybil "that these ignorant white men have been
awfully deceived. they have had presented to their imaginations utterly
false ideas of the results of secession, and have been taught that its
success would bring them advantages which they had never enjoyed in the
union."

"and i think," said colonel robinson, "that the women and ministers have
largely fed and fanned the fires of this rebellion, and have helped to
create a public opinion which has swept numbers of benighted men into
the conflict. well m
 
 ___________________________
 
ight one of their own men say, 'this is a rich man's
war and a poor man's fight.' they were led into it through their
ignorance, and held in it by their fears."

"i think," said captain sybil, "that if the public school had been
common through the south this war would never have occurred. now things
have reached such a pass that able-bodied men must report at
headquarters, or be treated as deserters. their leaders are desperate
men, of whom it has been said: 'they have robbed the cradle and the
grave.'"

"they are fighting against fearful odds," said colonel robinson, "and
their defeat is only a question of time."

"as soon," said robert, "as they fired on fort sumter, uncle daniel,
 
 ___________________________
 
 a
dear old father who had been praying and hoping for freedom, said to me:
'dey's fired on fort sumter, an' mark my words, bob, de norf's boun'
ter whip.'"

"had we freed the slaves at the outset," said captain sybil, "we
wouldn't have given the rebels so much opportunity to strengthen
themselves by means of slave labor in raising their crops, throwing up
their entrenchments, and building their fortifications. slavery was a
deadly cancer eating into the life of the nation; but, somehow, it had
cast such a glamour over us that we have acted somewhat as if our
national safety were better preserved by sparing the cancer than by
cutting it out."

"political and racial questions have sadly complicated this matte
 
 ___________________________
 
r,"
said colonel robinson. "the north is not wholly made up of anti-slavery
people. at the beginning of this war we were not permeated with justice,
and so were not ripe for victory. the battle of bull run inaugurated the
war by a failure. instead of glory we gathered shame, and defeat in
place of victory."

"we have been slow," said captain sybil, "to see our danger and to do
our duty. our delay has cost us thousands of lives and millions of
dollars. yet it may be it is all for the best. our national wound was
too deep to be lightly healed. when the president issued his
emancipation proclamation my heart overflowed with joy, and i said:
'this is the first bright rift in the war cloud.'"

"and did you really think that they would accept the terms of freedom
and lay down their arms?" asked robert.

"i hardly thought they would," continued
 
 ___________________________
 
 captain sybil. "i did not think
that their leaders would permit it. i believe the rank and file of their
army are largely composed of a mass of ignorance, led, manipulated, and
moulded by educated and ambitious wickedness. in attempting to overthrow
the union, a despotism and reign of terror were created which
encompassed them as fetters of iron, and they will not accept the
conditions until they have reached the last extremity. i hardly think
they are yet willing to confess that such extremity has been reac
 
 ___________________________
 
hed."

"captain," said robert, as they left colonel robinson's tent, "i have
lived all my life where i have had a chance to hear the 'secesh' talk,
and when they left their papers around i used to read everything i could
lay my hands on. it seemed to me that the big white men not only ruled
over the poor whites and made laws for them, but over the whole nation."

"that was so," replied captain sybil. "the north was strong but
forbearing. it was busy in trade and commerce, and permitted them to
make the northern states hunting-grounds for their slaves. when we sent
back simms and burns from beneath the shadow of bunker hill monument and
faneuil hall, they mistook us; looked upon us as a lot of
money-grabbers, who would be willing to purchase peace at any price. i
do not believe when they fired on the 'star of the west' that they had
the least apprehension of the fearful results which were t
 
 ___________________________
 
coasts of africa and, with their
superior knowledge, obtain cargoes of slaves, bring them across the
ocean, hem them in on the plantations, and surround them with a pall of
dense ignorance."

"i remember," said robert, "in reading a history i once came across at
our house, that when the africans first came to this country they did
not all speak one language. some had only met as mutual enemies. they
were not all one color, their complexions ranging from tawny yellow to
deep black."

"yes," said captain sybil, "and in dealing with the negro we wanted his
labor; in dealing with the indian we wanted his lands. for one we had
weapons of war; for the other we had real and invisible chains, the
coercion of force, and the terror of the unseen world."

"that's exactly so, captain! when i was a boy i used to hear the old
folks tell what would happen to bad people in another world; about the
devil pouring hot lead down people's throats and stirring them up with a
pitch-fork; and i used to get so scared that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 de groun' an' plowed, an' planted, an' riz a crap, an' den wen
it war all done, he hadn't a dollar to buy his ole woman a gown; an' he
jis' took a bag ob wheat.'"

"what did mr. parker say?" asked sybil.

"i don't know, though i reckon he didn't think it was a bad steal after
all, but i don't suppose he told jack so. when he came to the next
point, about jack's lying, i suppose he thought he had a clear case; but
jack was equal to the occasion."

"how did he clear up that charge?" interrogated captain sybil.

"finely. i think if he had been educated he would have made a first-rate
lawyer. he said, 'marse parker, dere's old joe. his wife don't lib on
dis plantation. old joe go ober ter see her, but he stayed too long, an'
didn't git back in time fer his work. massa's oberseer kotched him an'
cut him all up. when de oberseer went inter de house, pore old joe war
all tired an' beat up, an' so he lay down by de fence corner and go ter
sleep. bimeby massa oberseer com'd an' axed, "all bin a workin' lib
 
 ___________________________
 
ay "yes, massa."' then said mr. parker, 'you were lying, joe had been
sleeping, not working.' 'i know's dat, but ef i tole on joe, massa
oberseer cut him all up again, and massa jesus says, "blessed am de
peacemaker."' i heard, continued robert, that mr. parker said to
gundover, 'you seem to me like a man standing in a stream where the
blood of jesus can reach you, but you are standing between it and your
slaves. how will you answer that in the day of judgment?'"

"what did gundover say?" asked captain sybil.

"he turned pale, and said, 'for god's sake don't speak of the day of
judgment in connection with slavery.'"

just then a messenger brought a communication to captain sybil. he read
it attentively, and, turning to robert, said, "here are orders for an
engagement at five forks to-morrow. oh, this wasting of life and
scattering of treasure might have been saved had we only been wiser. but
the time is passing. look after your company, and see that everything is
in readiness as soon as possible."

 
 ___________________________
 
d and
tears, and on the brows of a ransomed people god poured the chrism of a
new era, and they stood a race newly anointed with freedom.




chapter xvi.


after the battle.

very sad and heart-rending were the scenes with which iola came in
constant contact. well may christian men and women labor and pray for
the time when nations shall learn war no more; when, instead of bloody
conflicts, there shall be peaceful arbitration. the battle in which
robert fought, after his last conversation with captain sybil, was one
of the decisive struggles of the closing conflict. the mills of doom and
fate had ground out a fearful grist of agony and death,

    "and lives of men and souls of states
       were thrown like chaff beyond the gates."

numbers were taken prisoners. pale, young corpses strewed the earth;
manhood was stricken down in the flush of its energy and prime. the
ambulances brought in the wounded and dying. captain sybil laid down his
life on the altar of freedom. his prediction was fulfilled
 
 ___________________________
 
 ter see you agin. do you
know de las' time i seed yer? well, you war on a stretcher, an' four ob
us war carryin' you ter de hospital. war you much hurt?

"no," replied robert, "it was only a flesh wound; and this young lady
nursed me so carefully that i soon got over it."

"is dat de way you foun' her?"

"yes, andrews,"--

"salters, ef you please," interrupted salters. i'se only andrews wen i
gits my money."

"well, salters," continued robert, "our freedom was a costly thing. did
you know that captain sybil was killed in one of the last battles of the
war? these young chaps, who are taking it so easy, don't know the
hardships through which we older ones passed. but all the battles are
not fought, nor all the victories won. the colored man has escaped from
one slavery, and i don't want him to fall into another. i want the young
folks to keep their brains clear, and their right arms strong, to fight
the battles of life manfully, and take their places alongside of every
other people in this country. 