 will tell you who, i think, will be a capital one to take with you,
and i believe he would go," said iola.

"who?" asked robert.

"rev. carmicle, your pastor."

"he is just the one," said robert, "courteous in his manner and very
scholarly in his attainments. he is a man whom if everybody hated him no
one could despise him."




chapter xxvi.


open questions.

in the evening robert and rev. carmicle called on dr. gresham, and found
dr. latrobe, the southerner, and a young doctor by the name of latimer,
already there. dr. gresham introduced dr. latrobe, but it was a new
experience to receive colored men socially. his wits, however, did not
forsake him, and he received the introduction and survived it.

"permit me, now," said dr. gresham, "to introduce you to my friend, dr.
latimer, who is attending our convention. he expects to go south and
labor among the colored people. don't you think that there is a large
field of usefulness before him?"

"yes," replied dr. latrobe, "if he will let politi
 
 ___________________________
 


"and i think," said rev. carmicle, "that we are outgrowing them as fast
as any other people would have done under the same conditions."

"the negro," replied dr. latrobe, "always has been and always will be an
element of discord in our country."

"what, then, is your remedy?" asked dr. gresham.

"i would eliminate him from the politics of the country."

"as disfranchisement is a punishment for crime, is it just to punish a
man before he transgresses the law?" asked dr. gresham.

"if," said dr. latimer, "the negro is ignorant, poor, and clannish, let
us remember that in part of our land it was once a crime to teach him to
read. if he is poor, for ages he was forced to bend to unrequited toil.
if he is clannish, society has segregated him to himself."

"and even," said robert, "has given him a negro pew in your churches
and a negro seat at your communion table."

"wisely, or unwisely," said dr. gresham, "the government has put the
ballot in his hands. it is better to teach him to use that ball
 
 ___________________________
 
ot aright
than to intimidate him by violence or vitiate his vote by fraud."

"to-day," said dr. latimer, "the negro is not plotting in beer-saloons
against the peace and order of society. his fingers are not dripping
with dynamite, neither is he spitting upon your flag, nor flaunting the
red banner of anarchy in your face."

"power," said dr. gresham, "naturally gravitates into the strongest
hands. the class who have the best brain and most wealth can strike with
the heaviest hand. i have too much faith in the inherent power of the
white race to dread the competition of any other people under hea
 
 ___________________________
 
of
arabia? i do not think that i underrate the difficulties in your way
when i say that you young men are holding in your hands golden
opportunities which it would be madness and folly to throw away. it is
your grand opportunity to help build up a new south, not on the shifting
sands of policy and expediency, but on the broad basis of equal justice
and universal freedom. do this and you will be blessed, and will make
your life a blessing."

after robert and rev. carmicle had left the hotel, drs. latimer,
gresham, and latrobe sat silent and thoughtful awhile, when dr. gresham
broke the silence by asking dr. latrobe how he had enjoyed the evening.

"very pleasantly," he replied. "i was quite interested in that parson.
where was he educated?"

"in oxford, i believe. i was pleased to hear him say that he had no
white blood in his veins."

"i should think not," replied dr. latrobe, "from his looks. but one
swallow does not make a summer. it is the exceptions which prove the
rule."

"don't you think
 
 ___________________________
 
me handicapped into life, and is now
on trial before the world. but it is not fair to subject him to the same
tests that you would a white man. i believe that there are possibilities
of growth in the race which we have never comprehended."

"the negro," said dr. latrobe, "is perfectly comprehensible to me. the
only way to get along with him is to let him know his place, and make
him keep it."

"i think," replied dr. gresham, "every man's place is the one he is best
fitted for."

"why," asked dr. latimer, "should any place be assigned to the negro
more than to the french, irish, or german?"

"oh," replied dr. latrobe, "they are all caucasians."

"well," said dr. gresham, "is all excellence summed up in that branch of
the human race?"

"i think," said dr. latrobe, proudly, "that we belong to the highest
race on earth and the negro to the lowest."

"and yet," said dr. latimer, "you have consorted with them till you have
bleached their faces to the whiteness of your own. your children nestle
in th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir bosoms; they are around you as body servants, and yet if one of
them should attempt to associate with you your bitterest scorn and
indignation would be visited upon them."

"i think," said dr. latrobe, "that feeling grows out of our anglo-saxon
regard for the marriage relation. these white negroes are of
illegitimate origin, and we would scorn to share our social life with
them. their blood is tainted."

"who tainted it?" asked dr. latimer, bitterly. "you give absolution to
the fathers, and visit the misfortunes of the mothers upon the
children."

"but, doctor, what kind of society would we have if we put down the bars
and admitted everybody to social equality?"

"this idea of social equality," said dr. latimer, "is only a bugbear
which frightens well-meaning people from dealing justly with the negro.
i know of no place on earth where there is perfect social equality, and
i doubt if there is such a thing in heaven. the sinner who
 
 ___________________________
 
 repents on
his death-bed cannot be the equal of st. paul or the beloved disciple."

"doctor," said dr. gresham, "i sometimes think that the final solution
of this question will be the absorption of the negro into our race."

"never! never!" exclaimed dr. latrobe, vehemently. "it would be a death
blow to american civilization."

"why, doctor," said dr. latimer, "you southerners began this absorption
before the war. i understand that in one decade the mixed bloods rose
from one-ninth to one-eighth of the population, and that as early as
1663 a law was passed in maryland to prevent english women from
intermarrying with slaves; and, even now, your laws against
miscegenation presuppose that you apprehend danger from that source."

"doctor, it is no use talking," replied dr. latrobe, wearily. "there
are niggers who are as white as i am, but the taint of b
 
 ___________________________
 
lood is there
and we always exclude it."

"how do you know it is there?" asked dr. gresham.

"oh, there are tricks of blood which always betray them. my eyes are
more practiced than yours. i can always tell them. now, that johnson is
as white as any man; but i knew he was a nigger the moment i saw him. i
saw it in his eye."

dr. latimer smiled at dr. latrobe's assertion, but did not attempt to
refute it; and bade him good-night.

"i think," said dr. latrobe, "that our war was the great mistake of the
nineteenth century. it has left us very serious complications. we cannot
amalgamate with the negroes. we cannot expatriate them. now, what are we
to do with them?"

"deal justly with them," said dr. gresham, "and let them alone. try to
create a moral sentiment in the nation, which will consider a wrong done
to the weakest of them 
 
 ___________________________
 
mething more was needed than bayonets and bullets, or the
schemes of selfish politicians or plotting demagogues. he knew that the
south needed the surrender of the best brain and heart of the country to
build, above the wastes of war, more stately temples of thought and
action.




chapter xxviii.


dr. latrobe's mistake.

on the morning previous to their departure for their respective homes,
dr. gresham met dr. latrobe in the parlor of the concordia.

"how," asked dr. gresham, "did you like dr. latimer's paper?"

"very much, indeed. it was excellent. he is a very talented young man.
he sits next to me at lunch and i have conversed with him several times.
he is very genial and attractive, only he seems to be rather cranky on
the negro question. i hope if he comes south that he will not make the
mistake of mixing up with the negroes. it would be throwing away his
influence and ruining his prospects. he seems to be well versed in
science and literature and would make a very delightful accession 
 
 ___________________________
 
to our
social life."

"i think," replied dr. gresham, "that he is an honor to our profession.
he is one of the finest specimens of our young manhood."

just then dr. latimer entered the room. dr. latrobe arose and, greeting
him cordially, said: "i was delighted with your paper; it was full of
thought and suggestion."

"thank you," answered dr. latimer, "it was my aim to make it so."

"and you succeeded admirably," replied dr. latrobe. "i could not help
thinking how much we owe to heredity and environment."

"yes," said dr. gresham. "continental europe yearly sends to our shores
subjects to be developed into citizens. emancipation has given us
millions of new citizens, and to them our influence and example should
be a blessing and not a curse."

"well," said dr. latimer, "i intend to go south, and help those who so
much need helpers from thei
 
 ___________________________
 
r own ranks."

"i hope," answered dr. latrobe, "that if you go south you will only
sustain business relations with the negroes, and not commit the folly of
equalizing yourself with them."

"why not?" asked dr. latimer, steadily looking him in the eye.

"because in equalizing yourself with them you drag us down; and our
social customs must be kept intact."

"you have been associating with me at the convention for several days; i
do not see that the contact has dragged you down, has it?"

"you! what has that got to do with associating with niggers?" asked dr.
latrobe, curtly.

"the blood of that race is coursing through my veins. i am one of them,"
replied dr. latimer, proudly raising his head.

"you!" exclaim
 
 ___________________________
 
ed dr. latrobe, with an air of profound astonishment and
crimsoning face.

"yes;" interposed dr. gresham, laughing heartily at dr. latrobe's
discomfiture. "he belongs to that negro race both by blood and choice.
his father's mother made overtures to receive him as her grandson and
heir, but he has nobly refused to forsake his mother's people and has
cast his lot with them."

"and i," said dr. latimer, "would have despised myself if i had done
otherwise."

"well, well," said dr. latrobe, rising, "i was never so deceived before.
good morning!"

dr. latrobe had thought he was clear-sighted enough to detect the
presence of negro blood when all physical traces had disappeared. but he
had associated with dr. latimer for several days, and admired his
talent, without suspecting for one moment his racial connection. he
could not help feeling a sense of vexation at the signal mistake he had
made.

dr
 
 ___________________________
 
. frank latimer was the natural grandson of a southern lady, in whose
family his mother had been a slave. the blood of a proud aristocratic
ancestry was flowing through his veins, and generations of blood
admixture had effaced all trace of his negro lineage. his complexion was
blonde, his eye bright and piercing, his lips firm and well moulded; his
manner very affable; his intellect active and well stored with
information. he was a man capable of winning in life through his rich
gifts of inheritance and acquir
 
 ___________________________
 
ted son. all the mother love in her
lonely heart awoke, and she was willing to overlook "the missing link of
matrimony," and adopt him as her heir, if he would ignore his identity
with the colored race.

before him loomed all the possibilities which only birth and blood can
give a white man in our democratic country. but he was a man of too much
sterling worth of character to be willing to forsake his mother's race
for the richest advantages his grandmother could bestow.

dr. gresham had met dr. latimer at the beginning of the convention, and
had been attracted to him by his frank and genial manner. one morning,
when conversing with him, dr. gresham had learned some of the salient
points of his history, which, instead of repelling him, had only
deepened his admiration for the young doctor. he was much amused when he
saw the pleasant acquaintanceship between him and dr. latrobe, but they
agreed to be silent about his racial connection until the time came when
they were ready to divulge it; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
they were hugely delighted at his
signal blunder.




chapter xxix.


visitors from the south.

"mamma is not well," said iola to robert. "i spoke to her about sending
for a doctor, but she objected and i did not insist."

"i will ask dr. latimer, whom i met at the concordia, to step in. he is
a splendid young fellow. i wish we had thousands like him."

in the evening the doctor called. without appearing to make a
professional visit he engaged marie in conversation, watched her
carefully, and came to the conclusion that her failing health proceeded
more from mental than physical causes.

"i am so uneasy about harry," said mrs. leroy. "he is so fearless and
outspoken. i do wish the attention of the whole nation could be turned
to the cru
 
 ___________________________
 
el barbarisms which are a national disgrace. i think the term
'bloody shirt' is one of the most heartless phrases ever invented to
divert attention from cruel wrongs and dreadful outrages."

just then iola came in and was introduced by her uncle to dr. latimer,
to whom the introduction was a sudden and unexpected pleasure.

after an interchange of courtesies, marie resumed the conversation,
saying: "harry wrote me only last week that a young friend of his had
lost his situation because he refused to have his pupils strew flowers
on the streets through which jefferson davis was to pass."

"i think," said dr. latimer, indignantly, "that the israelites had just
as much right to scatter flowers over the bodies of the egyptians, when
the waves threw back 
 
 ___________________________
 
hildren had to strew the path of jefferson davis with flowers. we
want our boys to grow up manly citizens, and not cringing sycophants.
when do you expect your son, mrs. leroy?"

"some time next week," answered marie.

"and his presence will do you more good than all the medicine in my
chest."

"i hope, doctor," said mrs. leroy, "that we will not lose sight of you,
now that your professional visit is ended; for i believe your visit was
the result of a conspiracy between iola and her uncle."

dr. latimer laughed, as he answered, "ah, mrs. leroy, i see you have
found us all out."

"oh, doctor," exclaimed iola, with pleasing excitement, "there is a
young lady coming here to visit me next week. her name is miss lucille
delany, and she is my ideal woman. she is grand, brave, intellectual,
and religious."

"is that so? she would make some man an excellent wife," replied dr.
latimer.

"now isn't that perfectly manlike," answered iola, smiling. "mamma, what
do you think of that? did any of you gentlem
 
 ___________________________
 
en ever see a young woman of
much ability that you did not look upon as a flotsam all adrift until
some man had appropriated her?"

"i think, miss leroy, that the world's work, if shared, is better done
than when it is performed alone. don't you think your life-work will be
better done if some one shares it with you?" asked dr. latimer, slowly,
and with a smile in his eyes.

"that would depend on the person who shared it," said iola, faintly
blushing.

"here," said robert, a few evenings after this conversation, as he
handed iola a couple of letters, "is something which will please you."

iola took the letters, and, after reading one of them, said: "miss
delany and harry will be here on wednesday; and this one is an
invitation which also adds to my enjoyment."

"what is it?" asked marie; "an invitation to a hop or a german?"

 
 ___________________________
 
n't be too exacting."

"yes," replied marie, "human beings naturally crave enjoyment, and if
not furnished with good amusements they are apt to gravitate to low
pleasures."

"some one," said robert, "has said that the indian belongs to an old
race and looks gloomily back to the past, and that the negro belongs to
a young race and looks hopefully towards the future."

"if that be so," replied marie, "our race-life corresponds more to the
follies of youth than the faults of maturer years."

on dr. latimer's next visit he was much pleased to see a great change in
marie's appearance. her eye had grown brighter, her step more elastic,
and the anxiety had faded from her face. harry had arrived, and with him
came miss delany.

"good evening, dr. latimer," said iola, cheerily, as she entered the
room with miss lucille delany. "this is my friend, miss delany, from
georgia. were she not present i would say she is one of the grandest
women in america."

"i am very much pleased to meet you," said dr. lati
 
 ___________________________
 
mer, cordially; "i
have heard miss leroy speak of you. we were expecting you," he added,
with a smile.

just then harry entered the room, and iola presented him to dr. latimer,
saying, "this is my brother, about whom mamma was so anxious."

"had you a pleasant journey?" asked dr. latimer, after the first
greetings were over.

"not especially," answered miss delany. "southern roads are not always
very pleasant to travel. when mr. leroy entered the cars at a----, where
he was known, had he taken his seat among the white people he would have
been remanded to the colored."

"but after awhile," said harry, "as miss delany and myself were sitting
together, laughing and chatting, a colored man entered the car, and,
mistaking me for a white man, asked the conductor to have me removed,

 
 ___________________________
 
and i had to insist that i was colored in order to be permitted to
remain. it would be ludicrous, if it were not vexatious, to be too white
to be black, and too black to be white."

"caste plays such fantastic tricks in this country," said dr. latimer.

"i tell mr. leroy," said miss delany, "that when he returns he must put
a label on himself, saying, 'i am a colored man,' to prevent annoyance."




chapter xxx.


friends in council.

on the following friday evening, mr. stillman's pleasant, spacious
parlors were filled to overflowing with a select company of earnest men
and women deeply interested in the welfare of the race.

bishop tunster had prepared a paper on "negro emigration." dr. latimer
opened the discussion by speaking favorably o
 
 ___________________________
 
enriched our mines with such wealth, that they should only minister to
grasping greed and sensuous enjoyment."

"climate, soil, and physical environments," said professor gradnor,
"have much to do with shaping national characteristics. if in africa,
under a tropical sun, the negro has lagged behind other races in the
march of civilization, at least for once in his history he has, in this
country, the privilege of using climatic advantages and developing under
new conditions."

"yes," replied dr. latimer, "and i do not wish our people to become
restless and unsettled before they have tried one generation of
freedom."

"i am always glad," said mr. forest, a tall, distinguished-looking
gentleman from new york, "when i hear of people who are ill treated in
one section of the country emigrating to another. men who are deaf to
the claims of mercy, and oblivious to the demands of justice, can feel
when money is slipping from their pockets."

"the negro," said hon. dugdale, "does not present to my min
 
 ___________________________
 
 as if all creation
travels to respond to the song of the herald angels, 'peace on earth,
good-will toward men.'"

the next paper was on "patriotism," by rev. cantnor. it was a paper in
which the white man was extolled as the master race, and spoke as if it
were a privilege for the colored man to be linked to his destiny and to
live beneath the shadow of his power. he asserted that the white race of
this country is the broadest, most christian, and humane of that branch
of the human family.

dr. latimer took exception to his position. "law," he said, "is the
pivot on which the whole universe turns; and obedience to law is the
gauge by which a nation's strength or weakness is tried. we have had two
evils by which our obedience to law has been tested--slavery and the
liquor traffic. how have we dealt with them both? we have been weighed
in the balance and found wanting. millions of slaves and serfs have been
liberated during this century, but not even in semi-barbaric russia,
heathen japan, or c
 
 ___________________________
 
e is a field of christian endeavor which lies between the
school-house and the pulpit, which needs the hand of a woman more in
private than in public," said miss delany.

"yes, i have often felt the need of such work in my own parish. we need
a union of women with the warmest hearts and clearest brains to help in
the moral education of the race," said rev. eustace.

"yes," said iola, "if we would have the prisons empty we must make the
homes more attractive."

"in civilized society," replied dr. latimer, "there must be restraint
either within or without. if parents fail to teach restraint within,
society has her check-reins without in the form of chain-gangs, prisons,
and the gallows."

the closing paper was on the "moral progress of the race," by hon.
dugdale. he said: "the moral progress of the race was not all he could
desire, yet he could not help feeling that, compared with other races,
the outlook was not hopeless. i am so sorry to see, however, that in
some states there is an undue prop
 
 ___________________________
 
girl
who was executed for murder when only a child in years. and it was
through the intervention of a friend of mine, one of the bravest young
men of the south, that a boy of fifteen was saved from the gallows."

"when i look," said mr. forest, "at the slow growth of modern
civilization--the ages which have been consumed in reaching our present
altitude, and see how we have outgrown slavery, feudalism, and religious
persecutions, i cannot despair of the future of the race."

"just now," said dr. latimer, "we have the fearful grinding and friction
which comes in the course of an adjustment of the new machinery of
freedom in the old ruts of slavery. but i am optimistic enough to
believe that there will yet be a far higher and better christian
civilization than our country has ever known."

"and in that civilization i believe the negro is to be an important
factor," said rev. cantnor.

"i believe it also," said miss delany, hopefully, "and this thought has
been a blessed inspiration to my life. w
 
 ___________________________
 
m of glory.
and never, while the agony of gethsemane and the sufferings of calvary
have their hold upon my heart, will i recognize any religion as his
which despises the least of his brethren."

as iola finished, there was a ring of triumph in her voice, as if she
were reviewing a path she had trodden with bleeding feet, and seen it
change to lines of living light. her soul seemed to be flashing through
the rare loveliness of her face and etherealizing its beauty.

every one was spell-bound. dr. latimer was entranced, and, turning to
hon. dugdale, said, in a low voice and with deep-drawn breath, "she is
angelic!"

hon. dugdale turned, gave a questioning look, then replied, "she is
strangely beautiful! do you know her?"

"yes; i have met her several times. i accompanied her here to-night. the
tones of her voice are like benedictions of peace; her words a call to
higher service and nobler life."

just then rev. carmicle was announced. he had been on a southern tour,
and had just returned.

"oh, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of other races, accustomed to struggle, achievement, and
dominion, but surely the world needs something better than the results
of arrogance, aggressiveness, and indomitable power. for the evils of
society there are no solvents as potent as love and justice, and our
greatest need is not more wealth and learning, but a religion replete
with life and glowing with love. let this be the impelling force in the
race and it cannot fail to rise in the scale of character and
condition."

"and," said dr. latimer, "instead of narrowing our sympathies to mere
racial questions, let us broaden them to humanity's wider issues."

"let us," replied rev. carmicle, "pass it along the lines, that to be
willfully ignorant is to be shamefully criminal. let us teach our people
not to love pleasure or to fear death, but to learn the true value of
life, and to do their part to eliminate the paganism of caste from our
holy religion and the lawlessness of savagery from our civilization."

       *       *       *      
 
 ___________________________
 
marie, "i would gladly welcome such a conference at
any time. i think such meetings would be so helpful to our young
people."




chapter xxxi.


dawning affections.

"doctor," said iola, as they walked home from the _conversazione_, "i
wish i could do something more for our people than i am doing. i taught
in the south till failing health compelled me to change my employment.
but, now that i am well and strong, i would like to do something of
lasting service for the race."

"why not," asked dr. latimer, "write a good, strong book which would be
helpful to them? i think there is an amount of dormant talent among us,
and a large field from which to gather materials for such a book."

"i would do it, willingly, if i could; but one needs both leisure and
money to make a successful book. there is material among us for the
broadest comedies and the deepest tragedies, but, besides money and
leisure, it needs patience, perseverance, courage, and the hand of an
artist to weave it into the literature o
 
 ___________________________
 
but who believes any good can
come out of the black nazareth?"

"miss leroy, out of the race must come its own thinkers and writers.
authors belonging to the white race have written good racial books, for
which i am deeply grateful, but it seems to be almost impossible for a
white man to put himself completely in our place. no man can feel the
iron which enters another man's soul."

"well, doctor, when i write a book i shall take you for the hero of my
story."

"why, what have i done," asked dr. latimer, in a surprised tone, "that
you should impale me on your pen?"

"you have done nobly," answered iola, "in refusing your grandmother's
offer."

"i only did my duty," he modestly replied.

"but," said iola, "when others are trying to slip out from the race and
pass into the white basis, i cannot help admiring one who acts as if he
felt that the weaker the race is the closer he would cling to it."

"my mother," replied dr. latimer, "faithful and true, belongs to that
race. where else should i be? 
 
 ___________________________
 
 song,
and could not be lured from her purpose."

a startled look stole over iola's face, and, lifting her eyes to his,
she faltered:--

"do you know her?"

"yes, i know her and admire her; and she ought to be made the subject
of a soul-inspiring story. do you know of whom i speak?"

"how should i, doctor? i am sure you have not made me your confidante,"
she responded, demurely; then she quickly turned and tripped up the
steps of her home, which she had just reached.

after this conversation dr. latimer became a frequent visitor at iola's
home, and a firm friend of her brother. harry was at that age when, for
the young and inexperienced, vice puts on her fairest guise and most
seductive smiles. dr. latimer's wider knowledge and larger experience
made his friendship for harry very valuable, and the service he rendered
him made him a favorite and ever-welcome guest in the family.

"are you all alone," asked robert, one night, as he entered the cosy
little parlor where iola sat reading. "where ar
 
 ___________________________
 
ndma have gone to bed," answered iola. "harry and lucille
are at the concert. they are passionately fond of music, and find
facilities here that they do not have in the south. they wouldn't go to
hear a seraph where they must take a negro seat. i was too tired to go.
besides, 'two's company and three's a crowd,'" she added, significantly.

"i reckon you struck the nail on the head that time," said robert,
laughing. "but you have not been alone all the time. just as i reached
the corner i saw dr. latimer leaving the door. i see he still continues
his visits. who is his patient now?"

"oh, uncle robert," said iola, smiling and flushing, "he is out with
harry and lucille part of the time, and drops in now and then to see us
all."

"well," said robert, "i suppose the case is now an affair of the heart.
but i cannot blame him for it," he added, looking fondly on the
beautiful face of his niece, which sorrow had touched only to chisel
into more loveliness. "how do you like him?"

"i must have within
 
 ___________________________
 
 me," answered iola, with unaffected truthfulness, "a
large amount of hero worship. the characters of the old testament i most
admire are moses and nehemiah. they were willing to put aside their own
advantages for their race and country. dr. latimer comes up to my ideal
of a high, heroic manhood."

"i think," answered robert, smiling archly, "he would be delighted to
hear your opinion of him."

"i tell him," continued iola, "that he belongs to the days of chivalry.
but he smiles and says, 'he only belongs to the days of hard-pan
service.'"

"some one," said robert, "was saying to-day that he stood in his own
light when he refused his grandmother's offer to receive him as her
son."

"i think," said iola, "it was the grandest hour of his lif
 
 ___________________________
 
e when he made
that decision. i have admired him ever since i heard his story."

"but, iola, think of the advantages he set aside. it was no sacrifice
for me to remain colored, with my lack of education and race sympathies,
but dr. latimer had doors open to him as a white man which are forever
closed to a colored man. to be born white in this country is to be born
to an inheritance of privileges, to hold in your hands the keys that
open before you the doors of every occupation, advantage, opportunity,
and achievement."

"i know that, uncle," answered iola; "but even these advantages are too
dearly bought if they mean loss of honor, true manliness, and self
respect. he could not have retained these had he ignored his mother and
li
 
 ___________________________
 
 paths of life a true man than tread
the softest carpets a moral cripple."

"i am afraid," said robert, laying his hand caressingly upon her head,
"that we are destined to lose the light of our home."

"oh, uncle, how you talk! i never dreamed of what you are thinking,"
answered iola, half reproachfully.

"and how," asked robert, "do you know what i am thinking about?"

"my dear uncle, i'm not blind."

"neither am i," replied robert, significantly, as he left the room.

iola's admiration for dr. latimer was not a one-sided affair. day after
day she was filling a larger place in his heart. the touch of her hand
thrilled him with emotion. her lightest words were an entrancing melody
to his ear. her noblest sentiments found a response in his heart. in
their desire to help the race their hearts beat in loving unison. one
grand and noble purpose was giving tone and color to their lives and
strengthening the bonds of affection between them.




chapter xxxii.


wooing and wedding.

harry's vacation 
 
 ___________________________
 
had been very pleasant. miss delany, with her fine
conversational powers and ready wit, had added much to his enjoyment.
robert had given his mother the pleasantest room in the house, and in
the evening the family would gather around her, tell her the news of the
day, read to her from the bible, join with her in thanksgiving for
mercies received and in prayer for protection through the night. harry
was very grateful to dr. latimer for the kindly interest he had shown in
accompanying miss delany and himself to places of interest and
amusement. he was grateful, too, that in the city of p---- doors were
open to them which were barred against them in the south.

the bright, beautiful days of summer were gliding into autumn, with its
glorious wealth of foliage, and the time was approaching for the
departure of harry and miss delany to their respective schools, when dr.
latimer received several letters from north carolina, urg
 
 ___________________________
 
ans were greatly needed there. although his practice
was lucrative in the city of p----, he resolved he would go where his
services were most needed.

a few evenings before he started he called at the house, and made an
engagement to drive iola to the park.

at the time appointed he drove up to the door in his fine equipage.
iola stepped gracefully in and sat quietly by his side to enjoy the
loveliness of the scenery and the gorgeous grandeur of the setting sun.

"i expect to go south," said dr. latimer, as he drove slowly along.

"ah, indeed," said iola, assuming an air of interest, while a shadow
flitted over her face. "where do you expect to pitch your tent?"

"in the city of c----, north carolina," he answered.

"oh, i wish," she exclaimed, "that you were going to georgia, where you
could take care of that high-spirited brother of mine."

"i suppose if he were to hear you he would laugh, and say that he could
take care of himself. but i know a better plan than that."

"what is it?" asked i
 
 ___________________________
 
ola, innocently.

"that you will commit yourself, instead of your brother, to my care."

"oh, dear," replied iola, drawing a long breath. "what would mamma say?"

"that she would willingly resign you, i hope."

"and what would grandma and uncle robert say?" again asked iola.

"that they would cheerfully acquiesce. now, what would i say if they all
consent?"

"i don't know," modestly responded iola.

"well," replied dr. latimer, "i would say:--

    "could deeds my love discover,
          could valor gain thy charms,
     to prove myself thy lover
          i'd face a world in arms."

"and prove a good soldier," added iola, smiling, "when there is no
battle to fight."

"iola, i am in earnest," said dr. latimer, passionately. "in the work to
which i am devoted every burden will be lighter, every path smoother, if
brightened and blessed with your companionship."

a sober expression swept over iola's face, and, dropping
 
 ___________________________
 
 her eyes, she
said: "i must have time to think."

quietly they rode along the river bank until dr. latimer broke the
silence by saying:--

"miss iola, i think that you brood too much over the condition of our
people."

"perhaps i do," she replied, "but they never burn a man in the south
that they do not kindle a fire around my soul."

"i am afraid," replied dr. latimer, "that you will grow morbid and
nervous. most of our people take life easily--why shouldn't you?"

"because," she answered, "i can see breakers ahead which they do not."

"oh, give yourself no uneasiness. they will catch the fret and fever of
the nineteenth century soon enough. i have heard several of our
ministers say that it is chiefly men of disreputable characters who are
made the subjects of violence and lynch-law."

"suppose it is so," responded iola, feelingly. "if these men believe in
e
 
 ___________________________
 
llent employer, and treats his employés as if they had
hearts as well as hands. but to be an expert accountant is not the best
use to which i can put my life."

"as a teacher you will need strong health and calm nerves. you had
better let me prescribe for you. you need," he added, with a merry
twinkle in his eyes, "change of air, change of scene, and change of
name."

"well, doctor," said iola, laughing, "that is the newest nostrum out.
had you not better apply for a patent?"

"oh," replied dr. latimer, with affected gravity, "you know you must
have unlimited faith in your physician."

"so you wish me to try the faith cure?" asked iola, laughing.

"yes, faith in me," responded dr. latimer, seriously.

"oh, here we are at home!" exclaimed iola. "this has been a glorious
evening, doctor. i am indebted to you for a great pleasure. i am
extremely grateful."

"you are perfectly welcome," replied dr. latimer. "the pleasure has been
mutual, i assure you."

"will you not come in?" asked iola.

tying 
 
 ___________________________
 
ppiness, they were a clarion call to a life of high and holy worth, a
call which found a response in her heart. her hand lay limp in his. she
did not withdraw it, but, raising her lustrous eyes to his, she softly
answered: "frank, i love you."

after he had gone, iola sat by the window, gazing at the splendid stars,
her heart quietly throbbing with a delicious sense of joy and love. she
had admired dr. gresham and, had there been no barrier in her way, she
might have learned to love him; but dr. latimer had grown irresistibly
upon her heart. there were depths in her nature that dr. gresham had
never fathomed; aspirations in her soul with which he had never mingled.
but as the waves leap up to the strand, so her soul went out to dr.
latimer. between their lives were no impeding barriers, no inclination
impelling one way and duty compelling another. kindred hopes and tastes
had knit their hearts; grand and noble purposes were lighting up their
lives; and they esteemed it a blessed privilege to s
 
 ___________________________
 
tand on the
threshold of a new era and labor for those who had passed from the old
oligarchy of slavery into the new commonwealth of freedom.

on the next evening, dr. latimer rang the bell and was answered by
harry, who ushered him into the parlor, and then came back to the
sitting-room, saying, "iola, dr. latimer has called to see you."

"has he?" answered iola, a glad light coming into her eyes. "come,
lucille, let us go into the parlor."

"oh, no," interposed harry, shrugging his shoulders and catching
lucille's hand. "he didn't ask for you. when we went to the concert we
were told three's a crowd. and i say one good turn deserves another."

"oh, harry, you are so full of nonsense. let lucille go!" said iola.

"indeed i will not. i want to have a good time as well as you," said
harry.

"oh, you're the
 
 ___________________________
 
 most nonsensical man i know," interposed miss delany.
yet she stayed with harry.

"you're looking very bright and happy," said dr. latimer to iola, as she
entered.

"my ride in the park was so refreshing! i enjoyed it so much! the day
was so lovely, the air delicious, the birds sang so sweetly, and the
sunset was so magnificent."

"i am glad of it. why, iola, your home is so happy your heart should be
as light as a school-girl's."

"doctor," she replied, "i must be prematurely old. i have scarcely known
what it is to be light-hearted since my father's death."

"i know it, darling," he answered, seating himself beside her, and
draw
 
 ___________________________
 
im. "you have been tried in the fire, but are you not
better for the crucial test?"

"doctor," she replied, "as we rode along yesterday, mingling with the
sunshine of the present came the shadows of the past. i was thinking of
the bright, joyous days of my girlhood, when i defended slavery, and of
how the cup that i would have pressed to the lips of others was forced
to my own. yet, in looking over the mournful past, i would not change
the iola of then for the iola of now."

"yes," responded dr. latimer, musingly,

    "'darkness shows us worlds of light
        we never saw by day.'"

"oh, doctor, you cannot conceive what it must have been to be hurled
from a home of love and light into the dark abyss of slavery; to be
compelled to take your place among a people you have learned to look
upon as inferiors and social outcasts; to be in the power of men whose
presence would fill you with horror and loathing, and to know that there
is no earthly power to protect you from the highest insults which
 
 ___________________________
 


"it was indeed! for awhile i was like one dazed. i tried to pray, but
the heavens seemed brass over my head. i was wild with agony, and had i
not been placed under conditions which roused all the resistance of my
soul, i would have lost my reason."

"was it not a mistake to have kept you ignorant of your colored blood?"

"it was the great mistake of my father's life, but dear papa knew
something of the cruel, crushing power of caste; and he tried to shield
us from it."

"yes, yes," replied dr. latimer, thoughtfully, "in trying to shield you
from pain he plunged you into deeper suffering."

"i never blame him, because i know he did it for the best. had he lived
he would have taken us to france, where i should have had a life of
careless ease and pleasure. but now my life has a much grander
significance than it would have had under such conditions. fearful as
the awakening was, it was better than to have slept through life."

"best for you and best for me," said dr. latimer. "there are souls t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
never awaken; but if they miss the deepest pain they also lose the
highest joy."

dr. latimer went south, after his engagement, and through his medical
skill and agreeable manners became very successful in his practice. in
the following summer, he built a cosy home for the reception of his
bride, and came north, where, with harry and miss delany as attendants,
he was married to iola, amid a pleasant gathering of friends, by rev.
carmicle.




chapter xxxiii.


conclusion.

it was late in the summer when dr. latimer and his bride reached their
home in north carolina. over the cottage por
 
 ___________________________
 
iently awaiting their arrival, and
uncle daniel was pleased to know that "dat sweet young lady who had sich
putty manners war comin' to lib wid dem."

as soon as they arrived, aunt linda rushed up to iola, folded her in her
arms, and joyfully exclaimed: "how'dy, honey! i'se so glad you's come. i
seed it in a vision dat somebody fair war comin' to help us. an' wen i
yered it war you, i larffed and jist rolled ober, and larffed and jist
gib up."

"but, aunt linda, i am not very fair," replied mrs. latimer.

"well, chile, you's fair to me. how's all yore folks in de up kentry?"

"all well. i expect them down soon to live here."

"what, har'yet, and robby, an' yer ma? oh, dat is too good. i allers
said robby had san' in his craw, and war born for good luck. he war a
mighty nice boy. har'yet's in clover now. well, ebery dorg has its day,
and de cat has sunday. i allers tole har'yet ter keep a stiff upper lip;
dat it war a long road dat had no turn."

dr. latimer was much gratified by the tender car
 
 ___________________________
 
very monotonous," harry broke out, when they had
gone some distance.

"oh, i enjoy it!" replied miss delany. "these stately pines look so
grand and solemn, they remind me of a procession of hooded monks."

"what in the world are you talking about, lucille?" asked harry, looking
puzzled.

"about those pine-trees," replied miss delany, in a tone of surprise.

"pshaw, i wasn't thinking about them. i'm thinking about iola and
frank."

"what about them?" asked lucille.

"why, when i was in p----, dr. latimer used to be first-rate company,
but now it is nothing but what iola wants, and what iola says, and what
iola likes. i don't believe that there is a subject i could name to him,
from spinning a top to circumnavigating the globe, that he wouldn't
somehow contrive to bring iola in. and i don't believe you could talk
ten minutes to iola on any subject, from dressing a doll to the latest
discovery in science, that she wouldn't manage to lug in frank."

"oh, you absurd creature!" responded lucille, "t
 
 ___________________________
 
 are freely opened for
the instruction of the children before their feet have wandered and gone
far astray. she has no carpets too fine for the tread of their little
feet. she thinks it is better to have stains on her carpet than stains
on their souls through any neglect of hers. in lowly homes and
windowless cabins her visits are always welcome. little children love
her. old age turns to her for comfort, young girls for guidance, and
mothers for counsel. her life is full of blessedness.

doctor latimer by his kindness and skill has won the name of the "good
doctor." but he is more than a successful doctor; he is a true patriot
and a good citizen. honest, just, and discriminating, he endeavors by
precept and example to instill into the minds of others sentiments of
good citizenship. he is a leader in every reform movement for the
benefit of the community; but his patriotism is not confined to race
lines. "the world is his country, and mankind his countrymen." while he
abhors their deeds of vio