


dr.[CHARACTER]
dr.[CHARACTER], a white physician, never succeeds in making his views on race
consistent. as the son of a northern abolitionist, he publicly and avidly
supports blacks and their quest for equal rights. however, he romanticizes
blacks by pitying them and seeking to rescue them from their suffering, and
though he loves iola, he can't allow himself to marry a woman who acknowledges
her black heritage. he wholeheartedly supports dr. latimer's right to assert his
mulatto identity and to support black rights. however, while dr.[CHARACTER] does
encourage iola to advocate on behalf of the black race, he explicitly expresses
his desire for her to pass as white, especially in his family's presence. such
hypocrisy represents the conflict that lies at the center of the novel and which
harper addresses on multiple levels of religious and moral issues--incongruence
between beliefs and actions. 
dr.[CHARACTER] reveals the prevalence of discrimination not only against
blacks but also against women. for example, he wants iola to completely erase
her black heritage and essentially repudiate her mother's existence. he fully
recognizes and backs dr. latimer's career and his advocacy for blacks, but he
discounts iola's career goals, telling her she is destined to fail in her
objective to uplift the black race in the south through community action.
through dr.[CHARACTER], harper also addresses class issues associated with race and
gender. dr.[CHARACTER] warns iola that marrying outside of the white race will
lower her social class, revealing his preoccupation with upward mobility,
surface appearances, and how society judges him. 
