lations from a goodly
number outside of the author's social connections.

doubtless the thousands of colored sunday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and his company

xvi. after the battle

xvii. flames in the school-room

xviii. searching for lost ones

xix. striking contrasts

xx. a revelation

xxi. a home for mother

xxii. further lifting of the veil

xxiii. delightful reunions

xxiv. norther
 
 ___________________________
 
stake

xxix. visitors from the south

xxx. friends in council

xxxi. dawning affections

xxxii. wooing and wedding

xxxiii. conclusion

note




chapter i.


mystery of market speech and prayer-meeting.

"good mornin', bob; how's butter dis mornin'?"

"fresh; just as fresh, as fresh can be."

"oh, glory!" said the questioner, whom we shall call thomas anderson,
although he was known among his acquaintances as marster anderson's tom.

his informant regarding the condition of the market was robert johnson,
who had been separated from his mother in his childhood and reared by
his mistress as a favorite slave. she had fondled him as a pet animal,
and even taught him to read. notwithstanding their relation as mistress
and slave, they had strong personal likings for each other.

tom anderson was the servant of a wealthy planter, who lived in the city
of c----, north carolina. this planter was quite advanced in life, but
in his earlier days he had spent much of his time in talking politics in
his sta
 
 ___________________________
 
te and national capitals in winter, and in visiting pleasure
resorts and watering places in summer. his plantations were left to the
care of overseers who, in their turn, employed negro drivers to aid them
in the work of cultivation and discipline. but as the infirmities of age
were pressing upon him he had withdrawn from active life, and given the
management of his affairs into the hands of his sons. as robert johnson
and thomas anderson passed homeward from the market, having bought
provisions for their respective homes, they seemed to be very
light-hearted and careless, chatting and joking with each other; but
every now and then, after looking furtively around, one would drop into
the ears of the other some news of the battle then raging between the
north and south which, like two great millstones, were grinding slavery
to powder.

as they passed along, they were met by another servant, who said in
hurried
 
 ___________________________
 
 i ralely b'lieves dat we
cullud folks is mixed up in dis fight. i seed it all in a vision. an'
soon as dey fired on dat fort, uncle dan'el says to me: 'linda, we's
gwine to git our freedom.' an' i says: 'wat makes you think so?" an' he
says: 'dey've fired on fort sumter, an' de norf is boun' to whip.'"

"i hope so," said robert. "i think that we have a heap of friends up
there."

"well, i'm jis' gwine to keep on prayin' an' b'lievin'."

just then the bell rang, and robert, answering, found mrs. johnson
suffering from a severe headache, which he thought was occasioned by her
worrying over the late defeat of the confederates. she sent him on an
errand, which he executed with his usual dispatch, and returned to some
work which he had to do in the kitchen. robert was quite a favorite with
aunt linda, and they often had confidential chats together.

"bobby," she said, when he returned, "i thinks we ort ter hab a
prayer-meetin' putty soon."

"i am in for that. where will you have it?"

"lem me see.
 
 ___________________________
 
 night ole marster had company. two big
ginerals, and dey was hoppin' mad. one ob dem looked like a turkey
gobbler, his face war so red. an' he sed one ob dem yankee ginerals, i
thinks dey called him beas' butler, sed dat de slaves dat runned away
war some big name--i don't know what he called it. but it meant dat all
ob we who com'd to de yankees should be free."

"contraband of war," said robert, who enjoyed the distinction of being a
good reader, and was pretty well posted about the war. mrs. johnson had
taught him to read on the same principle she would have taught a pet
animal amusing tricks. she had never imagined the time would come when
he would use the machinery she had put in his hands to help overthrow
the institution to which she was so ardently attached.

"what does it mean? is it somethin' good for us?"

"i think," said robert, a little vain of his superior knowledge, "it is
the best kind of good. it means if two armies are fighting and the
horses of one run away, the other has a
 
 ___________________________
 
just the same if a slave runs away from the secesh to the union lines.
he is called a contraband, just the same as if he were an ox or a horse.
they wouldn't send the horses back, and they won't send us back."

"is dat so?" said uncle daniel, a dear old father, with a look of
saintly patience on his face. "well, chillen, what do you mean to do?"

"go, jis' as soon as we kin git to de army," said tom anderson.

"what else did the generals say? and how did you come to hear them,
tom?" asked robert johnson.

"well, yer see, marster's too ole and feeble to go to de war, but his
heart's in it. an' it makes him feel good all ober when dem big ginerals
comes an' tells him all 'bout it. well, i war laying out on de porch
fas' asleep an' snorin' drefful hard. oh, i war so soun' asleep dat wen
marster wanted some ice-water he had to shake me drefful hard to wake me
up. an' all de time i war wide 'wake as he war."

"what did they say?" asked robert, who was always on the lookout for
news from the battle-
 
 ___________________________
 
 myself to sleep, thinking about her, and when i get
free i mean to hunt her up."

"well, i ain't tole you all. de gemman said he war 'cruiting for de
army; dat massa linkum hab set us all free, an' dat he wanted some more
sogers to put down dem secesh; dat we should all hab our freedom, our
wages, an' some kind ob money. i couldn't call it like he did."

"bounty money," said robert.

"yes, dat's jis' what he called it, bounty money. an' i said dat i war
in for dat, teeth and toe-nails."

robert johnson's heart gave a great bound. was that so? had that army,
with freedom emblazoned on its banners, come at last to offer them
deliverance if they would accept it? was it a bright, beautiful dream,
or a blessed reality soon to be grasped by his willing hands? his heart
grew buoyant with hope; the lightness of his heart gave elasticity to
his step and sent the blood rejoicingly through his veins. freedom was
almost in his grasp, and the future was growing rose-tinted and
rainbow-hued. all the ties w
 
 ___________________________
 
said he'd hab her whipped."

"did he do it?"

"i don't know. but he's mean 'nough to do enythin'. why, dey say she
war sole seben times in six weeks, 'cause she's so putty, but dat she
war game to de las'."

"well, tom," said robert, "getting that girl away was one of the best
things you ever did in your life."

"i think so, too. not dat i specs enytin' ob it. i don't spose she would
think ob an ugly chap like me; but it does me good to know dat marse tom
ain't got her."




chapter vi.


robert johnson's promotion and religion.

robert johnson, being able to meet the army requirements, was enlisted
as a substitute to help fill out the quota of a northern regiment. with
his intelligence, courage, and prompt obedience, he rose from the ranks
and became lieutenant of a colored company. he was daring, without being
rash; prompt, but not thoughtless; firm, without being harsh. kind and
devoted to the company he drilled, he soon won the respect of his
superior officers and the love of his comrades.
 
 ___________________________
 
 captain, i think my place is where i am
most needed. you do not need me in your ranks, and my company does.
they are excellent fighters, but they need a leader. to silence a
battery, to capture a flag, to take a fortification, they will rush into
the jaws of death."

"yes, i have often wondered at their bravery."

"captain, these battles put them on their mettle. they have been so long
taught that they are nothing and nobody, that they seem glad to prove
they are something and somebody."

"but, johnson, you do not look like them, you do not talk like them. it
is a burning shame to have held such a man as you in slavery."

"i don't think it was any worse to have held me in slavery than the
blackest man in the south."

"you are right, johnson. the color of a man's skin has nothing to do
with the possession of his rights."

"now, there is tom anderson," said robert, "he is just as black as black
can be. he has been bought and sold like a beast, and yet there is not a
braver man in all the compan
 
 ___________________________
 
who should have the opportunity
to enlist in an enterprise so fraught with danger. harry was one on whom
the lot fell.

grant crossed the river below, coiled his forces around vicksburg like
a boa-constrictor, and held it in his grasp. after forty-seven days of
endurance the city surrendered to him. port hudson, after the surrender
of vicksburg, gave up the unequal contest, and the mississippi was open
to the gulf.




chapter xv.


robert and his company.

"good morning, gentlemen," said robert johnson, as he approached colonel
robinson, the commander of the post, who was standing at the door of his
tent, talking with captain sybil.

"good morning," responded colonel robinson, "i am glad you have come. i
was just about to send for you. how is your company getting on?"

"first rate, sir," replied robert.

"in good health?"

"excellent. they are all in good health and spirits. our boys are used
to hardship and exposure, and the hope of getting their freedom puts new
snap into them."

"i am glad
 
 ___________________________
 
on his
way to the conference, the bishop had an engagement to dedicate a
church, near the city of c----, in north carolina. iola was quite
willing to stop there a few days, hoping to hear something of robert
johnson's mother. soon after she had seated herself in the cars she was
approached by a gentleman, who reached out his hand to her, and greeted
her with great cordiality. iola looked up, and recognized him
immediately as one of her last patients at the hospital. it was none
other than robert johnson.

"i am so glad to meet you," he said. "i am on my way to c---- in search
of my mother. i want to see the person who sold her last, and, if
possible, get some clew to the direction in which she went."

"and i," said iola, "am in search of _my_ mother. i am convinced that
when we find those for whom we are searching they will prove to be very
nearly related. mamma said, before we were parted, that her brother had
a red spot on his temple. if i could see that spot i should rest assured
that my mo
 
 ___________________________
 
 you have been put on
the right track. although i was born and raised in the midst of
slavery, i had not the least idea of its barbarous selfishness till i
was forced to pass through it. but we lived so much alone i had no
opportunity to study it, except on our own plantation. my father and
mother were very kind to their slaves. but it was slavery, all the same,
and i hate it, root and branch."

just then the conductor called out the station.

"we stop here," said robert. "i am going to see mrs. johnson, and hunt
up some of my old acquaintances. where do you stop?"

"i don't know," replied iola. "i expect that friends will be here to
meet us. bishop b----, permit me to introduce you to mr. robert johnson,
whom i have every reason to believe is my mother's brother. like myself,
he is engaged in hunting up his lost relatives."

"and i," said robert, "am very much pleased to know that we are not
without favorable clues."

"bishop," said iola, "mr. johnson wishes to know where i am to stop. he
is 
 
 ___________________________
 
going on an exploring expedition, and wishes to let me know the
result."

"we stop at mrs. allston's, 313 new street," said the bishop. "if i can
be of any use to you, i am at your service."

"thank you," said robert, lifting his hat, as he left them to pursue his
inquiries about his long-lost mother.

quickly he trod the old familiar streets which led to his former home.
he found mrs. johnson, but she had aged very fast since the war. she was
no longer the lithe, active woman, with her proud manner and resolute
bearing. her eye had lost its brightness, her step its elasticity, and
her whole appearance indicated that she was slowly sinking beneath a
weight of sorrow which was heavier far than her weight of years. when
she heard that robert had called to see her she was going to receive him
in the hall, as she would have done any of her former slaves, but her
mind immediately changed 
 
 ___________________________
 
hing. but its all over
now. let by-gones be by-gones. what are you doing now, and where are
you living?"

"i am living in the city of p----. i have opened a hardware store there.
but just now i am in search of my mother and sister."

"i hope that you may find them."

"how long," asked robert, "do you think it has been since they left
here?"

"let me see; it must have been nearly thirty years. you got my letter?"

"yes, ma'am; thank you."

"there have been great changes since you left here," mrs. johnson said.
"gundover died, and a number of colored men have banded together, bought
his plantation, and divided it among themselves. and i hear they have a
very nice settlement out there. i hope, since the government has set
them free, that they will succeed."

after robert's interview with mrs. johnson he thought he would visit the
settlement and hunt up his old friends. he easily found the place. it
was on a clearing in gundover's woods, where robert and uncle daniel had
held their last prayer-mee
 
 ___________________________
 
ar is yer stoppin?"

"i got here to-day," said robert, "but i expect to stay several days."

"well, i wants yer to meet my ole man, an' talk 'bout ole times.
couldn't yer come an' stop wid me, or isn't my house sniptious 'nuff?"

"yes, thank you; but there is a young lady in town whom i think is my
niece, my sister's daughter, and i want to be with her all i can."

"your niece! whar did you git any niece from?"

"don't you remember," asked robert, "that my mother had a little
daughter, when mrs. johnson sold her? well, i believe this young lady is
that daughter's child."

"laws a marcy!" exclaimed aunt linda, "yer don't tell me so! whar did
yer ketch up wid her?"

"i met her first," said robert, "at the hospital here, when our poor tom
was dying; and when i was wounded at five forks she attended me in the
field hospital there. she was just as good as gold."

"well, did i eber! you jis' fotch dat chile to see me, ef she ain't too
fine. i'se pore, but i'se clean, an' i ain't forgot how ter git u
 
 ___________________________
 
 flaky as ever. her jelly
was as bright as amber, and her preserves were perfectly delicious.
after she had set the table she stood looking in silent admiration,
chuckling to herself: "ole mistus can't set sich a table as dat. she
ought'er be yere to see it. specs 'twould make her mouf water. well, i
mus' let by-gones be by-gones. but dis yere freedom's mighty good."

aunt linda had invited uncle daniel, and, wishing to give him a pleasant
surprise, she had refrained from telling him that robert johnson was the
one she wished him to meet.

"do you know dis gemmen?" said aunt linda to uncle daniel, when the
latter arrived.

"well, i can't say's i do. my eyes is gittin dim, an i disremembers
him."

"now jis' you look right good at him. don't yer 'member him?"

uncle daniel looked puzzled and, slowly scanning robert's features,
said: "he do look like somebody i used ter know, but i can't make him
out ter save my life. i don't know whar to place him. who is de gemmen,
ennyhow?"

"why, uncle dan'el
 
 ___________________________
 
 are older now."

"yes, yer older, but i wouldn't put it pas' yer eben now, ef yer foun'
out whar it war."

"yes," said iola, laughing, "they say 'caution is the parent of
safety.'"

"money's a mighty tempting thing," said robert, smiling.

"but, robby, dere's nothin' like a klar conscience; a klar conscience,
robby!"

just then aunt linda, who had been completing the preparations for her
supper, entered the room with her husband, and said, "salters, let me
interdoos you ter my fren', mr. robert johnson, an' his niece, miss
leroy."

"why, is it possible," exclaimed robert, rising, and shaking hands,
"that you are aunt linda's husband?"

"dat's what de parson sed," replied salters.

"i thought," pursued robert, "that your name was john andrews. it was
such when you were in my company."

"all de use i'se got fer dat name is ter git my money wid it; an' wen
dat's done, all's done. got 'nuff ob my ole marster in slave times,
widout wearin' his name in freedom. wen i got done wid him, i got done
wi
 
 ___________________________
 
unch ob turnips."

"i," said iola, "am on my way south seeking for my mother, and i shall
not give up until i find her."

"come," said aunt linda, "we mustn't stan' yer talkin', or de grub'll
git cole. come, frens, sit down, an' eat some ob my pore supper."

aunt linda sat at the table in such a flutter of excitement that she
could hardly eat, but she gazed with intense satisfaction on her guests.
robert sat on her right hand, contrasting aunt linda's pleasant
situation with the old days in mrs. johnson's kitchen, where he had
played his pranks upon her, and told her the news of the war.

over iola there stole a spirit of restfulness. there was something so
motherly in aunt linda's manner that it seemed to recall the bright,
sunshiny days when she used to nestle in mam liza's arms, in her own
happy home. the conversation was full of army reminiscences and
recollections of the days of slavery. uncle daniel was much interested,
and, as they rose from the table, exclaimed:--

"robby, seein' yer a
 
 ___________________________
 
xperience. he referred to the days when they used to hold
their meetings in the lonely woods and gloomy swamps. how they had
prayed for freedom and plotted to desert to the union army; and
continuing, he said: "since then, brethren and sisters, i have had my
crosses and trials, but i try to look at the mercies. just think what it
was then and what it is now! how many of us, since freedom has come,
have been looking up our scattered relatives. i have just been over to
visit my old mistress, nancy johnson, and to see if i could get some
clue to my long-lost mother, who was sold from me nearly thirty years
ago."

again there was a chorus of moans.

on resuming, robert's voice was still fuller of pathos.

"when," he said, "i heard that dear old mother tell her experience it
seemed as if some one had risen from the dead. she made me think of my
own dear mother, who used to steal out at night to see me, fold me in
her arms, and then steal back again to her work. after she was sold
away i never saw h
 
 ___________________________
 
er face again by daylight. i have been looking for her
ever since the war, and i think at last i have got on the right track.
if mrs. johnson, who kept the boarding-house in c----, is the one who
sold that dear old mother from her son, then she is the one i am looking
for, and i am the son she has been praying for."

the dear old mother raised her eyes. they were clear and tearless. an
expression of wonder, hope, and love flitted over her face. it seemed as
if her youth were suddenly renewed and, bounding from her seat, she
rushed to the speaker in a paroxysm of joy. "oh, robby! robby! is dis
you? is dat my pore, dear boy i'se been p
 
 ___________________________
 
hausted by starvation. but she believed, she
trusted, and was delivered. her son took her north, where she could find
a resting place for the soles of her feet."

that night iola and the bishop left for the south.




chapter xxi.


a home for mother.

after iola had left the settlement, accompanied by robert as far as the
town, it was a pleasant satisfaction for the two old friends to settle
themselves down, and talk of times past, departed friends, and
long-forgotten scenes.

"what," said mrs. johnson, as we shall call robert's mother, "hab become
ob miss nancy's husband? is he still a libin'?"

"oh, he drunk hisself to death," responded aunt linda.

"he used ter be mighty handsome."

"yes, but drink war his ruination."

"an' how's miss nancy?"

"oh, she's com'd down migh'ly. she's pore as a church mouse. i thought
'twould com'd home ter her wen she sole yer 'way from yore chillen.
dere's nuffin goes ober de debil's back dat don't come under his belly.
do yo 'member miss nancy's fardder?"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
many prayers and tears, and i want to make her last
days as happy as possible. the south has not been a paradise to you all
the time, and i should think you would be willing to leave it."

"yes, that is so. iola needs rest and change, and she would be such a
comfort to mother. i suppose, for her sake, i will consent to have her
go back with you, at least for awhile."

in a few days, with many prayers and tears, marie, half reluctantly,
permitted iola to start for the north in company with robert johnson,
intending to follow as soon as she could settle her business and see
harry in a good boarding place.

very joyful was the greeting of the dear grandmother. iola soon nestled
in her heart and lent additional sunshine to her once checkered life,
and robert, who had so long been robbed of kith and kin, was delighted
with the new accession to his home life.




chapter xxiv.


northern experience.

"uncle robert," said iola, after she had been north several weeks, "i
have a theory that every woman
 
 ___________________________
 
ed for joy.

"can it be possible dat dis is my little marie?" she exclaimed.

it did seem almost impossible to realize that this faded woman, with
pale cheeks and prematurely whitened hair, was the rosy-cheeked child
from whom she had been parted more than thirty years.

"well," said robert, after the first joyous greeting was over, "love is
a very good thing, but marie has had a long journey and needs something
that will stick by the ribs. how about dinner, mother?"

"it's all ready," said mrs. johnson.

after marie had gone to her room and changed her dress, she came down
and partook of the delicious repast which her mother and iola had
prepared for her.

in a few days marie was settled in the home, and was well pleased with
the change. the only drawback to her happiness was the absence of her
son, and she expected him to come north after the closing of his school.

"uncle robert," said iola, after her mother had been with them several
weeks, "i am tired of being idle."

"what's the matter n
 
 ___________________________
 
y. excuse me a
few minutes," she said, and left the room. iola soon returned, bringing
with her her mother and grandmother.

"these," said iola, introducing her mother and grandmother, "are the
once-severed branches of our family; and this gentleman you have seen
before," continued iola, as robert entered the room.

dr. gresham looked scrutinizingly at him and said: "your face looks
familiar, but i saw so many faces at the hospital that i cannot just now
recall your name."

"doctor," said robert johnson, "i was one of your last patients, and i
was with tom anderson when he died."

"oh, yes," replied dr. gresham; "it all comes back to me. you were
wounded at the battle of five forks, were you not?"

"yes," said robert.

"i saw you when you were recovering. you told me that you thought you
had a clue to your lost relatives, from whom you had been so long
separated. how have you succeeded?"

"admirably! i have been fortunate in finding my mother, my sister, and
her children."

"ah, indeed! i am d
 
 ___________________________
 
ng beyond the present pain to a brighter
future for the race with which she was identified, and felt the
grandeur of a divine commission to labor for its uplifting.

as dr. gresham was parting with robert, he said: "this meeting has been
a very unexpected pleasure. i have spent a delightful evening. i only
regret that i had not others to share it with me. a doctor from the
south, a regular bourbon, is stopping at the hotel. i wish he could have
been here to-night. come down to the concordia, mr. johnson, to-morrow
night. if you know any colored man who is a strong champion of equal
rights, bring him along. good-night. i shall look for you," said the
doctor, as he left the door.

when robert returned to the parlor he said to iola: "dr. gresham has
invited me to come to his hotel to-morrow night, and to bring some
wide-awake colored man with me. there is a southerner whom he wishes me
to meet. i suppose he wants to discuss the negro problem, as they call
it. he wants some one who can do justice 
 
 ___________________________
 
nt english women from
intermarrying with slaves; and, even now, your laws against
miscegenation presuppose that you apprehend danger from that source."

"doctor, it is no use talking," replied dr. latrobe, wearily. "there
are niggers who are as white as i am, but the taint of blood is there
and we always exclude it."

"how do you know it is there?" asked dr. gresham.

"oh, there are tricks of blood which always betray them. my eyes are
more practiced than yours. i can always tell them. now, that johnson is
as white as any man; but i knew he was a nigger the moment i saw him. i
saw it in his eye."

dr. latimer smiled at dr. latrobe's assertion, but did not attempt to
refute it; and bade him good-night.

"i think," said dr. latrobe, "that our war was the great mistake of the
nineteenth century. it has left us very serious complications. we cannot
amalgamate with the negroes. we cannot expatriate them. now, what are we
to do with them?"

"deal justly with them," said dr. gresham, "and let them al
 
 ___________________________
 
ter iola's marriage, robert sold out his business and moved with his
mother and sister to north carolina. he bought a large plantation near
c----, which he divided into small homesteads, and sold to poor but
thrifty laborers, and his heart has been gladdened by their increased
prosperity and progress. he has seen the one-roomed cabins change to
comfortable cottages, in which cleanliness and order have supplanted the
prolific causes of disease and death. kind and generous, he often
remembers mrs. johnson and sends her timely aid.

marie's pale, spiritual face still bears traces of the beauty which was
her youthful dower, but its bloom has been succeeded by an air of
sweetness and dignity. though frail in health, she is always ready to
lend a helping hand wherever and whenever she can.

grandmother johnson was glad to return south and spend the remnant of
her days with the remaining friends of her early life. although feeble,
she is in full sympathy with her children for the uplifting of the rac