 tom, i wish you hadn't gone. o, tom! tom!" cried robert, in tones of
agony.

a gleam of grateful recognition passed over the drawn features of tom,
as the wail of his friend fell on his ear. he attempted to speak, but
the words died upon his lips, and he became unconscious.

"well," said captain sybil, "put him in one of the best wards. give him
into miss leroy's care. if good nursing can win him back to life, he
shall not want for any care or pains that she can bestow. send
immediately for dr. gresham."

robert followed his friend into the hospital, tenderly and carefully
helped to lay him down, and remained awhile, gazing in silent grief upon
the sufferer. then he turned to go, leaving him in the hands of iola,
but hoping against hope that his wounds would not be fatal.

with tender devotion iola watched her faithful friend. he recognized her
when restored to consciousness, and her presence was as balm to his
wounds. he smiled faintly, took her hand in his, stroked it tenderly,
looked wistf
 
 ___________________________
 
self quietly by tom's bedside, read the death
signs in his face.

"good-bye, robert," said tom, "meet me in de kingdom." suddenly a look
of recognition and rapture lit up his face, and he murmured, "angels,
bright angels, all's well, all's well!"

slowly his hand released its pressure, a peaceful calm overspread his
countenance, and without a sigh or murmur thomas anderson, iola's
faithful and devoted friend, passed away, leaving the world so much
poorer for her than it was before. just then dr. gresham, the hospital
physician, came to the bedside, felt for the pulse which would never
throb again, and sat down in silence by the cot.

"what do you think, doctor," said iola, "has he fainted?"

"no," said the doctor, "poor fellow! he is dead."

iola bowed her head in silent sorrow, and then relieved the anguish of
her heart by a flood of tears. robert rose, and sorrowfully left the
room.

iola, with tearful eyes and aching heart, clasped the cold hands over
the still breast, closed the waxen lid 
 
 ___________________________
 
over the eye which had once
beamed with kindness or flashed with courage, and then went back, after
the burial, to her daily round of duties, feeling the sad missing of
something from her life.




chapter viii.


the mystified doctor.

"colonel," said dr. gresham to col. robinson, the commander of the post,
"i am perfectly mystified by miss leroy."

"what is the matter with her?" asked col. robinson. "is she not faithful
to her duties and obedient to your directions?"

"faithful is not the word to express her tireless energy and devotion to
her work," responded dr. gresham. "she must have been a born nurse to
put such enthusiasm into her work."

"why, doctor, what is the matter with you? you talk like a lover."

a faint flush rose to the cheek of dr. gr
 
 ___________________________
 
re and
good breeding, could consent to occupy the position she so faithfully
holds. it is a mystery i cannot solve. can you?"

"i think i can," answered col. robinson.

"will you tell me?" queried the doctor.

"yes, on one condition."

"what is it?"

"everlasting silence."

"i promise," said the doctor. "the secret between us shall be as deep as
the sea."

"she has not requested secrecy, but at present, for her sake, i do not
wish the secret revealed. miss leroy was a slave."

"oh, no," said dr. gresham, starting to his feet, "it can't be so! a
woman as white as she a slave?"

"yes, it is so," continued the colonel. "in these states the child
follows the condition of its mother. this beautiful and accomplished
girl was held by one of the worst rebels in town. tom told me of it and
i issued orders for her release."

"well, well! is that so?" said dr. gresham, thoughtfully stroking his
beard. "wonders will never cease. why, i was just beginning to think
seriously of her."

"what's to hinder your
 
 ___________________________
 
 continuing to think?" asked col. robinson.

"what you tell me changes the whole complexion of affairs," replied the
doctor.

"if that be so i am glad i told you before you got head over heels in
love."

"yes," said dr. gresham, absently.

dr. gresham was a member of a wealthy and aristocratic family, proud of
its lineage, which it could trace through generations of good blood to
its ancestral isle. he had become deeply interested in iola before he
had heard her story, but after it had been revealed to him he tried to
banish her from his mind; but his constant observation of her only
increased his interest and admiration. the deep pathos of her story, the
tenderness of her ministrations, bestowed alike on black and white, and
the sad lonelin
 
 ___________________________
 
d rescued only by the strong arm of
his government from a fate worse than death. she was young in years, but
old in sorrow; one whom a sad destiny had changed from a light-hearted
girl to a heroic woman. as he observed her, he detected an undertone of
sorrow in her most cheerful words, and observed a quick flushing and
sudden paling of her cheek, as if she were living over scenes that were
thrilling her soul with indignation or chilling her heart with horror.
as nurse and physician, iola and dr. gresham were constantly thrown
together. his friends sent him magazines and books, which he gladly
shared with her. the hospital was a sad place. mangled forms, stricken
down in the flush of their prime and energy; pale young corpses,
sacrificed on the altar of slavery, constantly drained on her
sympathies. dr. gresham was glad to have some reading matter which might
divert her mind from the memories of her mournful past, and also furnish
them both with interesting themes of conversation in their momen
 
 ___________________________
 
 do not quit
and take some rest you will be our patient instead of our nurse. you'd
better take a furlough, go north, and return after the first frost."

"doctor, if that is your only remedy," replied iola, "i am afraid that i
am destined to die at my post. i have no special friends in the north,
and no home but this in the south. i am homeless and alone."

there was something so sad, almost despairing in her tones, in the
drooping of her head, and the quivering of her lip, that they stirred
dr. gresham's heart with sudden pity, and, drawing nearer to her, he
said, "miss leroy, you need not be all alone. let me claim the privilege
of making your life bright and happy. iola, i have loved you ever since
i have seen your devotion to our poor, sick boys. how faithfully you, a
young and gracious girl, have stood at your post and performed your
duties. and now i ask, will you not permit me to clasp hands with you
for life? i do not ask for a hasty reply. give yourself time to think
over what i have 
 
 ___________________________
 
acie was dying. the
servants gathered around her with tearful eyes, as she bade them all
good-bye. when she had finished, and mammy had lowered the pillow, an
unwonted radiance lit up her eye, and an expression of ineffable
gladness overspread her face, as she murmured: "it is beautiful, so
beautiful!" fainter and fainter grew her voice, until, without a
struggle or sigh, she passed away beyond the power of oppression and
prejudice.




chapter xiii.


a rejected suitor.

very unexpected was dr. gresham's proposal to iola. she had heartily
enjoyed his society and highly valued his friendship, but he had never
been associated in her mind with either love or marriage. as he held her
hand in his a tell-tale flush rose to her cheek, a look of grateful
surprise beamed from her eye, but it was almost immediately succeeded by
an air of inexpressible sadness, a drooping of her eyelids, and an
increasing pallor of her cheek. she withdrew her hand from his, shook
her head sadly, and said:--

"no, doctor
 
 ___________________________
 
; that can never be. i am very grateful to you for your
kindness. i value your friendship, but neither gratitude nor friendship
is love, and i have nothing more than those to give."

"not at present," said dr. gresham; "but may i not hope your friendship
will ripen into love?"

"doctor, i could not promise. i do not think that i should. there are
barriers between us that i cannot pass. were you to know them i think
you would say the same."

just then the ambulance brought in a wounded scout, and iola found
relief from the wounds of her own heart in attending to his.

dr. gresham knew the barrier that lay between them. it was one which his
love had surmounted. but he was too noble and generous to take advanta
 
 ___________________________
 
a halo of romance. to him the negro
was a picturesque being, over whose woes he had wept when a child, and
whose wrongs he was ready to redress when a man. but when he saw the
lovely girl who had been rescued by the commander of the post from the
clutches of slavery, all the manhood and chivalry in his nature arose in
her behalf, and he was ready to lay on the altar of her heart his first
grand and overmastering love. not discouraged by her refusal, but
determined to overcome her objections, dr. gresham resolved that he
would abide his time.

iola was not indifferent to dr. gresham. she admired his manliness and
respected his character. he was tall and handsome, a fine specimen of
the best brain and heart of new england. he had been nurtured under
grand and ennobling influences. his father was a devoted abolitionist.
his mother was kind-hearted, but somewhat exclusive and aristocratic.
she would have looked upon his marriage with iola as a mistake and
feared that such an alliance would hurt th
 
 ___________________________
 
e prospects of her daughters.

during iola's stay in the north, she had learned enough of the racial
feeling to influence her decision in reference to dr. gresham's offer.
iola, like other girls, had had her beautiful day-dreams before she was
rudely awakened by the fate which had dragged her into the depths of
slavery. in the chambers of her imagery were pictures of noble deeds; of
high, heroic men, knightly, tender, true, and brave. in dr. gresham she
saw the ideal of her soul exemplified. but in her lonely condition,
with all its background of terrible sorrow and deep abasement, she had
never for a moment thought of giving or receiving love from one of that
race who had been so lately associated in her mind with horror,
aversion, and disgust. his kindness to her had been a new experience.
his companionship was an unexpected pleasure. she had learned to enjoy
his presence and to miss him when absent, and when she began to question
her he
 
 ___________________________
 
lowers to the sun. i
could not accept his hand and hide from him the secret of my birth; and
i could not consent to choose the happiest lot on earth without first
finding my poor heart-stricken and desolate mother. perhaps some day i
may have the courage to tell him my sad story, and then make my heart
the sepulchre in which to bury all the love which might have gladdened
and brightened my whole life."

during the sad and weary months which ensued while the war dragged its
slow length along, dr. gresham and iola often met by the bedsides of the
wounded and dying, and sometimes he would drop a few words at which her
heart would beat quicker and her cheek flush more vividly. but he was so
kind, tender, and respectful, that iola had no idea he knew her race
affiliations. she knew from unmistakable signs that dr. gresham had
learned to love her, and that he had power to call forth the warmest
affection of her soul; but she fought with her own heart and repressed
its rising love. she felt that it w
 
 ___________________________
 
as best for his sake that they should
not marry. when she saw the evidences of his increasing love she
regretted that she had not informed him at the first of the barrier that
lay between them; it might have saved him unnecessary suffering.
thinking thus, iola resolved, at whatever cost of pain it might be to
herself, to explain to dr. gresham what she meant by the insurmountable
barrier. iola, after a continuous strain upon her nervous system for
months, began to suffer from general debility and nervous depression.
dr. gresham saw the increasing pallor on iola's cheek and the loss of
buoyancy in her step. one morning, as she turned from the bed of a young
soldier for whom she had just written a letter to his mother, there was
such a look of pity and sorrow on her face that dr. gresham's whole
heart went out in sympathy for her, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
f up to suffer and be strong. i intend, when
this conflict is over, to cast my lot with the freed people as a helper,
teacher, and friend. i have passed through a fiery ordeal, but this
ministry of suffering will not be in vain. i feel that my mind has
matured beyond my years. i am a wonder to myself. it seems as if years
had been compressed into a few short months. in telling you this, do you
not, can you not, see that there is an insurmountable barrier between
us?"

"no, i do not," replied dr. gresham. "i love you for your own sake. and
with this the disadvantages of birth have nothing to do."

"you say so now, and i believe that you are perfectly sincere. today
your friendship springs from compassion, but, when that subsides, might
you not look on me as an inferior?"

"iola, you do not understand me. you think too meanly of me. you must
not judge me by the worst of my race. surely our country has produced a
higher type of manhood than the men by whom you were tried and tempted."

"tried, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
riends of his calamities. other men have plead his cause, but out of
the race must come its own defenders. with them the pen must be
mightier than the sword. it is the weapon of civilization, and they must
use it in their own defense. we cannot tell what is in them until they
express themselves."

"yes, and i think there is a large amount of latent and undeveloped
ability in the race, which they will learn to use for their own benefit.
this my hospital experience has taught me."

"but," said dr. gresham, "they must learn to struggle, labor, and
achieve. by facts, not theories, they will be judged in the future. the
anglo-saxon race is proud, domineering, aggressive, and impatient of a
rival, and, as i think, has more capacity for dragging down a weaker
race than uplifting it. they have been a conquering and achieving
people, marvelous in their triumphs of mind over matter. they have
manifested the traits of character which are developed by success and
victory."

"and yet," said iola, earnestly
 
 ___________________________
 
, "i believe the time will come when the
civilization of the negro will assume a better phase than you
anglo-saxons possess. you will prove unworthy of your high vantage
ground if you only use your superior ability to victimize feebler races
and minister to a selfish greed of gold and a love of domination."

"but, iola," said dr. gresham, a little impatiently, "what has all this
to do with our marriage? your complexion is as fair as mine. what is to
hinder you from sharing my northern home, from having my mother to be
your mother?" the tones of his voice grew tender, as he raised his eyes
to iola's face and anxiously awaited her reply.

"dr. gresham," said iola, sadly, "should the story of my life be
revealed to your family, would they be willing to ignore all the
traditions of my blood, forget all the terrible humiliations thr
 
 ___________________________
 
. i have pledged my life to that resolve, and i believe time and
patience will reward me."

there was a deep shadow of sorrow and disappointment on the face of dr.
gresham as he rose to leave. for a moment he held her hand as it lay
limp in his own. if she wavered in her determination it was only for a
moment. no quivering of her lip or paling of her cheek betrayed any
struggle of her heart. her resolve was made, and his words were
powerless to swerve her from the purpose of her soul.

after dr. gresham had gone iola went to her room and sat buried in
thought. it seemed as if the fate of tantalus was hers, without his
crimes. here she was lonely and heart-stricken, and unto her was
presented the offer of love, home, happiness, and social position; the
heart and hand of a man too noble and generous to refuse her
companionship for life on account of the blood in her veins. why should
she refuse these desirable boons? but, mingling with these beautiful
visions of manly love and protecting care sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e saw the anguish of her
heart-stricken mother and the pale, sweet face of her dying sister, as
with her latest breath she had said, "iola, stand by mamma!"

"no, no," she said to herself; "i was right to refuse dr. gresham. how
dare i dream of happiness when my poor mamma's heart may be slowly
breaking? i should be ashamed to live and ashamed to die were i to
choose a happy lot for myself and leave poor mamma to struggle alone. i
will never be satisfied till i get tidings of her. and when i have found
her i will do all i can to cheer and brighten the remnant of her life."




chapter xiv.


harry leroy.

it was several weeks after iola had written to her brother that her
letter reached him. the trusty servant to 
 
 ___________________________
 
or have you any?" asked robert.

"i intend offering myself as a teacher in one of the schools which are
being opened in different parts of the country," replied iola. "as soon
as i am able i will begin my search for my dear mother. i will advertise
for her in the papers, hunt for her in the churches, and use all the
means in my power to get some tidings of her and my brother harry. what
a cruel thing it was to separate us!"




chapter xvii.


flames in the school-room.

"good morning," said dr. gresham, approaching robert and iola. "how are
you both? you have mended rapidly," turning to robert, "but then it was
only a flesh wound. your general health being good, and your blood in
excellent condition, it was not hard for you to rally."

"where have you been, doctor? i have a faint recollection of having seen
you on the morning i was brought in from the field, but not since."

"i have been on a furlough. i was running down through exhaustion and
overwork, and i was compelled to go home for a fe
 
 ___________________________
 
olor of their skins, we will have given our
best contribution towards the solution of the negro problem."

"i feel, my dear," said mrs. cloten, "that what you have done is a right
step in the right direction, and i hope that other merchants will do the
same. we have numbers of business men, rich enough to afford themselves
the luxury of a good conscience."




chapter xxv.


an old friend.

"good-morning, miss leroy," said a cheery voice in tones of glad
surprise, and, intercepting her path, dr. gresham stood before iola,
smiling, and reaching out his hand.

"why, dr. gresham, is this you?" said iola, lifting her eyes to that
well-remembered face. "it has been several years since we met. how have
you been all this time, and where?"

"i have been sick, and am just now recovering from malaria and nervous
prostration. i am attending a medical convention in this city, and hope
that i shall have the pleasure of seeing you again."

iola hesitated, and then replied: "i should be pleased to have you
c
 
 ___________________________
 
ill they reached mr. cloten's
store; then, bidding the doctor good morning, iola left him repeating to
himself the words of his favorite poet:--

    "thou art too lovely and precious a gem
      to be bound to their burdens and sullied by them."

no one noticed the deep flush on iola's face as she entered the store,
nor the subdued, quiet manner with which she applied herself to her
tasks. she was living over again the past, with its tender, sad, and
thrilling reminiscences.

in the evening dr. gresham called on iola. she met him with a pleasant
welcome. dr. gresham gazed upon her with unfeigned admiration, and
thought that the years, instead of detracting from, had only
intensified, her loveliness. he had thought her very beautiful in the
hospital, in her gray dress and white collar, with her glorious wealth
of hair drawn over her ears. but now, when he saw her with that hair
artistically arranged, and her finely-proportioned form arrayed in a
dark crimson dress, relieved by a shimmer of lac
 
 ___________________________
 
he stood up before him in the calm
loveliness of her ripened womanhood, radiant in beauty and gifted in
intellect. time and failing health had left their traces upon dr.
gresham. his step was less bounding, his cheek a trifle paler, his
manner somewhat graver than it was when he had parted from iola in the
hospital, but his meeting with her had thrilled his heart with
unexpected pleasure. hopes and sentiments which long had slept awoke at
the touch of her hand and the tones of her voice, and dr. gresham found
himself turning to the past, with its sad memories and disappointed
hopes. no other face had displaced her image in his mind; no other love
had woven itself around every tendril of his soul. his heart and hand
were just as free as they were the hour they had parted.

"to see you again," said dr. gresham, "is a great and unexpected
pleasure."

"you had not forgotten me, then?" said iola, smiling.

"forget you! i would just as soon forget my own existence. i do not
think that time will ever
 
 ___________________________
 
sful," said iola, with a joyous ring in her voice. "i
have found my mother, brother, grandmother, and uncle, and, except my
brother, we are all living together, and we are so happy. excuse me a
few minutes," she said, and left the room. iola soon returned, bringing
with her her mother and grandmother.

"these," said iola, introducing her mother and grandmother, "are the
once-severed branches of our family; and this gentleman you have seen
before," continued iola, as robert entered the room.

dr. gresham looked scrutinizingly at him and said: "your face looks
familiar, but i saw so many faces at the hospital that i cannot just now
recall your name."

"doctor," said robert johnson, "i was one of your last patients, and i
was with tom anderson when he died."

"oh, yes," replied dr. gresham; "it all comes back to me. you were
wounded at the battle of five forks, were you not?"

"yes," said robert.

"i saw you when you were recovering. you told me that you thought you
had a clue to your lost relati
 
 ___________________________
 
 this," he continued, "is my sister, and miss leroy is
my niece."

"is it possible? i am very glad to hear it. it has been said that every
cloud has its silver lining, and the silver lining of our war cloud is
the redemption of a race and the reunion of severed hearts. war is a
dreadful thing; but worse than the war was the slavery which preceded
it."

"slavery," said iola, "was a fearful cancer eating into the nation's
heart, sapping its vitality, and undermining its life."

"and war," said dr. gresham, "was the dreadful surgery by which the
disease was eradicated. the cancer has been removed, but for years to
come i fear that we will have to deal with the effects of the disease.
but i believe that we have vitality enough to outgrow those effects."

"i think, doctor," said iola, "that there is but one remedy by which our
nation can recover from the evil entailed upon her by slavery."

"what is that?" asked robert.

"a fuller comprehension of the claims of the gospel of jesus christ, and
their
 
 ___________________________
 
 application to our national life."

"yes," said robert; "while politicians are stumbling on the barren
mountains of fretful controversy and asking what shall we do with the
negro? i hold that jesus answered that question nearly two thousand
years ago when he said, 'whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them.'"

"yes," said dr. gresham; "the application of that rule in dealing with
the negro would solve the whole problem."

"slavery," said mrs. leroy, "is dead, but the spirit which animated it
still lives; and i think that a reckless disregard for human life is
more the outgrowth of slavery than any actual hatred of the negro."

"the problem of the nation," continued dr. gresham, "is not what men
will do with the negro, but what will they do with the reckless, lawless
white men who murder, lynch and burn their fellow-citizens
 
 ___________________________
 
egro,
poor and despised as he is, has laid his hands on our southern
civilization and helped mould its character."

"yes," said mrs. leroy; "the colored nurse could not nestle her master's
child in her arms, hold up his baby footsteps on their floors, and walk
with him through the impressible and formative period of his young life
without leaving upon him the impress of her hand."

"i am glad," said robert, "for the whole nation's sake, that slavery
has been destroyed."

"and our work," said dr. gresham, "is to build over the desolations of
the past a better and brighter future. the great distinction between
savagery and civilization is the creation and maintenance of law.
a people cannot habitually trample on law and justice without
retrograding toward barbarism. but i am hopeful that time will bring us
changes for the better; that, as we get farther away from the war, we
will outgrow the animosities and prejudices engendered by slavery. the
short-sightedness of our fathers linked the negro's
 
 ___________________________
 
the intelligence and virtue of
the south will be strong to grapple effectually with its ignorance and
vice."

"i hope that time will speedily come," said marie. "my son is in the
south, and i am always anxious for his safety. he is not only a teacher,
but a leading young man in the community where he lives."

"yes," said robert, "and when i see the splendid work he is doing in the
south, i am glad that, instead of trying to pass for a white man, he has
cast his lot with us."

"but," answered dr. gresham, "he would possess advantages as a white man
which he could not if he were known to be colored."

"doctor," said iola, decidedly, "he has greater advantages as a colored
man."

"i do not understand you," said dr. gresham, looking somewhat puzzled.

"doctor," continued iola, "i do not think life's highest advantages are
those that we can see with our eyes or grasp with our hands. to whom
to-day is the world most indebted--to its millionaires or to its
martyrs?"

"taking it from the ideal standpo
 
 ___________________________
 
n, to teach men clearer views of life and duty, and to
inspire their souls with loftier aims, is a far greater privilege than
it is to open the gates of material prosperity and fill every home with
sensuous enjoyment."

"and i," said mrs. leroy, her face aglow with fervid feeling, "would
rather--ten thousand times rather--see harry the friend and helper of
the poor and ignorant than the companion of men who, under the cover of
night, mask their faces and ride the country on lawless raids."

"dr. gresham," said robert, "we ought to be the leading nation of the
earth, whose influence and example should give light to the world."

"not simply," said iola, "a nation building up a great material
prosperity, founding magnificent cities, grasping the commerce of the
world, or excelling in literature, art, and science, but a nation
wearing sobriety as a crown and righteousness as the girdle of her
loins."

dr. gresham gazed admiringly upon iola. a glow of enthusiasm overspread
her beautiful, expressive
 
 ___________________________
 
 face. there was a rapt and far-off look in her
eye, as if she were looking beyond the present pain to a brighter
future for the race with which she was identified, and felt the
grandeur of a divine commission to labor for its uplifting.

as dr. gresham was parting with robert, he said: "this meeting has been
a very unexpected pleasure. i have spent a delightful evening. i only
regret that i had not others to share it with me. a doctor from the
south, a regular bourbon, is stopping at the hotel. i wish he could have
been here to-night. come down to the concordia, mr. johnson, to-morrow
night. if you know any colored man who is a strong champion of equal
rights, bring him along. good-night. i shall look for you," said the
doctor, as he left the
 
 ___________________________
 
 door.

when robert returned to the parlor he said to iola: "dr. gresham has
invited me to come to his hotel to-morrow night, and to bring some
wide-awake colored man with me. there is a southerner whom he wishes me
to meet. i suppose he wants to discuss the negro problem, as they call
it. he wants some one who can do justice to the subject. i wonder whom i
can take with me?"

"i will tell you who, i think, will be a capital one to take with you,
and i believe he would go," said iola.

"who?" asked robert.

"rev. carmicle, your pastor."

"he is just the one," said r
 
 ___________________________
 
obert, "courteous in his manner and very
scholarly in his attainments. he is a man whom if everybody hated him no
one could despise him."




chapter xxvi.


open questions.

in the evening robert and rev. carmicle called on dr. gresham, and found
dr. latrobe, the southerner, and a young doctor by the name of latimer,
already there. dr. gresham introduced dr. latrobe, but it was a new
experience to receive colored men socially. his wits, however, did not
forsake him, and he received the introduction and survived it.

"permit me, now," said dr. gresham, "to introduce you to my friend, dr.
latimer, who is attending our convention. he expects to go south and
labor among the colored people. don't you think that there is a large
field of usefulness before him?"

"yes," replied dr. latrobe, "if he will let politics alone."

"and why let pol
 
 ___________________________
 
itics alone?" asked dr. gresham.

"because," replied dr. latrobe, "we southerners will never submit to
negro supremacy. we will never abandon our caucasian civilization to an
inferior race."

"have you any reason," inquired rev. carmicle, "to dread that a race
which has behind it the heathenism of africa and the slavery of america,
with its inheritance of ignorance and poverty, will be able, in less
than one generation, to domineer over a race which has behind it ages of
dominion, freedom, education, and christianity?"

a sli
 
 ___________________________
 
he hesitated a moment, then replied:--

"i am not afraid of the negro as he stands alone, but what i dread is
that in some closely-contested election ambitious men will use him to
hold the balance of power and make him an element of danger. he is
ignorant, poor, and clannish, and they may impact him as their policy
would direct."

"any more," asked robert, "than the leaders of the rebellion did the
ignorant, poor whites during our late conflict?"

"ignorance, poverty, and clannishness," said dr. gresham, "are more
social than racial conditions, which may be outgrown."

"and i think," said rev. carmicle, "that we are outgrowing them as fast
as any other people would have done under the same conditions."

"the negro," replied dr. latrobe, "always has been and always will be an
element of discord in our country."

"what, then, is your remedy?" asked dr. gresham.

"i would eliminate him from the politics of the country."

"as disfranchisement is a punishment for crime, is it just to punish a
man b
 
 ___________________________
 
efore he transgresses the law?" asked dr. gresham.

"if," said dr. latimer, "the negro is ignorant, poor, and clannish, let
us remember that in part of our land it was once a crime to teach him to
read. if he is poor, for ages he was forced to bend to unrequited toil.
if he is clannish, society has segregated him to himself."

"and even," said robert, "has given him a negro pew in your churches
and a negro seat at your communion table."

"wisely, or unwisely," said dr. gresham, "the government has put the
ballot in his hands. it is better to teach him to use that ballot aright
than to intimidate him by violence or vitiate his vote by fraud."

"to-day," said dr. latimer, "the negro is not plotting in beer-saloons
against the peace and order of society. his fingers are not dripping
with dynamite, neither is he spitting upon your flag, nor flaunting the
red banner of anarchy in your face."

"power," said dr. gresham, "naturally gravitates into the strongest
hands. the c
 
 ___________________________
 
t brain and most wealth can strike with
the heaviest hand. i have too much faith in the inherent power of the
white race to dread the competition of any other people under heaven."

"i think you northerners fail to do us justice," said dr. latrobe. "the
men into whose hands you put the ballot were our slaves, and we would
rather die than submit to them. look at the carpet-bag governments the
wicked policy of the government inflicted upon us. it was only done to
humiliate us."

"oh, no!" said dr. gresham, flushing, and rising to his feet. "we had no
other alternative than putting the ballot in their hands."

"i will not deny," said rev. carmicle, "that we have made woeful
mistakes, but with our antecedents it would have been miraculous if we
had never committed any mistakes or made any blunders."

"they were allies in war," continued dr. gresham, "and i am sorry that
we have not done more to protect them in peace."

"protect them in peace!" said robert, bitterly. "what protection does
the color
 
 ___________________________
 
ed man receive from the hands of the government? i know of no
civilized country outside of america where men are still burned for real
or supposed crimes."

"johnson," said dr. gresham, compassionately, "it is impossible to have
a policeman at the back of each colored man's chair, and a squad of
soldiers at each crossroad, to detect with certainty, and punish with
celerity, each invasion of his rights. we tried provisional governments
and found them a failure. it seemed like leaving our former allies to be
mocked with the name of freedom and tortured with the essence of
slavery. the ballot is our weapon of defense, and we gave it to them for
theirs."

"and there," said dr. la
 
 ___________________________
 
that we are right in suppressing the
negro's vote. this is a white man's government, and a white man's
country. we own nineteen-twentieths of the land, and have about the same
ratio of intelligence. i am a white man, and, right or wrong, i go with
my race."

"but, doctor," said rev. carmicle, "there are rights more sacred than
the rights of property and superior intelligence."

"what are they?" asked dr. latrobe.

"the rights of life and liberty," replied rev. carmicle.

"that is true," said dr. gresham; "and your southern civilization will
be inferior until you shall have placed protection to those rights at
its base, not in theory but in fact."

"but, dr. gresham, we have to live with these people, and the north is
constantly irritating us by its criticisms."

"the world," said dr. gresham, "is fast becoming a vast whispering
gallery, and lips once sealed can now state their own grievances and
appeal to the conscience of the nation, and, as long as a sense of
justice and mercy retains a hold
 
 ___________________________
 
nstrance. and if it were not so i would be ashamed of my country and
of my race."

"you speak," said dr. latrobe, "as if we had wronged the negro by
enslaving him and being unwilling to share citizenship with him. i think
that slavery has been of incalculable value to the negro. it has lifted
him out of barbarism and fetich worship, given him a language of
civilization, and introduced him to the world's best religion. think
what he was in africa and what he is in america!"

"the negro," said dr. gresham, thoughtfully, "is not the only branch of
the human race which has been low down in the scale of civilization and
freedom, and which has outgrown the measure of his chains. slavery,
polygamy, and human sacrifices have been practiced among europeans in
by-gone days; and when tyndall tells us that out of savages unable to
count to the number of their fingers and speaking only a language of
nouns and verbs, arise at length our newtons and shakspeares, i do not
see that the negro could not have lea
 
 ___________________________
 
hen i say that you young men are holding in your hands golden
opportunities which it would be madness and folly to throw away. it is
your grand opportunity to help build up a new south, not on the shifting
sands of policy and expediency, but on the broad basis of equal justice
and universal freedom. do this and you will be blessed, and will make
your life a blessing."

after robert and rev. carmicle had left the hotel, drs. latimer,
gresham, and latrobe sat silent and thoughtful awhile, when dr. gresham
broke the silence by asking dr. latrobe how he had enjoyed the evening.

"very pleasantly," he replied. "i was quite interested in that parson.
where was he educated?"

"in oxford, i believe. i was pleased to hear him say that he had no
white blood in his veins."

"i should think not," replied dr. latrobe, "from his looks. but one
swallow does not make a summer. it is the exceptions which prove the
rule."

"don't you think," asked dr. gresham, "that we have been too hasty in
our judgment of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 negro? he has come handicapped into life, and is now
on trial before the world. but it is not fair to subject him to the same
tests that you would a white man. i believe that there are possibilities
of growth in the race which we have never comprehended."

"the negro," said dr. latrobe, "is perfectly comprehensible to me. the
only way to get along with him is to let him know his place, and make
him keep it."

"i think," replied dr. gresham, "every man's place is the one he is best
fitted for."

"why," asked dr. latimer, "should any place be assigned to the negro
more than to the french, irish, or german?"

"oh," replied dr. latrobe, "they are all caucasians."

"well," said dr. gresham, "is all excellence summed up in that branch of
the human race?"

"i think," said dr. latrobe, proudly, "that we belong to the highest
race on earth and the negro to the lowest."

"and yet," said dr. latimer, "you have consorted with them till you h
 
 ___________________________
 
dren."

"but, doctor, what kind of society would we have if we put down the bars
and admitted everybody to social equality?"

"this idea of social equality," said dr. latimer, "is only a bugbear
which frightens well-meaning people from dealing justly with the negro.
i know of no place on earth where there is perfect social equality, and
i doubt if there is such a thing in heaven. the sinner who repents on
his death-bed cannot be the equal of st. paul or the beloved disciple."

"doctor," said dr. gresham, "i sometimes think that the final solution
of this question will be the absorption of the negro into our race."

"never! never!" exclaimed dr. latrobe, vehemently. "it would be a death
blow to american civilization."

"why, doctor," said dr. latimer, "you southerners began this absorption
before the war. i understand that in one decade the mixed bloods rose
from one-ninth to one-eighth of the population, and that as early as
1663 a law was passed in maryland to prevent english women from
inter
 
 ___________________________
 
marrying with slaves; and, even now, your laws against
miscegenation presuppose that you apprehend danger from that source."

"doctor, it is no use talking," replied dr. latrobe, wearily. "there
are niggers who are as white as i am, but the taint of blood is there
and we always exclude it."

"how do you know it is there?" asked dr. gresham.

"oh, there are tricks of blood which always betray them. my eyes are
more practiced than yours. i can always tell them. now, that johnson is
as white as any man; but i knew he was a nigger the moment i saw him. i
saw it in his eye."

dr. latimer smiled at dr. latrobe's assertion, but did not attempt to
refute it; and bade him good-night.

"i think," said dr. latrobe, "that our war was the great mistake of the
nineteenth century. it has left us very serious complications. we cannot
amalgamate 
 
 ___________________________
 
with the negroes. we cannot expatriate them. now, what are we
to do with them?"

"deal justly with them," said dr. gresham, "and let them alone. try to
create a moral sentiment in the nation, which will consider a wrong done
to the weakest of them as a wrong done to the whole community. whenever
you find ministers too righteous to be faithless, cowardly, and time
serving; women too christly to be scornful; and public men too noble to
be tricky and too honest to pander to the prejudices of the people,
stand by them and give them your moral support."

"doctor," said latrobe, "with your views you ought to be a preache
 
 ___________________________
 
r
striving to usher in the millennium."

"it can't come too soon," replied dr. gresham.




chapter xxvii.


diverging paths.

on the eve of his departure from the city of p----, dr. gresham called
on iola, and found her alone. they talked awhile of reminiscences of the
war and hospital life, when dr. gresham, approaching iola, said:--

"miss leroy, i am glad the great object of your life is accomplished,
and that you have found all your relatives. years have passed since we
parted, years in which i have vainly tried to get a trace of you and
have been baffled, but i have found you at last!" clasping her hand in
his, he continued, "i would it were so that i should never lose you
again! iola, will you not grant me the privilege of holding this hand as
mine all through the future of our lives? your se
 
 ___________________________
 
be mine as nothing else on earth is mine." dr.
gresham looked eagerly on iola's face, and tried to read its varying
expression. "iola, i learned to love you in the hospital. i have tried
to forget you, but it has been all in vain. your image is just as deeply
engraven on my heart as it was the day we parted."

"doctor," she replied, sadly, but firmly, as she withdrew her hand from
his, "i feel now as i felt then, that there is an insurmountable barrier
between us."

"what is it, iola?" asked dr. gresham, anxiously.

"it is the public opinion which assigns me a place with the colored
people."

"but what right has public opinion to interfere with our marriage
relations? why should we yield to its behests?"

"because it is stronger than we are, and we cannot run counter to it
without suffering its penalties."

"and what are they, iola? shadows that you merely dread?"

"no! no! the penalties of social ostracism north and south, except here
and there some grand and noble exceptions. i do not think 
 
 ___________________________
 
ke her first communion, she
unintentionally took her seat at the head of the column. the elder who
was administering the communion gave her the bread in the order in which
she sat, but before he gave her the wine some one touched him on the
shoulder and whispered a word in his ear. he then passed mamma by, gave
the cup to others, and then returned to her. from that rite connected
with the holiest memories of earth, my poor mother returned humiliated
and depressed."

"what a shame!" exclaimed dr. gresham, indignantly.

"i have seen," continued iola, "the same spirit manifested in the north.
mamma once attempted to do missionary work in this city. one day she
found an outcast colored girl, whom she wished to rescue. she took her
to an asylum for fallen women and made an application for her, but was
refused. colored girls were not received there. soon after mamma found
among the colored people an outcast white girl. mamma's sympathies,
unfettered by class distinction, were aroused in her behalf, 
 
 ___________________________
 
with my heart's blood. it is easier to
outgrow the dishonor of crime than the disabilities of color. you have
created in this country an aristocracy of color wide enough to include
the south with its treason and utah with its abominations, but too
narrow to include the best and bravest colored man who bared his breast
to the bullets of the enemy during your fratricidal strife. is not the
most arrant rebel to-day more acceptable to you than the most faithful
colored man?"

"no! no!" exclaimed dr. gresham, vehemently. "you are wrong. i belong to
the grand army of the republic. we have no separate state posts for the
colored people, and, were such a thing proposed, the majority of our
members, i believe, would be against it. in congress colored men have
the same seats as white men, and the color line is slowly fading out in
our public institutions."

"but how is it in the church?" asked iola.

"the church is naturally conservative. it preserves old truths, even if
it is somewhat slow in embracing
 
 ___________________________
 
to attempt to
divert her from her purpose. he knew that for the true reconstruction of
the country something more was needed than bayonets and bullets, or the
schemes of selfish politicians or plotting demagogues. he knew that the
south needed the surrender of the best brain and heart of the country to
build, above the wastes of war, more stately temples of thought and
action.




chapter xxviii.


dr. latrobe's mistake.

on the morning previous to their departure for their respective homes,
dr. gresham met dr. latrobe in the parlor of the concordia.

"how," asked dr. gresham, "did you like dr. latimer's paper?"

"very much, indeed. it was excellent. he is a very talented young man.
he sits next to me at lunch and i have conversed with him several times.
he is very genial and attractive, only he seems to be rather cranky on
the negro question. i hope if he comes south that he will not make the
mistake of mixing up with the negroes. it would be throwing away his
influence and ruining his prospe
 
 ___________________________
 
cts. he seems to be well versed in
science and literature and would make a very delightful accession to our
social life."

"i think," replied dr. gresham, "that he is an honor to our profession.
he is one of the finest specimens of our young manhood."

just then dr. latimer entered the room. dr. latrobe arose and, greeting
him cordially, said: "i was delighted with your paper; it was full of
thought and suggestion."

"thank you," answered dr. latimer, "it was my aim to make it so."

"and you succeeded admirably," replied dr. latrobe. "i could not help
thinking how much we owe to heredity and environment."

"yes," said dr. gresham. "continental e
 
 ___________________________
 
and our
social customs must be kept intact."

"you have been associating with me at the convention for several days; i
do not see that the contact has dragged you down, has it?"

"you! what has that got to do with associating with niggers?" asked dr.
latrobe, curtly.

"the blood of that race is coursing through my veins. i am one of them,"
replied dr. latimer, proudly raising his head.

"you!" exclaimed dr. latrobe, with an air of profound astonishment and
crimsoning face.

"yes;" interposed dr. gresham, laughing heartily at dr. latrobe's
discomfiture. "he belongs to that negro race both by blood and choice.
his father's mother made overtures to receive him as her grandson and
heir, but he has nobly refused to forsake his mother's people and has
cast his lot with them."

"and i," said dr. latimer, "would have despised myself if i had done
otherwise."

"well, well," said dr. latrobe, rising, "i was never so deceived before.
good morning!"

dr. latrobe had thought he was clear-sighted enough to 
 
 ___________________________
 
e to her dear, departed son. all the mother love in her
lonely heart awoke, and she was willing to overlook "the missing link of
matrimony," and adopt him as her heir, if he would ignore his identity
with the colored race.

before him loomed all the possibilities which only birth and blood can
give a white man in our democratic country. but he was a man of too much
sterling worth of character to be willing to forsake his mother's race
for the richest advantages his grandmother could bestow.

dr. gresham had met dr. latimer at the beginning of the convention, and
had been attracted to him by his frank and genial manner. one morning,
when conversing with him, dr. gresham had learned some of the salient
points of his history, which, instead of repelling him, had only
deepened his admiration for the young doctor. he was much amused when he
saw the pleasant acquaintanceship between him and dr. latrobe, but they
agreed to be silent about his racial connection until the time came when
they were ready
 
 ___________________________
 
e crowning joy of my life?"

his words were more than a tender strain wooing her to love and
happiness, they were a clarion call to a life of high and holy worth, a
call which found a response in her heart. her hand lay limp in his. she
did not withdraw it, but, raising her lustrous eyes to his, she softly
answered: "frank, i love you."

after he had gone, iola sat by the window, gazing at the splendid stars,
her heart quietly throbbing with a delicious sense of joy and love. she
had admired dr. gresham and, had there been no barrier in her way, she
might have learned to love him; but dr. latimer had grown irresistibly
upon her heart. there were depths in her nature that dr. gresham had
never fathomed; aspirations in her soul with which he had never mingled.
but as the waves leap up to the strand, so her soul went out to dr.
latimer. between their lives were no impeding barriers, no inclination
impelling one way and duty compelling another. kindred hopes and tastes
had knit their hearts; grand