l.
and this young lady, uncle daniel, i believe is my niece." as he spoke
he turned to iola. "do you remember my mother?"

"oh, yes," said uncle daniel, looking intently at iola as she stepped
forward and cordially gave him her hand.

"well, i firmly believe," continued robert, "that this is the daughter
of the little girl whom miss nancy sold away with my mother."

"well, i'se rale glad ter see her. she puts me mighty much in mine ob
dem days wen we war all young togedder; wen miss nancy sed, 'harriet war
too high fer her.' it jis' seems like yisterday wen i yeard miss nancy
say, 'no house could flourish whar dere war two mistresses.' well, mr.
robert--"

"oh, no, no, uncle daniel," interrupted robert, "don't say that! call me
robby or bob, just as you used to."

"well, bobby, i'se glad klar from de bottom of my heart ter see yer."

"even if you wouldn't go with us when we left?"

"oh, bobby, dem war mighty tryin' times. you boys didn't know it, but
marster robert hab giben me a bag ob money
 
 ___________________________
 
lks are down here teaching theology, that
is, teaching young men how to preach. why don't you study theology?"

"look a yere, boy, i'se been a preachin' dese thirty years, an' you come
yere a tellin' me 'bout studying yore ologies. i larn'd my 'ology at de
foot ob de cross. you bin dar?"

"dear uncle daniel," said iola, "the moral aspect of the nation would be
changed if it would learn at the same cross to subordinate the spirit of
caste to the spirit of christ."

"does yer 'member miss nancy's harriet," asked aunt linda, "dat she sole
away kase she wouldn't let her whip her? well, we think dis is harriet's
gran'chile. she war sole away from her mar, an' now she's a lookin' fer
her."

"well, i hopes she may fine her," replied salters. "i war sole 'way from
my mammy wen i war eighteen mont's ole, an' i wouldn't know her now from
a bunch ob turnips."

"i," said iola, "am on my way south seeking for my mother, and i shall
not give up until i find her."

"come," said aunt linda, "we mustn't stan'
 
 ___________________________
 
y iola bent over the happy mother, with her heart
filled with mournful memories of her own mother.

aunt linda was induced to stay until the next morning, and then gladly
assisted robert's mother in arranging for her journey northward. the
friends who had given her a shelter in their hospitable home, learned to
value her so much that it was with great reluctance they resigned her to
the care of her son. aunt linda was full of bustling activity, and her
spirits overflowed with good humor.

"now, harriet," she said, as they rode along on their return journey,
"you mus' jis' thank me fer finin' yore chile, 'cause i got him to come
to dat big meetin' wid me."

"oh, lindy," she cried, "i'se glad from de bottom ob my heart ter see
you's all. i com'd out dere ter git a blessin', an' i'se got a double
po'tion. de frens i war libin' wid war mighty good ter me. dey lib'd wid
me in de lower kentry, an' arter de war war ober i stopped wid 'em and
helped take keer ob de chillen; an' when dey com'd up yere