ttle room to doubt that the book will be
in great demand and will meet with warm congratulations from a goodly
number outside of the author's social connections.

doubtless the thousands of colored sunday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and his company

xvi. after the battle

xvii. flames in the school-room

xviii. searching for lost ones

xix. striking contrasts

xx. a revelation

xxi. a home for
 
 ___________________________
 
r over the
nation, and so warped the consciences of men, that they failed to read
aright the legible transcript of divine retribution which was written
upon the shuddering earth, where the blood of god's poor children had
been as water freely spilled.




chapter ii.


contraband of war.

a few evenings after this conversation between robert and linda, a
prayer-meeting was held. under the cover of night a few dusky figures
met by stealth in mccullough's woods.

"howdy," said robert, approaching uncle daniel, the leader of the
prayer-meeting, who had preceded him but a few minutes.

"thanks and praise; i'se all right. how is you, chile?"

"oh, i'm all right," said robert, smiling, and grasping uncle daniel's
hand.

"what's de news?" exclaimed several, as they turned their faces eagerly
towards robert.

"i hear," said robert, "that they are done sending the runaways back to
their masters."

"is dat so?" said a half dozen earnest voices. "how did you yere it?"

"i read it in the papers. and tom told 
 
 ___________________________
 
attached.

"what does it mean? is it somethin' good for us?"

"i think," said robert, a little vain of his superior knowledge, "it is
the best kind of good. it means if two armies are fighting and the
horses of one run away, the other has a right to take them. and it is
just the same if a slave runs away from the secesh to the union lines.
he is called a contraband, just the same as if he were an ox or a horse.
they wouldn't send the horses back, and they won't send us back."

"is dat so?" said uncle daniel, a dear old father, with a look of
saintly patience on his face. "well, chillen, what do you mean to do?"

"go, jis' as soon as we kin git to de army," said tom anderson.

"what else did the generals say? and how did you come to hear them,
tom?" asked robert johnson.

"well, yer see, marster's too ole and feeble to go to de war, but his
heart's in it. an' it makes him feel good all ober when dem big ginerals
comes an' tells him all 'bout it. well, i war laying out on de porch
fas' asleep an' sn
 
 ___________________________
 
y wouldn't
know how to take keer ob demselves.'"

"only let 'em try it," chorused a half dozen voices, "an' dey'll soon
see who'll git de bes' ob de guns; an' as to taking keer ob ourselves, i
specs we kin take keer ob ourselves as well as take keer ob dem."

"yes," said tom, "who plants de cotton and raises all de crops?"

    "'they eat the meat and give us the bones,
      eat the cherries and give us the stones,'

"and i'm getting tired of the whole business," said robert.

"but, bob," said uncle daniel, "you've got a good owner. you don't hab
to run away from bad times and wuss a comin'."

"it isn't so good, but it might be better. i ain't got nothing 'gainst
my ole miss, except she sold my mother from me. and a boy ain't nothin'
without his mother. i forgive her, but i never forget her, and never
expect to. but if she were the best woman on earth i would rather have
my freedom than belong to her. well, boys, here's a chance for us just
as soon as the union army gets in sight. what will you d
 
 ___________________________
 
om anderson, "jis' as soon as dem linkum soldiers
gits in sight."

"an' i'se a gwine wid you, tom," said another. "i specs my ole
marster'll feel right smart lonesome when i'se gone, but i don't keer
'bout stayin' for company's sake."

"my ole marster's room's a heap better'n his company," said tom
anderson, "an' i'se a goner too. dis yer freedom's too good to be lef'
behind, wen you's got a chance to git it. i won't stop to bid ole marse
good bye."

"what do you think," said robert, turning to uncle daniel; "won't you go
with us?"

"no, chillen, i don't blame you for gwine; but i'se gwine to stay.
slavery's done got all de marrow out ob dese poor ole bones. ef freedom
comes it won't do me much good; we ole one's will die out, but it will
set you youngsters all up."

"but, uncle daniel, you're not too old to want your freedom?"

"i knows dat. i lubs de bery name of freedom. i'se been praying and
hoping for it dese many years. an' ef i warn't boun', i would go wid you
ter-morrer. i won't put a stra
 
 ___________________________
 
w in your way. you boys go, and my prayers
will go wid you. i can't go, it's no use. i'se gwine to stay on de ole
place till marse robert comes back, or is brought back."

"but, uncle daniel," said robert, "what's the use of praying for a
thing if, when it comes, you won't take it? as much as you have been
praying and talking about freedom, i thought that when the chance came
you would have been one of the first to take it. now, do tell us why you
won't go with us. ain't you willing?"

"why, robbie, my whole heart is wid you. but when marse robert went to
de war, he called me into his room and said to me, 'uncle dan'el, i'se
gwine to de war, an' i want you to look arter my wife an'
 
 ___________________________
 
erin', cussin', and
swearin' at somebody. marse robert ain't a bit like him. he takes right
arter his mother. bad as ole marster war, i think she jis' lob'd de
groun' he walked on. well, women's mighty curious kind of folks anyhow.
i sometimes thinks de wuss you treats dem de better dey likes you."

"well," said tom, a little impatiently, "what's yer gwine to do? is yer
gwine wid us, ef yer gits a chance?"

"now, jes' you hole on till i gits a chance to tell yer why i'se gwine
to stay."

"well, uncle daniel, let's hear it," said robert.

"i was jes' gwine to tell yer when tom put me out. ole marster died when
marse robert war two years ole, and his pore mother when he war four.
when he died, miss anna used to keep me 'bout her jes' like i war her
shadder. i used to nuss marse robert jes' de same as ef i were his own
fadder. i used to fix his milk, rock him to sleep, ride him on my back,
an' nothin' pleased him better'n fer uncle dan'el to ride him
piggy-back."

"well, uncle daniel," said robert, "
 
 ___________________________
 
ant to go back to africa a slave. he thought if he did, his people
would look down on him, an' he wanted to go back a free man. he war
orful weak when marster brought him de free papers. he jis' ris up in de
bed, clutched dem in his han's, smiled, an' gasped out, 'i'se free at
las'; an' fell back on de pillar, an' he war gone. oh, but he war
spunky. de oberseers, arter dey foun' out who he war, gin'rally gabe him
a wide birth. i specs his father war some ole guinea king."

"well, chillen," said uncle daniel, "we's kept up dis meeting long
enough. we'd better go home, and not all go one way, cause de patrollers
might git us all inter trouble, an' we must try to slip home by hook or
crook."

"an' when we meet again, uncle daniel can finish his story, an' be ready
to go with us," said robert.

"i wish," said tom anderson, "he would go wid us, de wuss kind."




chapter iii.


uncle daniel's story.

the union had snapped asunder because it lacked the cohesion of justice,
and the nation was destined to
 
 ___________________________
 
 pass through the crucible of disaster and
defeat, till she was ready to clasp hands with the negro and march
abreast with him to freedom and victory.

the union army was encamping a few miles from c----, in north carolina.
robert, being well posted on the condition of affairs, had stealthily
contrived to call a meeting in uncle daniel's cabin. uncle daniel's wife
had gone to bed as a sick sister, and they held a prayer-meeting by her
bedside. it was a little risky, but as mr. thurston did not encourage
the visits of the patrollers, and heartily detested having them prying
into his cabins, there was not much danger of molestation.

"well, uncle daniel, we want to hear your story, and see if you have
made up your mind to go with us," said robert, after he had been seated
a few minutes in uncle daniel's cabin.

"no, chillen, i've no objection to fin
 
 ___________________________
 
you free?"

"marse robert tole me, ef he died fust he war gwine ter leave me
free--dat i should neber sarve any one else."

"oh, sho!" said tom, "promises, like pie crusts, is made to be broken. i
don't trust none ob dem. i'se been yere dese fifteen years, an' i'se
neber foun' any troof in dem. an' i'se gwine wid dem north men soon's i
gits a chance. an' ef you knowed what's good fer you, you'd go, too."

"no, tom; i can't go. when marster robert went to de front, he called me
to him an' said: 'uncle daniel,' an' he was drefful pale when he said
it, 'i are gwine to de war, an' i want yer to take keer of my wife an'
chillen, jis' like yer used to take keer of me wen yer called me your
little boy.' well, dat jis' got to me, an' i couldn't help cryin', to
save my life."

"i specs," said tom, "your tear bags must lie mighty close to your eyes.
i wouldn't cry ef dem yankees would make ebery one ob dem go to de
front, an' stay dere foreber. dey'd only be gittin' back what dey's been
a doin' to us."

"ma
 
 ___________________________
 
of a
soul which had been fearfully tempest tossed, but had passed through
suffering into peace. very touching was the look of resignation and hope
which overspread her features as she replied, with the simple child-like
faith which she had learned in the darkest hour, "the lord says, we must
forgive." and with her that thought, as coming from the lips of divine
love, was enough to settle the whole question of forgiveness of injuries
and love to enemies.

"well," said thomas anderson, turning to uncle daniel, "we can't count
on yer to go wid us?"

"boys," said uncle daniel, and there was grief in his voice, "i'se
mighty glad you hab a chance for your freedom; but, ez i tole yer, i
promised marse robert i would stay, an' i mus' be as good as my word.
don't you youngsters stay for an ole stager like me. i'm ole an' mos'
worn out. freedom wouldn't do much for me, but i want you all to be as
free as the birds; so, you chillen, take your freedom when you kin get
it."

"but, uncle dan'el, you won't say n
 
 ___________________________
 
othin' 'bout our going, will you?"
said the youngest of the company.

uncle daniel slowly arose. there was a mournful flash in his eye, a
tremor of emotion in his voice, as he said, "look yere, boys, de boy dat
axed dat question war a new comer on dis plantation, but some ob you's
bin here all ob your lives; did you eber know ob uncle dan'el gittin'
any ob you inter trouble?"

"no, no," exclaimed a chorus of voices, "but many's de time you've held
off de blows wen de oberseer got too mean, an' cruelized us too much,
wen marse robert war away. an' wen he got back, you made him
 
 ___________________________
 
 settle de
oberseer's hash."

"well, boys," said uncle daniel, with an air of mournful dignity, "i'se
de same uncle dan'el i eber war. ef any ob you wants to go, i habben't a
word to say agin it. i specs dem yankees be all right, but i knows marse
robert, an' i don't know dem, an' i ain't a gwine ter throw away dirty
water 'til i gits clean."

"well, uncle ben," said robert, addressing a stalwart man whose towering
form and darkly flashing eye told that slavery had failed to put the
crouch in his shoulders or general abjectness into his demeanor, "you
wil
 
 ___________________________
 
 don't want to be free and leave her behind in
slavery. i was only five years old when my master and, as i believe,
father, sold us both here to this lower country, an' we've been here
ever since. it's no use talking, i won't leave her to be run over by
everybody."

a few evenings after this interview, the union soldiers entered the town
of c----, and established their headquarters near the home of thomas
anderson.

out of the little company, almost every one deserted to the union army,
leaving uncle daniel faithful to his trust, and ben tunnel hushing his
heart's deep aspirations for freedom in a passionate devotion to his
timid and affectionate mother.




chapter iv.


arrival of the union army.

a few evenings before the stampede of robert and his friends to the
army, and as he sat alone in his room reading the latest news from the
paper he had secreted, he heard a cautious tread and a low tap at his
window. he opened the door quietly and whispered:--

"anything new, tom?"

"yes."

"what is it
 
 ___________________________
 
captain sybil, "that if the public school had been
common through the south this war would never have occurred. now things
have reached such a pass that able-bodied men must report at
headquarters, or be treated as deserters. their leaders are desperate
men, of whom it has been said: 'they have robbed the cradle and the
grave.'"

"they are fighting against fearful odds," said colonel robinson, "and
their defeat is only a question of time."

"as soon," said robert, "as they fired on fort sumter, uncle daniel, a
dear old father who had been praying and hoping for freedom, said to me:
'dey's fired on fort sumter, an' mark my words, bob, de norf's boun'
ter whip.'"

"had we freed the slaves at the outset," said captain sybil, "we
wouldn't have given the rebels so much opportunity to strengthen
themselves by means of slave labor in raising their crops, throwing up
their entrenchments, and building their fortifications. slavery was a
deadly cancer eating into the life of the nation; but, somehow, it had
 
 ___________________________
 
 changes since you left here," mrs. johnson said.
"gundover died, and a number of colored men have banded together, bought
his plantation, and divided it among themselves. and i hear they have a
very nice settlement out there. i hope, since the government has set
them free, that they will succeed."

after robert's interview with mrs. johnson he thought he would visit the
settlement and hunt up his old friends. he easily found the place. it
was on a clearing in gundover's woods, where robert and uncle daniel had
held their last prayer-meeting. now the gloomy silence of those woods
was broken by the hum of industry, the murmur of cheerful voices, and
the merry laughter of happy children. where they had trodden with fear
and misgiving, freedmen walked with light and bounding hearts. the
school-house had taken the place of the slave-pen and auction-block.
"how is yer, ole boy?" asked one laborer of another.

"everything is lobly," replied the other. the blue sky arching overhead
and the beauty of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
o! whar did
yer ketch up wid her?"

"i met her first," said robert, "at the hospital here, when our poor tom
was dying; and when i was wounded at five forks she attended me in the
field hospital there. she was just as good as gold."

"well, did i eber! you jis' fotch dat chile to see me, ef she ain't too
fine. i'se pore, but i'se clean, an' i ain't forgot how ter git up good
dinners. now, i wants ter hab a good talk 'bout our feller-sarvants."

"yes, and i," said robert, "want to hear all about uncle daniel, and
jennie, and uncle ben tunnel."

"well, i'se got lots an' gobs ter tell yer. i'se kep' track ob dem all.
aunt katie died an' went ter hebben in a blaze ob glory. uncle dan'el
stayed on de place till marse robert com'd back. when de war war ober he
war smashed all ter pieces. i did pity him from de bottom ob my heart.
when he went ter de war he looked so brave an' han'some; an' wen he
com'd back he looked orful. 'fore he went he gib uncle dan'el a bag full
ob money ter take kere ob. 'an wen 
 
 ___________________________
 
s had not lost their skill since she had tasted the sweets of
freedom. her biscuits were just as light and flaky as ever. her jelly
was as bright as amber, and her preserves were perfectly delicious.
after she had set the table she stood looking in silent admiration,
chuckling to herself: "ole mistus can't set sich a table as dat. she
ought'er be yere to see it. specs 'twould make her mouf water. well, i
mus' let by-gones be by-gones. but dis yere freedom's mighty good."

aunt linda had invited uncle daniel, and, wishing to give him a pleasant
surprise, she had refrained from telling him that robert johnson was the
one she wished him to meet.

"do you know dis gemmen?" said aunt linda to uncle daniel, when the
latter arrived.

"well, i can't say's i do. my eyes is gittin dim, an i disremembers
him."

"now jis' you look right good at him. don't yer 'member him?"

uncle daniel looked puzzled and, slowly scanning robert's features,
said: "he do look like somebody i used ter know, but i can't make him
 
 ___________________________
 

out ter save my life. i don't know whar to place him. who is de gemmen,
ennyhow?"

"why, uncle dan'el," replied aunt linda, "dis is robby; miss nancy's
bad, mischeebous robby, dat war allers playin' tricks on me."

"well, shore's i'se born, ef dis ain't our ole bobby!" exclaimed uncle
daniel, delightedly. "why, chile, whar did yer come from? thought you
war dead an' buried long 'go."

"why, uncle daniel, did you send anybody to kill me?" asked robert,
laughingly.

"oh, no'n 'deed, chile! but i yeard dat you war killed in de battle, an'
i never 'spected ter see you agin."

"well, here i am," replied robert, "large as life, and just as natural.
and this young lady, uncle daniel, i believe is my niece." as he spoke
he turned to iola. "do you remember my mother?"

"oh, yes," said uncle daniel, looking intently at iola as she stepped
forward and cordially gave him her hand.

"well, i firmly believe
 
 ___________________________
 
," continued robert, "that this is the daughter
of the little girl whom miss nancy sold away with my mother."

"well, i'se rale glad ter see her. she puts me mighty much in mine ob
dem days wen we war all young togedder; wen miss nancy sed, 'harriet war
too high fer her.' it jis' seems like yisterday wen i yeard miss nancy
say, 'no house could flourish whar dere war two mistresses.' well, mr.
robert--"

"oh, no, no, uncle daniel," interrupted robert, "don't say that! call me
robby or bob, just as you used to."

"well, bobby, i'se glad klar from de bottom of my heart ter see yer."

"even if you wouldn't go with us when we left?"

"oh, bobby, dem war mighty tryin' times. you boys didn't know it, but
marster robert hab giben me a bag ob money ter take keer ob, an' i
promised him i'd do it an' i had ter be ez good ez my word."

"oh, uncle daniel, why didn't you tell us boys all about it? we could
have helped you take care 
 
 ___________________________
 
of it."

"now, wouldn't dat hab bin smart ter let on ter you chaps, an' hab you
huntin' fer it from dan ter barsheba? i specs some ob you would bin a
rootin' fer it yit!"

"well, uncle daniel, we were young then; i can't tell what we would have
done if we had found it. but we are older now."

"yes, yer older, but i wouldn't put it pas' yer eben now, ef yer foun'
out whar it war."

"yes," said iola, laughing, "they say 'caution is the parent of
safety.'"

"money's a mighty tempting thing," said robert, smiling.

"but, robby, dere's nothin' like a klar conscience; a klar conscience,
robby!"

just then aunt linda, who had been completing the preparations for her
supper, entered the roo
 
 ___________________________
 
d you get married since
the war?"

"lindy an' me war married long 'fore de war. but my ole marster sole me
away from her an' our little gal, an' den sole her chile ter somebody
else. arter freedom, i hunted up our little gal, an' foun' her. she war
a big woman den. den i com'd right back ter dis place an' foun' lindy.
she hedn't married agin, nuther hed i; so we jis' let de parson marry us
out er de book; an' we war mighty glad ter git togedder agin, an' feel
hitched togedder fer life."

"well, uncle daniel," said robert, turning the conversation toward him,
"you and uncle ben wouldn't go with us, but you came out all right at
last."

"yes, indeed," said aunt linda, "ben got inter a stream of luck. arter
freedom com'd, de people had a heap of fath in ben; an' wen dey wanted
some one to go ter congress dey jist voted for ben ter go. an' he went,
too. an' wen salters went to washin'ton to git his pension, who should
he see dere wid dem big men but our ben, lookin' jist as big as any ob
dem."

"an' i
 
 ___________________________
 
 in salters; "if i
couldn't go dere myself, i war mighty glad to see some one ob my people
dat could. i felt like de boy who, wen somebody said he war gwine to
slap off his face, said, 'yer kin slap off my face, but i'se got a big
brudder, an' you can't slap off his face.' i went to see him 'fore i lef,
and he war jist de same as he war wen we war boys togedder. he hadn't
got de big head a bit."

"i reckon mirandy war mighty sorry she didn't stay wid him. i know i
should be," said aunt linda.

"uncle daniel," asked robert, "are you still preaching?"

"yes, chile, i'se still firing off de gospel gun."

"i hear some of the northern folks are down here teaching theology, that
is, teaching young men how to preach. why don't you study theology?"

"look a yere, boy, i'se been a preachin' dese thirty years, an' you come
yere a tellin' me 'bout studying yore ologies. i larn'd my 'ology at de
foot ob de cross. you bin dar?"

"dear uncle daniel," said iola, "the moral aspect of the nation would be
changed i
 
 ___________________________
 
t sat on her right hand, contrasting aunt linda's pleasant
situation with the old days in mrs. johnson's kitchen, where he had
played his pranks upon her, and told her the news of the war.

over iola there stole a spirit of restfulness. there was something so
motherly in aunt linda's manner that it seemed to recall the bright,
sunshiny days when she used to nestle in mam liza's arms, in her own
happy home. the conversation was full of army reminiscences and
recollections of the days of slavery. uncle daniel was much interested,
and, as they rose from the table, exclaimed:--

"robby, seein' yer an' hearin' yer talk, almos' puts new springs inter
me. i feel 'mos' like i war gittin' younger."

after the supper, salters and his guests returned to the front room,
which aunt linda regarded with so much pride, and on which she bestowed
so much care.

"well, captin," said salters, "i neber 'spected ter see you agin. do you
know de las' time i seed yer? well, you war on a stretcher, an' four ob
us war carr
 
 ___________________________
 
id salters.

"i specs cullud folks mus' hab done somethin'," interposed aunt linda.

"o, nonsense," said robert. "i don't think they are any worse than the
white people. i don't believe, if we had the power, we would do any
more lynching, burning, and murdering than they do."

"dat's so," said aunt linda, "it's ralely orful how our folks hab been
murdered sence de war. but i don't think dese young folks is goin' ter
take things as we's allers done."

"we war cowed down from the beginnin'," said uncle daniel, "but dese
young folks ain't comin' up dat way."

"no," said salters, "fer one night arter some ob our pore people had
been killed, an' some ob our women had run'd away 'bout seventeen miles,
my gran'son, looking me squar in de face, said: 'ain't you got five
fingers? can't you pull a trigger as well as a white man?' i tell yer,
cap, dat jis' got to me, an' i made up my mine dat my boy should neber
call me a coward."

"it is not to be expected," said robert, "that these young people are
going t
 
 ___________________________
 
cotton. cotton war bringin' orful high prices den, but lindy said to me,
'now, john, you'se got a lot ob money, an' you'd better salt it down.
i'd ruther lib on a little piece ob lan' ob my own dan a big piece ob
somebody else's. well, i says to lindy, i dun know nuthin' 'bout buyin'
lan', an' i'se 'fraid arter i'se done buyed it an' put all de marrer ob
dese bones in it, dat somebody's far-off cousin will come an' say de
title ain't good, an' i'll lose it all."

"you're right thar, john," said uncle daniel. "white man's so unsartain,
black man's nebber safe."

"but somehow," continued salters, "lindy warn't satisfied wid rentin',
so i buyed a piece ob lan', an' i'se glad now i'se got it. lindy's got a
lot ob gumption; knows most as much as a man. she ain't got dat long
head fer nuffin. she's got lots ob sense, but i don't like to tell her
so."

"why not?" asked iola. "do you think it would make her feel too happy?"

"well, it don't do ter tell you women how much we thinks ob you. it sets
you up t
 
 ___________________________
 
come under his belly.
do yo 'member miss nancy's fardder?"

"ob course i does!"

"well," said aunt linda, "he war a nice ole gemmen. wen he died, i said
de las' gemmen's dead, an' dere's noboddy ter step in his shoes."

"pore miss nancy!" exclaimed robert's mother. "i ain't nothin' agin her.
but i wouldn't swap places wid her, 'cause i'se got my son; an' i
beliebs he'll do a good part by me."

"mother," said robert, as he entered the room, "i've brought an old
friend to see you. do you remember uncle daniel?"

uncle daniel threw back his head, reached out his hand, and manifested
his joy with "well, har'yet! is dis you? i neber 'spected to see you in
dese lower grouns! how does yer do? an' whar hab you bin all dis time?"

"o, i'se been tossin' roun' 'bout; but it's all com'd right at las'.
i'se lib'd to see my boy 'fore i died."

"my wife an' boys is in glory," said uncle daniel. "but i 'spects to see
'em 'fore long. 'cause i'se tryin' to dig deep, build sure, an' make my
way from earth ter glory.
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"dat's de right kine ob talk, dan'el. we ole folks ain't got long ter
stay yere."

they chatted together until job and salters came home for supper. after
they had eaten, uncle daniel said:--

"we'll hab a word ob prayer."

there, in that peaceful habitation, they knelt down, and mingled their
prayers together, as they had done in by-gone days, when they had met by
stealth in lonely swamps or silent forests.

the next morning robert and his mother started northward. they were well
supplied with a bountiful luncheon by aunt linda, who had so thoroughly
enjoyed their sojourn with her. on the next day he arrived in the city
of p----, and took his mother to his boarding-house, u
 
 ___________________________
 
harry and miss delany as attendants,
he was married to iola, amid a pleasant gathering of friends, by rev.
carmicle.




chapter xxxiii.


conclusion.

it was late in the summer when dr. latimer and his bride reached their
home in north carolina. over the cottage porch were morning-glories to
greet the first flushes of the rising day, and roses and jasmines to
distill their fragrance on the evening air. aunt linda, who had been
apprised of their coming, was patiently awaiting their arrival, and
uncle daniel was pleased to know that "dat sweet young lady who had sich
putty manners war comin' to lib wid dem."

as soon as they arrived, aunt linda rushed up to iola, folded her in her
arms, and joyfully exclaimed: "how'dy, honey! i'se so glad you's come. i
seed it in a vision dat somebody fair war comin' to help us. an' wen i
yered it war you, i larffed and jist rolled ober, and larffed and jist
gib up."

"but, aunt linda, i am not very fair," replied mrs. latimer.

"well, chile, you's fair to me. how'
 
 ___________________________
 
es her ripening experience to her chosen work, to which she
was too devoted to resign. and through the school they are lifting up
the homes of the people. some have pitied, others blamed, harry for
casting his lot with the colored people, but he knows that life's
highest and best advantages do not depend on the color of the skin or
texture of the hair. he has his reward in the improved condition of his
pupils and the superb manhood and noble life which he has developed in
his much needed work.

uncle daniel still lingers on the shores of time, a cheery, lovable old
man, loved and respected by all; a welcome guest in every home. soon
after iola's marriage, robert sold out his business and moved with his
mother and sister to north carolina. he bought a large plantation near
c----, which he divided into small homesteads, and sold to poor but
thrifty laborers, and his heart has been gladdened by their increased
prosperity and progress. he has seen the one-roomed cabins change to
comfortable cottages, 