 to look at him skylarking dere while
de folks is waitin' for dere letters, an' talkin' bout de war, yer
wouldn't think dat boy had a thimbleful of sense. but jake's listenin'
all de time wid his eyes and his mouf wide open, an' ketchin' eberything
he kin, an' a heap ob news he gits dat way. as to jinny, she jis'
capered and danced all ober de flore. an' i jis' had to put my han' ober
her mouf to keep ole miss from yereing her. oh, but we did hab a good
time. boy, yer oughter been yere."

"and, aunt linda, what did you do?"

"oh, honey, i war jis' ready to crack my sides larffin, jis' to see what
a long face jinny puts on wen ole miss is talkin', an' den to see dat
face wen missus' back is turned, why it's good as a circus. it's nuff to
make a horse larff."

"why, aunt linda, you never saw a circus?"

"no, but i'se hearn tell ob dem, and i thinks dey mus' be mighty funny.
an' i know it's orful funny to see how straight jinny's face looks wen
she's almos' ready to bust, while ole miss is frettin'
 
 ___________________________
 
whip.'"

"i hope so," said robert. "i think that we have a heap of friends up
there."

"well, i'm jis' gwine to keep on prayin' an' b'lievin'."

just then the bell rang, and robert, answering, found mrs. johnson
suffering from a severe headache, which he thought was occasioned by her
worrying over the late defeat of the confederates. she sent him on an
errand, which he executed with his usual dispatch, and returned to some
work which he had to do in the kitchen. robert was quite a favorite with
aunt linda, and they often had confidential chats together.

"bobby," she said, when he returned, "i thinks we ort ter hab a
prayer-meetin' putty soon."

"i am in for that. where will you have it?"

"lem me see. las' sunday we had it in gibson's woods; sunday 'fore las',
in de old cypress swamp; an' nex' sunday we'el hab one in mccullough's
woods. las' sunday we had a good time. i war jis' chock full an' runnin'
ober. aunt milly's daughter's bin monin all summer, an' she's jis' come
throo. we had a powerf
 
 ___________________________
 
i belieb ef dere's a saint in glory, miss anna's dere."

"oh, i don't take much stock in white folks' religion," said robert,
laughing carelessly.

"the way," said tom anderson, "dat some of dese folks cut their cards
yere, i think dey'll be as sceece in hebben as hen's teeth. i think wen
some of dem preachers brings de bible 'round an' tells us 'bout mindin
our marsters and not stealin' dere tings, dat dey preach to please de
white folks, an' dey frows coleness ober de meetin'."

"an' i," said aunt linda, "neber did belieb in dem bible preachers. i
yered one ob dem sayin' wen he war dyin', it war all dark wid him. an'
de way he treated his house-girl, pore thing, i don't wonder dat it war
dark wid him."

"o, i guess," said robert, "that the bible is all right, but some of
these church folks don't get the right hang of it."

"may be dat's so," said aunt linda. "but i allers wanted to learn how to
read. i once had a book, and tried to make out what war in it, but ebery
time my mistus caught me wi
 
 ___________________________
 
diment of content and good humor. robert looked inquiringly at her.
on seeing him, she almost immediately exclaimed, "shore as i'se born,
dat's robert! look yere, honey, whar did yer come from? i'll gib my head
fer a choppin' block ef dat ain't miss nancy's bob. ain't yer our bobby?
shore yer is."

"of course i am," responded robert. "it isn't anybody else. how did you
know me?"

"how did i know yer? by dem mischeebous eyes, ob course. i'd a knowed
yer if i had seed yer in europe."

"in europe, aunt linda? where's that?"

"i don't know. i specs its some big city, somewhar. but yer looks jis'
splendid. yer looks good 'nuff ter kiss."

"oh, aunt linda, don't say that. you make me blush."

"oh you go 'long wid yer. i specs yer's got a nice little wife up dar
whar yer comes from, dat kisses yer ebery day, an' sunday, too."

"is that the way your old man does you?"

"oh, no, not a bit. he isn't one ob de kissin' kine. but sit down," she
said, handing robert a chair. "won't yer hab a glass ob milk? bo
 
 ___________________________
 
y, i'se
a libin' in clover. neber 'spected ter see sich good times in all my
born days."

"well, aunt linda," said robert, seating himself near her, and drinking
the glass of milk which she had handed him, "how goes the battle? how
have you been getting on since freedom?"

"oh, fust rate, fust rate! wen freedom com'd i jist lit out ob miss
johnson's kitchen soon as i could. i wanted ter re'lize i war free, an'
i couldn't, tell i got out er de sight and soun' ob ole miss. when de
war war ober an' de sogers war still stopping' yere, i made pies an'
cakes, sole em to de sogers, an' jist made money han' 
 
 ___________________________
 
d let de lan' grow up in trees 'fore he'd sell it to
us. an' dere war mr. brayton; he buyed some lan' and sole it to some
cullud folks, an' his ole frien's got so mad wid him dat dey wouldn't
speak ter him, an' he war borned down yere. i tole ole miss anderson's
daughter dat we wanted ter git some homes ob our ownselbs. she sez, 'den
you won't want ter work for us?' jis' de same as ef we could eat an'
drink our houses. i tell yer, robby, dese white folks don't know
eberything."

"that's a fact, aunt linda."

"den i sez ter john, 'wen one door shuts anoder opens.' an' shore
'nough, ole gundover died, an' his place war all in debt, an' had to be
sole. some jews bought it, but dey didn't want to farm it, so dey gib us
a chance to buy it. dem jews hez been right helpful to cullud people wen
dey hab lan' to sell. i reckon dey don't keer who buys it so long as dey
gits de money. well, john didn't gib in at fust; didn't want to let on
his wife knowed more dan he did, an' dat he war ruled ober by a woma
 
 ___________________________
 
to rule a woman. but i kep' naggin at him, till i specs he got tired
of my tongue, an' he went and buyed dis piece ob lan'. dis house war on
it, an' war all gwine to wrack. it used to belong to john's ole marster.
his wife died right in dis house, an' arter dat her husband went right
to de dorgs; an' now he's in de pore-house. my! but ain't dem tables
turned. when we knowed it war our own, warn't my ole man proud! i seed
it in him, but he wouldn't let on. ain't you men powerful 'ceitful?"

"oh, aunt linda, don't put me in with the rest!"

"i don't know 'bout dat. put you all in de bag for 'ceitfulness, an' i
don't know which would git out fust."

"well, aunt linda, i suppose by this time you know how to read and
write?"

"no, chile, sence freedom's com'd i'se bin scratchin' too hard to get a
libin' to put my head down to de book."

"but, aunt linda, it would be such company when your husband is away, to
take a book. do you never get lonesome?"

"chile, i ain't got no time ter get lonesome. ef yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u had eber so many
chickens to feed, an' pigs squealin' fer somethin' ter eat, an' yore
ducks an' geese squakin' 'roun' yer, yer wouldn't hab time ter git
lonesome."

"but, aunt linda, you might be sick for months, and think what a comfort
it would be if you could read your bible."

"oh, i could hab prayin' and singin'. dese people is mighty good 'bout
prayin' by de sick. why, robby, i think it would gib me de hysterics ef
i war to try to git book larnin' froo my pore ole head. how long is yer
gwine to stay? an' whar is yer stoppin?"

"i got here to-day," said robert, "but i expect to stay several days."

"well, i wants yer to meet my ole man, an' talk 'bout ole times.
could
 
 ___________________________
 
n't yer come an' stop wid me, or isn't my house sniptious 'nuff?"

"yes, thank you; but there is a young lady in town whom i think is my
niece, my sister's daughter, and i want to be with her all i can."

"your niece! whar did you git any niece from?"

"don't you remember," asked robert, "that my mother had a little
daughter, when mrs. johnson sold her? well, i believe this young lady is
that daughter's child."

"laws a marcy!" exclaimed aunt linda, "yer don't tell me so! whar did
yer ketch up wid her?"

"i met her first," said robert, "at the hospital here, when our poor tom
was dying; and when i was wounded at five forks she attended me in the
field hospital there. she was just as good as gold."

"well, did i eber! you jis' fotch dat chile to see me, ef she ain't too
fine. i'se pore, but i'se clean, an' i ain't forgot how ter git up good
dinners. now, i wants ter hab a good talk 'bout our feller-sarvants."

"yes, and i," said robert, "w
 
 ___________________________
 
' up dere grog-shops, tryin' to fedder dere
nests sellin' licker to pore culled people. deys de bery kine ob men dat
used ter keep dorgs to ketch de runaways. i'd be chokin' fer a drink
'fore i'd eber spen' a cent wid dem, a spreadin' dere traps to git de
black folks' money. you jis' go down town 'fore sun up to-morrer
mornin' an' you see ef dey don't hab dem bars open to sell dere drams to
dem hard workin' culled people 'fore dey goes ter work. i thinks some
niggers is mighty big fools."

"oh, aunt linda, don't run down your race. leave that for the white
people."

"i ain't runnin' down my people. but a fool's a fool, wether he's white
or black. an' i think de nigger who will spen' his hard-earned money in
dese yere new grog-shops is de biggest kine ob a fool, an' i sticks ter
dat. you know we didn't hab all dese low places in slave times. an' what
is dey fer, but to get the people's money. an' its a shame how dey do
sling de licker 'bout 'lection times."

"but don't the temperance people want 
 
 ___________________________
 
y great on funerals. well dat jis' tuck wid de people, an' he
got 'lected to de legislatur. den he got a fine house, an' his ole wife
warn't good 'nuff for him. den dere war a young school-teacher, an' he
begun cuttin' his eyes at her. but she war as deep in de mud as he war
in de mire, an' he jis' gib up his ole wife and married her, a fusty
thing. he war a mean ole hypocrit, an' i wouldn't sen' fer him to bury
my cat. robby, i'se down on dese kine ob preachers like a thousand
bricks."

"well, aunt linda, all the preachers are not like him."

"no; i knows dat; not by a jug full. we's got some mighty good men down
yere, an' we's glad when dey comes, an' orful sorry when dey goes 'way.
de las preacher we had war a mighty good man. he didn't like too much
hollerin'."

"perhaps," said robert, "he thought it were best for only one to speak
at a time."

"i specs so. his wife war de nicest and sweetest lady dat eber i did
see. none ob yer airish, stuck up folks, like a tarrapin carryin'
eberything on 
 
 ___________________________
 
fer de mudders, an'
larn us how to raise our chillen, an' talk so putty to de chillen. i
sartinly did lub dat woman."

"where is she now?" asked robert.

"de conference moved dem 'bout thirty miles from yere. deys gwine to hab
a big meetin' ober dere next sunday. don't you 'member dem meetins we
used to hab in de woods? we don't hab to hide like we did den. but it
don't seem as ef de people had de same good 'ligion we had den. 'pears
like folks is took up wid makin' money an' politics."

"well, aunt linda, don't you wish those good old days would come back?"

"no, chile; neber! neber! wat fer you take me? i'd ruther lib in a
corn-crib. freedom needn't keep me outer heben; an' ef i'se sich a fool
as ter lose my 'ligion cause i'se free, i oughtn' ter git dere."

"but, aunt linda, if old miss were able to take care of you, wouldn't
you just as leave be back again?"

there was a faint quiver of indignation in aunt linda's voice, as she
replied:--

"don't yer want yer freedom? well i wants ter pat my
 
 ___________________________
 
i wants dem
folks to see wat nice folks i kin bring to de meetin'. i hope's yer
didn't lose all your 'ligion in de army."

"oh, i hope not," replied robert.

"oh, chile, yer mus' be shore 'bout dat. i don't want yer to ride hope's
hoss down to torment. now be shore an' come to-morrer an' bring dat
young lady, an' take supper wid me. i'se all on nettles to see dat
chile."




chapter xix.


striking contrasts.

the next day, robert, accompanied by iola, went to the settlement to
take supper with aunt linda, and a very luscious affair it was. her
fingers had not lost their skill since she had tasted the sweets of
freedom. her biscuits were just as light and flaky as ever. her jelly
was as bright as amber, and her preserves were perfectly delicious.
after she had set the table she stood looking in silent admiration,
chuckling to herself: "ole mistus can't set sich a table as dat. she
ought'er be yere to see it. specs 'twould make her mouf water. well, i
mus' let by-gones be by-gones. but dis yere f
 
 ___________________________
 
reedom's mighty good."

aunt linda had invited uncle daniel, and, wishing to give him a pleasant
surprise, she had refrained from telling him that robert johnson was the
one she wished him to meet.

"do you know dis gemmen?" said aunt linda to uncle daniel, when the
latter arrived.

"well, i can't say's i do. my eyes is gittin dim, an i disremembers
him."

"now jis' you look right good at him. don't yer 'member him?"

uncle daniel looked puzzled and, slowly scanning robert's features,
said: "he do look like somebody i used ter know, but i can't make him
out ter save my life. i don't know whar to place him. who is de gemmen,
ennyhow?"

"why, uncle dan'el," replied aunt linda, "dis is robby; miss nancy's
bad, mischeebous robby, dat 
 
 ___________________________
 
 barsheba? i specs some ob you would bin a
rootin' fer it yit!"

"well, uncle daniel, we were young then; i can't tell what we would have
done if we had found it. but we are older now."

"yes, yer older, but i wouldn't put it pas' yer eben now, ef yer foun'
out whar it war."

"yes," said iola, laughing, "they say 'caution is the parent of
safety.'"

"money's a mighty tempting thing," said robert, smiling.

"but, robby, dere's nothin' like a klar conscience; a klar conscience,
robby!"

just then aunt linda, who had been completing the preparations for her
supper, entered the room with her husband, and said, "salters, let me
interdoos you ter my fren', mr. robert johnson, an' his niece, miss
leroy."

"why, is it possible," exclaimed robert, rising, and shaking hands,
"that you are aunt linda's husband?"

"dat's what de parson sed," replied salters.

"i thought," pursued robert, "that your name was john andrews. it was
such when you were in my company."

"all de use i'se got fer dat name is ter git
 
 ___________________________
 
 my money wid it; an' wen
dat's done, all's done. got 'nuff ob my ole marster in slave times,
widout wearin' his name in freedom. wen i got done wid him, i got done
wid his name. wen i 'listed, i war john andrews; and wen i gits my
pension, i'se john andrews; but now salters is my name, an' i likes it
better."

"but how came you to be aunt linda's husband? did you get married since
the war?"

"lindy an' me war married long 'fore de war. but my ole marster sole me
away from her an' our little gal, an' den sole her chile ter somebody
else. arter freedom, i hunted up our little gal, an' foun' her. she war
a big woman den. den i com'd right back ter dis place an' foun' lindy.
she hedn't married agin, nuther hed i; so we jis' let de parson marry us
out er de book; an' we war mighty glad ter git togedder agin, an' feel
hitched togedder fer l
 
 ___________________________
 
ife."

"well, uncle daniel," said robert, turning the conversation toward him,
"you and uncle ben wouldn't go with us, but you came out all right at
last."

"yes, indeed," said aunt linda, "ben got inter a stream of luck. arter
freedom com'd, de people had a heap of fath in ben; an' wen dey wanted
some one to go ter congress dey jist voted for ben ter go. an' he went,
too. an' wen salters went to washin'ton to git his pension, who should
he see dere wid dem big men but our ben, lookin' jist as big as any ob
dem."

"an' it did my ole eyes good jist ter see it," broke in salters; "if i
couldn't go dere myself, i war mighty glad to see some one ob my people
dat could. i felt like d
 
 ___________________________
 
e boy who, wen somebody said he war gwine to
slap off his face, said, 'yer kin slap off my face, but i'se got a big
brudder, an' you can't slap off his face.' i went to see him 'fore i lef,
and he war jist de same as he war wen we war boys togedder. he hadn't
got de big head a bit."

"i reckon mirandy war mighty sorry she didn't stay wid him. i know i
should be," said aunt linda.

"uncle daniel," asked robert, "are you still preaching?"

"yes, chile, i'se still firing off de gospel gun."

"i hear some of the northern folks are down here teaching theology, that
is, teaching young men how to preach. why don't you study theology?"

"look a yere, boy, i'se been a preachin' dese thirty years, an' you come
yere a tellin' me 'bout studying yore ologies. i larn'd my 'ology at de
foot ob de cross. you bin dar?"

"dear uncle daniel," said iola, "the moral aspect of the nation wo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld be
changed if it would learn at the same cross to subordinate the spirit of
caste to the spirit of christ."

"does yer 'member miss nancy's harriet," asked aunt linda, "dat she sole
away kase she wouldn't let her whip her? well, we think dis is harriet's
gran'chile. she war sole away from her mar, an' now she's a lookin' fer
her."

"well, i hopes she may fine her," replied salters. "i war sole 'way from
my mammy wen i war eighteen mont's ole, an' i wouldn't know her now from
a bunch ob turnips."

"i," said iola, "am on my way south seeking for my mother, and i shall
not give up until i find her."

"come," said aunt linda, "we mustn't stan' yer talkin', or de
 
 ___________________________
 
 grub'll
git cole. come, frens, sit down, an' eat some ob my pore supper."

aunt linda sat at the table in such a flutter of excitement that she
could hardly eat, but she gazed with intense satisfaction on her guests.
robert sat on her right hand, contrasting aunt linda's pleasant
situation with the old days in mrs. johnson's kitchen, where he had
played his pranks upon her, and told her the news of the war.

over iola there stole a spirit of restfulness. there was something so
motherly in aunt linda's manner that it seemed to recall the bright,
sunshiny days when she used to nestle in mam liza's arms, in her own
happy home. the conversation was full of army reminiscences and
recollections of the days of slavery. uncle daniel was much interested,
and, as they rose from the table, exclaimed:--

"robby, seein' yer an' hearin' yer talk, almos' puts new springs inter
me. i feel 'mos' like i war gittin' younger."

after the supper, salters and his guests returned to the front room,
which aunt li
 
 ___________________________
 
n
kin do dat a white man can't keep step wid him."

"yes," assented robert, "but while a white man is stealing a thousand
dollars, a black man is getting into trouble taking a few chickens."

"all that may be true," said iola, "but there are some things a white
man can do that we cannot afford to do."

"i beliebs eberybody, norf and souf, is lookin' at us; an' some ob dem
ain't got no good blood fer us, nohow you fix it," said salters.

"i specs cullud folks mus' hab done somethin'," interposed aunt linda.

"o, nonsense," said robert. "i don't think they are any worse than the
white people. i don't believe, if we had the power, we would do any
more lynching, burning, and murdering than they do."

"dat's so," said aunt linda, "it's ralely orful how our folks hab been
murdered sence de war. but i don't think dese young folks is goin' ter
take things as we's allers done."

"we war cowed down from the beginnin'," said uncle daniel, "but dese
young folks ain't comin' up dat way."

"no," said salters,
 
 ___________________________
 
s takes a book an' tries to make out de
words, but my eyes is gittin' dim an' de letters all run togedder, an' i
gits sleepy, an' ef yer wants to put me to sleep jis' put a book in my
han'. but wen it comes to gittin' out a stan' ob cotton, an' plantin'
corn, i'se dere all de time. but dat gran'son ob mine is smart as a
steel trap. i specs he'll be a preacher."

salters looked admiringly at his grandson, who sat grinning in the
corner, munching a pear he had brought from the table.

"yes," said aunt linda, "his fadder war killed by the secesh, one night,
comin' home from a politic meetin', an' his pore mudder died a few
weeks arter, an' we mean to make a man ob him."

"he's got to larn to work fust," said salters, "an' den ef he's right
smart i'se gwine ter sen' him ter college. an' ef he can't get a libin'
one way, he kin de oder."

"yes," said iola, "i hope he will turn out an excellent young man, for
the greatest need of the race is noble, earnest men, and true women."

"job," said salters, t
 
 ___________________________
 
urning to his grandson, "tell jake ter hitch up de
mules, an' you stay dere an' help him. we's all gwine ter de big
meetin'. yore grandma hab set her heart on goin', an' it'll be de same
as a spell ob sickness ef she don't hab a chance to show her bes' bib
an' tucker. that ole gal's as proud as a peacock."

"now, john salters," exclaimed aunt linda, "ain't you 'shamed ob
yourself? allers tryin' to poke fun at yer pore wife. never mine; wait
till i'se gone, an' you'll miss me."

"ef i war single," said salters, "i could git a putty young gal, but it
wouldn't be so easy wid you."

"why not?" said iola, smiling.

"'cause young men don't want ole hens, an' ole men want young pullets,"
was salter's reply.

"robby, honey," said aunt linda, "when you gits a wife, don't treat her
like dat man treats me."

"oh, his head's level," answered robert; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 festooned with moss, which hung like graceful
draperies. ever and anon a startled hare glided over the path, and
whip-poor-wills and crickets broke the restful silence of the night.
robert rode quietly along, quaffing the beauty of the scene and thinking
of his boyish days, when he gathered nuts and wild plums in those woods;
he also indulged pleasant reminiscences of later years, when, with uncle
daniel and tom anderson, he attended the secret prayer-meetings. iola
rode along, conversing with aunt linda, amused and interested at the
quaintness of her speech and the shrewdness of her intellect. to her the
ride was delightful.

"does yer know dis place, robby," asked aunt linda, as they passed an
old resort.

"i should think i did," replied robert. "it is the place where we held
our last prayer-meeting."

"an' dere's dat ole broken pot we used, ter tell 'bout de war. but
warn't ole miss hoppin' wen she foun' out you war goin' to de war! i
thought she'd go almos' wile. now, own up, robby, didn't 
 
 ___________________________
 
leep. it's all ober now, but i'se gwine to hole up fer dem yankees dat
gib me my freedom, an' sent dem nice ladies from de norf to gib us some
sense. some ob dese folks calls em nigger teachers, an' won't hab nuffin
to do wid 'em, but i jis' thinks dey's splendid. but dere's some
triflin' niggers down yere who'll sell der votes for almost nuffin. does
you 'member jake williams an' gundover's tom? well dem two niggers is de
las' ob pea-time. dey's mighty small pertaters an' few in a hill."

"oh, aunt linda," said robert, "don't call them niggers. they are our
own people."

"dey ain't my kine ob people. i jis' calls em niggers, an' niggers i
means; an' de bigges' kine ob niggers. an' if my john war sich a nigger
i'd whip him an' leave him."

"an' what would i be a doin'," queried john, suddenly rousing up at the
mention of his name.

"standing still and taking it, i suppose," said iola, who had been
quietly listening to and enjoying the conversation.

"yes, an' i'd ketch myself stan'in' still an' 
 
 ___________________________
 
takin' it," was john's
plucky response.

"well, you oughter, ef you's mean enough to wote dat ticket ter put me
back inter slavery," was aunt linda's parting shot. "robby," she
continued, "you 'member miss nancy's jinnie?"

"of course i do," said robert.

"she married mr. gundover's dick. well, dere warn't much git up an' go
'bout him. so, wen 'lection time com'd, de man he war workin' fer tole
him ef he woted de radical ticket he'd turn him off. well, jinnie war so
'fraid he'd do it, dat she jis' follered him fer days."

"poor fellow!" exclaimed robert. "how did he come out?"

"he certainly was between two fires," interposed iola.

"oh, j
 
 ___________________________
 
hab company ter tea. dey made a big
spread, an' put a lot ob sugar on de table fer supper, an' tom jis' went
fer dat sugar. he put a lot in his tea. but somehow it didn't tase
right, an' wen dey come ter fine out what war de matter, dey hab sent
him a barrel ob san' wid some sugar on top, an' wen de sugar war all
gone de san' war dare. wen i yeard it, i jis' split my sides a larfin.
it war too good to keep; an' wen it got roun', jake war as mad as a
march hare. but it sarved him right."

"well, aunt linda, you musn't be too hard on uncle jake; you know he's
getting old."

"well he ain't too ole ter do right. he ain't no older dan uncle dan'el.
an' i yered dey offered him $500 ef he'd go on dere side. an' uncle
dan'el wouldn't tech it. an' dere's uncle job's wife; why didn't she go
dat way? she war down on job's meanness."

"what did she do?"

"wen 'lection time 'rived, he com'd home bringing some flour an' meat;
an' he says ter aunt polly, 'ole woman, i got dis fer de wote.' she jis'
picked up d
 
 ___________________________
 
at meat an' flour an' sent it sailin' outer doors, an' den
com'd back an' gib him a good tongue-lashin'. 'oder people,' she said,
'a wotin' ter lib good, an' you a sellin' yore wote! ain't you got 'nuff
ob ole marster, an' ole marster bin cuttin' you up? it shan't stay
yere.' an' so she wouldn't let de things stay in de house."

"what did uncle job do?"

"he jis' stood dere an' cried."

"and didn't you feel sorry for him?" asked iola.

"not a bit! he hedn't no business ter be so shabby."

"but, aunt linda," pursued iola, "if it were shabby for an ignorant
colored man to sell his vote, wasn't it shabbier for an intelligent
white man to buy it?"

"you see," added robert, "all the shabbiness is not on our side."

"i knows dat," said aunt linda, "but i can't help it. i wants my people
to wote right, an' to think somethin' ob demselves."

"well, aunt linda, they say in every flock of sheep there will be one
that's scabby," observed iola.

"dat's so! but i ain't got no use fer scabby sheep."

"lindy,"
 
 ___________________________
 
 cried john, "we's most dar! don't you yere dat singin'? dey's
begun a'ready."

"neber mine," said aunt linda, "sometimes de las' ob de wine is de
bes'."

thus discoursing they had beguiled the long hours of the night and made
their long journey appear short.

very soon they reached the church, a neat, commodious, frame building,
with a blue ceiling, white walls within and without, and large windows
with mahogany-colored facings. it was a sight full of pathetic interest
to see that group which gathered from miles around. they had come to
break bread with each other, relate their experiences, and tell o
 
 ___________________________
 
y as
the days are long. i am living in the north, and doing a good business
there. i want you to see joy according to all the days wherein you have
seen sorrow. i do hope this young lady will find _her_ ma and that, when
found, she will prove to be your daughter!"

"yes, pore, dear chile! i specs her mudder's heart's mighty hungry fer
her. i does hope she's my gran'chile."

tenderly and caressingly iola bent over the happy mother, with her heart
filled with mournful memories of her own mother.

aunt linda was induced to stay until the next morning, and then gladly
assisted robert's mother in arranging for her journey northward. the
friends who had given her a shelter in their hospitable home, learned to
value her so much that it was with great reluctance they resigned her to
the care of her son. aunt linda was full of bustling activity, and her
spirits overflowed with good humor.

"now, harriet," she said, as they rode along on their return journey,
"you mus' jis' thank me fer finin' yore chile,
 
 ___________________________
 
ome
to dat big meetin' wid me."

"oh, lindy," she cried, "i'se glad from de bottom ob my heart ter see
you's all. i com'd out dere ter git a blessin', an' i'se got a double
po'tion. de frens i war libin' wid war mighty good ter me. dey lib'd wid
me in de lower kentry, an' arter de war war ober i stopped wid 'em and
helped take keer ob de chillen; an' when dey com'd up yere dey brought
me wid 'em. i'se com'd a way i didn't know, but i'se mighty glad i'se
com'd."

"does you know dis place?" asked aunt linda, as they approached the
settlement.

"no'n 'deed i don't. it's all new ter me."

"well, dis is whar i libs. ain't you mighty tired? i feels a little
stiffish. dese bones is gittin' ole."

"dat's so! but i'se mighty glad i'se lib'd to see my boy 'fore i crossed
ober de riber. an' now i feel like ole simeon."

"but, mother," said robert, "if you are ready to go, i am not willing to
let you. i want you to stay ever so long where i can see you."

a bright smile overspread her face. robert's words r
 
 ___________________________
 
e linda's first thought was to prepare dinner for her
guests. but, before she began her work of preparation, she went to the
cupboard to get a cup of home-made wine.

"here," she said, filling three glasses, "is some wine i made myself
from dat grape-vine out dere. don't it look nice and clar? jist taste
it. it's fus'rate."

"no, thank you," said robert. "i'm a temperance man, and never take
anything which has alcohol in it."

"oh, dis ain't got a bit ob alcohol in it. i made it myself."

"but, aunt linda, you didn't make the law which ferments grape-juice and
makes it alcohol."

"but, robby, ef alcohol's so bad, w'at made de lord put it here?"

"aunt lindy," said iola, "i heard a lady say that there were two things
the lord didn't make. one is sin, and the other alcohol."

"why, aunt linda," said robert, "there are numbers of things the lord
has made that i wouldn't touch with a pair of tongs."

"what are they?"

"rattlesnakes, scorpions, and moccasins."

"oh, sho!"

"aunt linda," said iola, "t
 
 ___________________________
 
he bible says that the wine at last will bite
like a serpent and sting like an adder."

"and, aunt linda," added robert, "as i wouldn't wind a serpent around my
throat, i don't want to put something inside of it which will bite like
a serpent and sting as an adder."

"i reckon robby's right," said his mother, setting down her glass and
leaving the wine unfinished. "you young folks knows a heap more dan we
ole folks." "well," declared aunt linda, "you all is temp'rence to de
backbone. but what could i do wid my wine ef we didn't drink it?"

"let it turn to vinegar, and sign the temperance pledge," replied
robert.

"i don't keer 'bout it myself, but i don't 'spect john would be willin'
ter let it go, 'cause he likes it a heap."

"then you must give it up for his sake and job's," said robert. "they
may learn to like it too well."

"you know, aunt linda," said iola, "people don't get to be drunkards all
at once. and you wouldn't like to f
 
 ___________________________
 
eel, if job should learn to drink,
that you helped form his appetite."

"dat' so! i beliebs i'll let dis turn to winegar, an' not make any
more."

"that's right, aunt linda. i hope you'll hold to it," said robert,
encouragingly.

very soon aunt linda had an excellent dinner prepared. after it was over
robert went with iola to c----, where her friend, the bishop, was
awaiting her return. she told him the wonderful story of robert's
finding his mother, and of her sweet, childlike faith.

the bishop, a kind, fatherly man, said, "miss iola, i hope that such
happiness is in store for you. my dear child, still continue to pray and
trust. i am old-fashioned enough to believe in prayer. i knew an old
lady living in illinois, who was a slave. her so
 
 ___________________________
 
of her feet."

that night iola and the bishop left for the south.




chapter xxi.


a home for mother.

after iola had left the settlement, accompanied by robert as far as the
town, it was a pleasant satisfaction for the two old friends to settle
themselves down, and talk of times past, departed friends, and
long-forgotten scenes.

"what," said mrs. johnson, as we shall call robert's mother, "hab become
ob miss nancy's husband? is he still a libin'?"

"oh, he drunk hisself to death," responded aunt linda.

"he used ter be mighty handsome."

"yes, but drink war his ruination."

"an' how's miss nancy?"

"oh, she's com'd down migh'ly. she's pore as a church mouse. i thought
'twould com'd home ter her wen she sole yer 'way from yore chillen.
dere's nuffin goes ober de debil's back dat don't come under his belly.
do yo 'member miss nancy's fardder?"

"ob course i does!"

"well," said aunt linda, "he war a nice ole gemmen. wen he died, i said
de las' gemmen's dead, an' dere's noboddy ter step in his 
 
 ___________________________
 
talk, dan'el. we ole folks ain't got long ter
stay yere."

they chatted together until job and salters came home for supper. after
they had eaten, uncle daniel said:--

"we'll hab a word ob prayer."

there, in that peaceful habitation, they knelt down, and mingled their
prayers together, as they had done in by-gone days, when they had met by
stealth in lonely swamps or silent forests.

the next morning robert and his mother started northward. they were well
supplied with a bountiful luncheon by aunt linda, who had so thoroughly
enjoyed their sojourn with her. on the next day he arrived in the city
of p----, and took his mother to his boarding-house, until he could find
a suitable home into which to install her. he soon came across one which
just suited his taste, but when the agent discovered that robert's
mother was colored, he told him that the house had been previously
engaged. in company with his mother he looked at several other houses in
desirable neighborhoods, but they were constantly me
 
 ___________________________
 
ing summer, he built a cosy home for the reception of his
bride, and came north, where, with harry and miss delany as attendants,
he was married to iola, amid a pleasant gathering of friends, by rev.
carmicle.




chapter xxxiii.


conclusion.

it was late in the summer when dr. latimer and his bride reached their
home in north carolina. over the cottage porch were morning-glories to
greet the first flushes of the rising day, and roses and jasmines to
distill their fragrance on the evening air. aunt linda, who had been
apprised of their coming, was patiently awaiting their arrival, and
uncle daniel was pleased to know that "dat sweet young lady who had sich
putty manners war comin' to lib wid dem."

as soon as they arrived, aunt linda rushed up to iola, folded her in her
arms, and joyfully exclaimed: "how'dy, honey! i'se so glad you's come. i
seed it in a vision dat somebody fair war comin' to help us. an' wen i
yered it war you, i larffed and jist rolled ober, and larffed and jist
gib up."

"bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t, aunt linda, i am not very fair," replied mrs. latimer.

"well, chile, you's fair to me. how's all yore folks in de up kentry?"

"all well. i expect them down soon to live here."

"what, har'yet, and robby, an' yer ma? oh, dat is too good. i allers
said robby had san' in his craw, and war born for good luck. he war a
mighty nice boy. har'yet's in clover now. well, ebery dorg has its day,
and de cat has sunday. i allers tole har'yet ter keep a stiff upper lip;
dat it war a long road dat had no turn."

dr. l
 
 ___________________________
 
atimer was much gratified by the tender care aunt linda bestowed
on iola.

"i ain't goin' to let her do nuffin till she gits seasoned. she looks as
sweet as a peach. i allers wanted some nice lady to come down yere and
larn our gals some sense. i can't read myself, but i likes ter yere dem
dat can."

"well, aunt linda, i am going to teach in the sunday-school, help in the
church, hold mothers' meetings to help these boys and girls to grow up
to be good men and women. won't you get a pair of spectacles and learn
to read?"

"oh, yer can't git dat book froo my head, no way you fix it. i knows
nuff to git to hebben, and dat's all i wants to know." aunt linda was
kind and obliging, but there was one place where she drew the line, and
that was at learning to read.

harry and miss delany accompanied iola as far as 