nday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and his company

xvi. after the battle

xvii. flames in the school-room

xviii. searching for lost ones

xix. striking contrasts

xx. a revelation

xxi. a home for mother

xxii. further lifting of the veil

xxiii. delightful reunions

xxiv. northern experience

xxv. an old friend

xxvi. open questions

xxvii. diverging paths

xxviii. dr. latrobe's mistake

xxix. v
 
 ___________________________
 
 to her, he
said, "miss leroy, you need not be all alone. let me claim the privilege
of making your life bright and happy. iola, i have loved you ever since
i have seen your devotion to our poor, sick boys. how faithfully you, a
young and gracious girl, have stood at your post and performed your
duties. and now i ask, will you not permit me to clasp hands with you
for life? i do not ask for a hasty reply. give yourself time to think
over what i have proposed."




chapter ix.


eugene leroy and alfred lorraine.

nearly twenty years before the war, two young men, of french and spanish
descent, sat conversing on a large verandah which surrounded an ancient
home on the mississippi river. it was french in its style of
architecture, large and rambling, with no hint of modern improvements.

the owner of the house was the only heir of a creole planter. he had
come into possession of an inheritance consisting of vast baronial
estates, bank stock, and a large number of slaves. eugene leroy, being
deprived of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ith vast
possessions, abundant leisure, unsettled principles, and uncontrolled
desires. he had no other object than to extract from life its most
seductive draughts of ease and pleasure. his companion, who sat opposite
him on the verandah, quietly smoking a cigar, was a remote cousin, a
few years older than himself, the warmth of whose southern temperament
had been modified by an infusion of northern blood.

eugene was careless, liberal, and impatient of details, while his
companion and cousin, alfred lorraine, was selfish, eager, keen, and
alert; also hard, cold, methodical, and ever ready to grasp the main
chance. yet, notwithstanding the difference between them, they had
formed a warm friendship for each other.

"alfred," said eugene, "i am going to be married."

lorraine opened his eyes with sudden wonder, and exclaimed: "well,
that's the latest thing out! who is the fortunate lady who has bound you
with her silken fetters? is it one of those beautiful creole girls who
were visiting augustine's p
 
 ___________________________
 
it will
not be long before iola will notice the offishness of girls of her own
age, and the scornful glances which, even now, i think, are leveled at
her. yesterday harry came crying to me, and told me that one of the
neighbor's boys had called him 'nigger.'"

a shadow flitted over leroy's face, as he answered, somewhat soberly,
"oh, marie, do not meet trouble half way. i have manumitted you, and the
children will follow your condition. i have made you all legatees of my
will. except my cousin, alfred lorraine, i have only distant relatives,
whom i scarcely know and who hardly know me."

"your cousin lorraine? are you sure our interests would be safe in his
hands?"

"i think so; i don't think alfred would do anything dishonorable."

"he might not with his equals. but how many men would be bound by a
sense of honor where the rights of a colored woman are in question? your
cousin was bitterly opposed to our marriage, and i would not trust any
important interests in his hands. i do hope that in providin
 
 ___________________________
 
dential chair has been filled the
greater number of years by southerners, and the majority of offices has
been shared by our men. we wanted representation in congress on a basis
which would include our slaves, and the north, whose suffrage represents
only men, gave us a three-fifths representation for our slaves, whom we
count as property. i think the step will be suicidal. there are
extremists in both sections, but i hope, between them both, wise
counsels and measures will prevail."

just then alfred lorraine was ushered into the room. occasionally he
visited leroy, but he always came alone. his wife was the only daughter
of an enterprising slave-trader, who had left her a large amount of
property.

her social training was deficient, her education limited, but she was
too proud of being a pure white woman to enter the home of leroy, with
marie as its presiding genius. lorraine tolerated marie's presence as a
necessary evil, while to her he always seemed like a presentiment of
trouble. with his comin
 
 ___________________________
 
a's address.

lorraine made a careful investigation of the case, to ascertain whether
marie's marriage was valid. to his delight he found there was a flaw in
the marriage and an informality in the manumission. he then determined
to invalidate marie's claim, and divide the inheritance among leroy's
white relations. in a short time strangers, distant relatives of her
husband, became frequent visitors at the plantation, and made themselves
offensively familiar. at length the dreadful storm burst.

alfred lorraine entered suit for his cousin's estate, and for the
remanding of his wife and children to slavery. in a short time he came
armed with legal authority, and said to marie:--

"i have come to take possession of these premises."

"by what authority?" she gasped, turning deathly pale. he hesitated a
moment, as if his words were arrested by a sense of shame.

"by what authority?" she again demanded.

"by the authority of the law," answered lorraine, "which has decided
that leroy's legal heirs are his w
 
 ___________________________
 
rning
deathly pale, she exclaimed, "oh, mother, it can't be so! you must be
dreaming!"

"no, my child; it is a terrible reality."

almost wild with agony, iola paced the floor, as the fearful truth broke
in crushing anguish upon her mind. then bursting into a paroxysm of
tears succeeded by peals of hysterical laughter, said:--

"i used to say that slavery is right. i didn't know what i was talking
about." then growing calmer, she said, "mother, who is at the bottom of
this downright robbery?"

"alfred lorraine; i have always dreaded that man, and what i feared has
come to pass. your father had faith in him; i never had."

"but, mother, could we not contest his claim. you have your marriage
certificate and papa's will."

"yes, my dear child, but judge starkins has decided that we have no
standing in the court, and no testimony according to law."

"oh, mother, what can i do?"

"nothing, my child, unless you can escape to the north."

"and leave you?"

"yes."

"mother, i will never desert you in your ho