iola leroy,

or

shadows uplifted.

by

frances e.w. harper.




1893, philadelphia

to my daughter

mary e. harper,

this book is lovingly dedicated.




introduction.


i confess when i first learned that mrs. harper was about to write "a
story" on some features of the anglo-african race, growing out of what
was once popularly known as the "peculiar institution," i had my doubts
about the matter. indeed it was far from being easy for me to think that
she was as fortunate as she might have been in select
 
 ___________________________
 
known not only amongst her own race but likewise by
the reformers, laboring for the salvation of the intemperate and others
equally unfortunate, there is little room to doubt that the book will be
in great demand and will meet with warm congratulations from a goodly
number outside of the author's social connections.

doubtless the thousands of colored sunday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and h
 
 ___________________________
 
ed his plans
with the greatest secrecy. a few faithful and trusted friends stood
ready to desert with him when the union army came within hailing
distance. when it came, there was a stampede to its ranks of men ready
to serve in any capacity, to labor in the tents, fight on the fields, or
act as scouts. it was a strange sight to see these black men rallying
around the stars and stripes, when white men were trampling them under
foot and riddling them with bullets.




chapter v.


the release of iola leroy.

"well, boys," said robert to his trusted friends, as they gathered
together at a meeting in gundover's woods, almost under the shadow of
the union army, "how many of you are ready to join the army and fight
for your freedom."

"all ob us."

"the soldiers," continued robert, "are camped right at the edge of the
town. the general has his headquarters in the heart of the town, and one
of the officers told me yesterday that the president had set us all
free, and that as many as wanted to join the
 
 ___________________________
 

"get her, if you possibly can, but you must be mighty mum about it."

"trus' me for dat," said tom.

tom was very anxious to get word to the beautiful but intractable girl
who was held in durance vile by her reckless and selfish master, who had
tried in vain to drag her down to his own low level of sin and shame.
but all tom's efforts were in vain. finally he applied to the commander
of the post, who immediately gave orders for her release. the next day
tom had the satisfaction of knowing that iola leroy had been taken as a
trembling dove from the gory vulture's nest and given a place of
security. she was taken immediately to the general's headquarters. the
general was much impressed by her modest demeanor, and surprised to see
the refinement and beauty she possessed. could it be possible that this
young and beautiful girl had been a chattel, with no power to protect
herself from the highest insults that lawless brutality could inflict
upon innocent and defenseless womanhood? could he ever agai
 
 ___________________________
 
has made
    their marriage invalid, robbed us of our inheritance, and remanded
    us all to slavery. mamma is too wretched to attempt to write
    herself, but told me to entreat you not to attempt to come home. you
    can do us no good, and that mean, cruel lorraine may do you much
    harm. don't attempt, i beseech you, to come home. show this letter
    to mr. bascom and let him advise you what to do. but don't, for our
    sake, attempt to come home.

    'your heart-broken sister,

    'iola leroy.'"


"this," said the doctor, "is a very awkward affair. the boy is too ill
to be removed. it is doubtful if the nerves which have trembled with
such fearful excitement will ever recover their normal condition. it is
simply a work of mercy to watch over him with the tenderest care."

fortunately for harry he had fallen into good hands, and the most tender
care and nursing were bestowed upon him. for awhile harry was strangely
silent, never referring to the terrible misfortune which had so sudde
 
 ___________________________
 
     are more than godless might.

    above earth's pain and sorrow
           christ's dying face i see;
    i hear the cry of anguish:--
           "why hast thou forsaken me?"

    in the pallor of that anguish
           i see the only light,
    to flood with peace and gladness
           earth's sorrow, pain, and night.

    arrayed in christly armor
           'gainst error, crime, and sin,
    the victory can't be doubtful,
           for god is sure to win.

the next paper was by miss iola leroy, on the "education of mothers."

"i agree," said rev. eustace, of st. mary's parish, "with the paper. the
great need of the race is enlightened mothers."

"and enlightened fathers, too," added miss delany, quickly. "if there is
anything i chafe to see it is a strong, hearty man shirking his burdens,
putting them on the shoulders of his wife, and taking life easy for
himself."

"i always pity such mothers," interposed iola, tenderly.

"i think," said miss delany, with a flash in her eye and a ri