the author's social connections.

doubtless the thousands of colored sunday-schools in the south, in
casting about for an interesting, moral story-book, full of practical
lessons, will not be content to be without "iola leroy, or shadows
uplifted."

william still.




contents.


chapter

i. the mystery of market speech and prayer meetings

ii. contraband of war

iii. uncle daniel's story

iv. arrival of the union army

v. release of iola leroy

vi. robert johnson's promotion and religion

vii. tom anderson's death

viii. the mystified doctor

ix. eugene leroy and alfred lorraine

x. shadows in the home

xi. the plague and the law

xii. school-girl notions

xiii. a rejected suitor

xiv. harry leroy

xv. robert and his company

xvi. after the battle

xvii. flames in the school-room

xviii. searching for lost ones

xix. striking contrasts

xx. a revelation

xxi. a home for mother

xxii. further lifting of the veil

xxiii. delightful reunions

xxiv. northern experience

xxv. an old friend

xxvi. open
 
 ___________________________
 
can be."

"oh, glory!" said the questioner, whom we shall call thomas anderson,
although he was known among his acquaintances as marster anderson's tom.

his informant regarding the condition of the market was robert johnson,
who had been separated from his mother in his childhood and reared by
his mistress as a favorite slave. she had fondled him as a pet animal,
and even taught him to read. notwithstanding their relation as mistress
and slave, they had strong personal likings for each other.

tom anderson was the servant of a wealthy planter, who lived in the city
of c----, north carolina. this planter was quite advanced in life, but
in his earlier days he had spent much of his time in talking politics in
his state and national capitals in winter, and in visiting pleasure
resorts and watering places in summer. his plantations were left to the
care of overseers who, in their turn, employed negro drivers to aid them
in the work of cultivation and discipline. but as the infirmities of age
were pres
 
 ___________________________
 
o great millstones, were grinding slavery
to powder.

as they passed along, they were met by another servant, who said in
hurried tones, but with a glad accent in his voice:--

"did you see de fish in de market dis mornin'? oh, but dey war splendid,
jis' as fresh, as fresh kin be."

"that's the ticket," said robert, as a broad smile overspread his face.
"i'll see you later."

"good mornin', boys," said another servant on his way to market. "how's
eggs dis mornin'?"

"fust rate, fust rate," said tom anderson. "bob's got it down fine."

"i thought so; mighty long faces at de pos'-office dis mornin'; but i'd
better move 'long," and with a bright smile lighting up his face he
passed on with a quickened tread.

there seemed to be an unusual interest manifested by these men in the
state of the produce market, and a unanimous report of its good
condition. surely there was nothing in the primeness of the butter or
the freshness of the eggs to change careless looking faces into such
expressions of gratific
 
 ___________________________
 
d las'
winter, but it will hole a lot o' water, an' we puts it whar we can tell
it eberything. we has our own good times. an' i want you to come sunday
night an' tell all 'bout the good eggs, fish, and butter. mark my words,
bobby, we's all gwine to git free. i seed it all in a vision, as plain
as de nose on yer face."

"well, i hope your vision will come out all right, and that the eggs
will keep and the butter be fresh till we have our next meetin'."

"now, bob, you sen' word to uncle dan'el, tom anderson, an' de rest ob
dem, to come to mccullough's woods nex' sunday night. i want to hab a
sin-killin' an' debil-dribin' time. but, boy, you'd better git out er
yere. ole miss'll be down on yer like a scratch cat."

although the slaves were denied unrestricted travel, and the holding of
meetings without the surveillance of a white man, yet they contrived to
meet by stealth and hold gatherings where they could mingle their
prayers and tears, and lay plans for escaping to the union army.
outwitting th
 
 ___________________________
 
 is you, chile?"

"oh, i'm all right," said robert, smiling, and grasping uncle daniel's
hand.

"what's de news?" exclaimed several, as they turned their faces eagerly
towards robert.

"i hear," said robert, "that they are done sending the runaways back to
their masters."

"is dat so?" said a half dozen earnest voices. "how did you yere it?"

"i read it in the papers. and tom told me he heard them talking about it
last night, at his house. how did you hear it, tom? come, tell us all
about it."

tom anderson hesitated a moment, and then said:--

"now, boys, i'll tell you all 'bout it. but you's got to be mighty mum
'bout it. it won't do to let de cat outer de bag."

"dat's so! but tell us wat you yered. we ain't gwine to say nuffin to
nobody."

"well," said tom, "las' night ole marster had company. two big
ginerals, and dey was hoppin' mad. one ob dem looked like a turkey
gobbler, his face war so red. an' he sed one ob dem yankee ginerals, i
thinks dey called him beas' butler, sed dat de slaves dat
 
 ___________________________
 
wo armies are fighting and the
horses of one run away, the other has a right to take them. and it is
just the same if a slave runs away from the secesh to the union lines.
he is called a contraband, just the same as if he were an ox or a horse.
they wouldn't send the horses back, and they won't send us back."

"is dat so?" said uncle daniel, a dear old father, with a look of
saintly patience on his face. "well, chillen, what do you mean to do?"

"go, jis' as soon as we kin git to de army," said tom anderson.

"what else did the generals say? and how did you come to hear them,
tom?" asked robert johnson.

"well, yer see, marster's too ole and feeble to go to de war, but his
heart's in it. an' it makes him feel good all ober when dem big ginerals
comes an' tells him all 'bout it. well, i war laying out on de porch
fas' asleep an' snorin' drefful hard. oh, i war so soun' asleep dat wen
marster wanted some ice-water he had to shake me drefful hard to wake me
up. an' all de time i war wide 'wake as he 
 
 ___________________________
 
r. you don't hab
to run away from bad times and wuss a comin'."

"it isn't so good, but it might be better. i ain't got nothing 'gainst
my ole miss, except she sold my mother from me. and a boy ain't nothin'
without his mother. i forgive her, but i never forget her, and never
expect to. but if she were the best woman on earth i would rather have
my freedom than belong to her. well, boys, here's a chance for us just
as soon as the union army gets in sight. what will you do?"

"i'se a goin," said tom anderson, "jis' as soon as dem linkum soldiers
gits in sight."

"an' i'se a gwine wid you, tom," said another. "i specs my ole
marster'll feel right smart lonesome when i'se gone, but i don't keer
'bout stayin' for company's sake."

"my ole marster's room's a heap better'n his company," said tom
anderson, "an' i'se a goner too. dis yer freedom's too good to be lef'
behind, wen you's got a chance to git it. i won't stop to bid ole marse
good bye."

"what do you think," said robert, turning to uncle danie
 
 ___________________________
 
ou to look arter my wife an' chillen, an'
see dat eberything goes right on de place'. an' i promised him i'd do it,
an' i mus' be as good as my word. 'cept de overseer, dere isn't a white
man on de plantation, an' i hear he has to report ter-morrer or be
treated as a deserter. an' der's nobody here to look arter miss mary an'
de chillen, but myself, an' to see dat eberything goes right. i promised
marse robert i would do it, an' i mus' be as good as my word."

"well, what should you keer?" said tom anderson. "who looked arter you
when you war sole from your farder and mudder, an' neber seed dem any
more, and wouldn't know dem to-day ef you met dem in your dish?"

"well, dats neither yere nor dere. marse robert couldn't help what his
father did. he war an orful mean man. but he's dead now, and gone to see
'bout it. but his wife war the nicest, sweetest lady dat eber i did see.
she war no more like him dan chalk's like cheese. she used to visit de
cabins, an' listen to de pore women when de overseer
 
 ___________________________
 
liebs in praisin' de bridge dat carries me ober. she
said, 'uncle dan'el, i wish you war free. ef i had my way you shouldn't
serve any one when i'm gone; but mr. thurston had eberything in his
power when he made his will. i war tied hand and foot, and i couldn't
help it.' in a little while she war gone--jis' faded away like a flower.
i belieb ef dere's a saint in glory, miss anna's dere."

"oh, i don't take much stock in white folks' religion," said robert,
laughing carelessly.

"the way," said tom anderson, "dat some of dese folks cut their cards
yere, i think dey'll be as sceece in hebben as hen's teeth. i think wen
some of dem preachers brings de bible 'round an' tells us 'bout mindin
our marsters and not stealin' dere tings, dat dey preach to please de
white folks, an' dey frows coleness ober de meetin'."

"an' i," said aunt linda, "neber did belieb in dem bible preachers. i
yered one ob dem sayin' wen he war dyin', it war all dark wid him. an'
de way he treated his house-girl, pore thing, i d
 
 ___________________________
 
on't wonder dat it war
dark wid him."

"o, i guess," said robert, "that the bible is all right, but some of
these church folks don't get the right hang of it."

"may be dat's so," said aunt linda. "but i allers wanted to learn how to
read. i once had a book, and tried to make out what war in it, but ebery
time my mistus caught me wid a book in my hand, she used to whip my
fingers. an' i couldn't see ef it war good for white folks, why it
warn't good for cullud folks."

"well," said tom anderson, "i belieb in de good ole-time religion. but
arter dese white folks is done fussin' and beatin' de cullud folks, i
don't want 'em to come talking religion to me. we used to hab on our
place a real guinea man, an' once he made ole marse mad, an' he had him
whipped. old marse war trying to break him in, but dat fellow war spunk
to de backbone, an' when he 'gin talkin' to him 'bout savin' his soul
an' gittin' to hebbin, he tole him ef he went to hebbin an' foun' he war
dare, he wouldn't go in. he 
 
 ___________________________
 
e war gone. oh, but he war
spunky. de oberseers, arter dey foun' out who he war, gin'rally gabe him
a wide birth. i specs his father war some ole guinea king."

"well, chillen," said uncle daniel, "we's kept up dis meeting long
enough. we'd better go home, and not all go one way, cause de patrollers
might git us all inter trouble, an' we must try to slip home by hook or
crook."

"an' when we meet again, uncle daniel can finish his story, an' be ready
to go with us," said robert.

"i wish," said tom anderson, "he would go wid us, de wuss kind."




chapter iii.


uncle daniel's story.

the union had snapped asunder because it lacked the cohesion of justice,
and the nation was destined to pass through the crucible of disaster and
defeat, till she was ready to clasp hands with the negro and march
abreast with him to freedom and victory.

the union army was encamping a few miles from c----, in north carolina.
robert, being well posted on the condition of affairs, had stealthily
contrived to call a mee
 
 ___________________________
 
e dan'el i eber war. ef any ob you wants to go, i habben't a
word to say agin it. i specs dem yankees be all right, but i knows marse
robert, an' i don't know dem, an' i ain't a gwine ter throw away dirty
water 'til i gits clean."

"well, uncle ben," said robert, addressing a stalwart man whose towering
form and darkly flashing eye told that slavery had failed to put the
crouch in his shoulders or general abjectness into his demeanor, "you
will go with us, for sure, won't you?"

"yes," spoke up tom anderson, "'cause de trader's done took your wife,
an' got her for his'n now."

as ben tunnel looked at the speaker, a spasm of agony and anger darkened
his face and distorted his features, as if the blood of some strong
race were stirring with sudden vigor through his veins. he clutched his
hands together, as if he were struggling with an invisible foe, and for
a moment he remained silent. then suddenly raising his head, he
exclaimed, "boys, there's not one of you loves freedom more than i do,
but--"


 
 ___________________________
 
the rescue of the beautiful young girl and the
discomfiture of his young master who, in the words of tom, "was mad
enough to bite his head off" (a rather difficult physical feat).

iola, freed from her master's clutches, applied herself readily to her
appointed tasks. the beautiful, girlish face was full of tender
earnestness. the fresh, young voice was strangely sympathetic, as if
some great sorrow had bound her heart in loving compassion to every
sufferer who needed her gentle ministrations.

tom anderson was a man of herculean strength and remarkable courage.
but, on account of physical defects, instead of enlisting as a soldier,
he was forced to remain a servant, although he felt as if every nerve in
his right arm was tingling to strike a blow for freedom. he was well
versed in the lay of the country, having often driven his master's
cotton to market when he was a field hand. after he became a coachman,
he had become acquainted with the different roads and localities of the
country. besides, h
 
 ___________________________
 
 on their mettle. they have been so long
taught that they are nothing and nobody, that they seem glad to prove
they are something and somebody."

"but, johnson, you do not look like them, you do not talk like them. it
is a burning shame to have held such a man as you in slavery."

"i don't think it was any worse to have held me in slavery than the
blackest man in the south."

"you are right, johnson. the color of a man's skin has nothing to do
with the possession of his rights."

"now, there is tom anderson," said robert, "he is just as black as black
can be. he has been bought and sold like a beast, and yet there is not a
braver man in all the company. i know him well. he is a noble-hearted
fellow. true as steel. i love him like a brother. and i believe tom
would risk his life for me any day. he don't know anything about his
father or mother. he was sold from them before he could remember. he can
read a little. he used to take lessons from a white gardener in
virginia. he would go between the hou
 
 ___________________________
 
 oh, i heard a soldier," said
captain sybil, "say, when the colored men were being enlisted, that he
would break his sword and resign. but he didn't do either. after colonel
shaw led his charge at fort wagner, and died in the conflict, he got
bravely over his prejudices. the conduct of the colored troops there and
elsewhere has done much to turn public opinion in their favor. i suppose
any white soldier would rather have his black substitute receive the
bullets than himself."




chapter vii.


tom anderson's death.

"where is tom?" asked captain sybil; "i have not seen him for several
hours."

"he's gone down the sound with some of the soldiers," replied robert.
"they wanted tom to row them."

"i am afraid those boys will get into trouble, and the rebs will pick
them off," responded sybil.

"o, i hope not," answered robert.

"i hope not, too; but those boys are too venturesome."

"tom knows the lay of the land better than any of us," said robert. "he
is the most wide-awake and gamiest man i know.
 
 ___________________________
 
 if his very hair
stood on his head, their prayer was so solemn. as he was going away the
man took some shingles and nailed them on his shoes to throw the
bloodhounds off his track. i don't think he will ever cease to feel
kindly towards colored people. i do wonder what has become of the boys?
what can keep them so long?"

just as captain sybil and robert were wondering at the delay of tom and
the soldiers they heard the measured tread of men who were slowly
bearing a burden. they were carrying tom anderson to the hospital,
fearfully wounded, and nigh to death. his face was distorted, and the
blood was streaming from his wounds. his respiration was faint, his
pulse hurried, as if life were trembling on its frailest cords.

robert and captain sybil hastened at once towards the wounded man. on
robert's face was a look of intense anguish, as he bent pityingly over
his friend.

"o, this is dreadful! how did it happen?" cried robert.

captain sybil, pressing anxiously forward, repeated robert's questio
 
 ___________________________
 
grist of agony and death,

    "and lives of men and souls of states
       were thrown like chaff beyond the gates."

numbers were taken prisoners. pale, young corpses strewed the earth;
manhood was stricken down in the flush of its energy and prime. the
ambulances brought in the wounded and dying. captain sybil laid down his
life on the altar of freedom. his prediction was fulfilled. robert was
brought into the hospital, wounded, but not dangerously. iola remembered
him as being the friend of tom anderson, and her heart was drawn
instinctively towards him. for awhile he was delirious, but her presence
had a soothing effect upon him. he sometimes imagined that she was his
mother, and he would tell her how he had missed her; and then at times
he would call her sister. iola, tender and compassionate, humored his
fancies, and would sing to him in low, sweet tones some of the hymns
she had learned in her old home in mississippi. one day she sang a few
verses of the hymn beginning with the words--

  
 
 ___________________________
 
bscured the brightness of the moon or the splendor of the stars. the
ancient trees were festooned with moss, which hung like graceful
draperies. ever and anon a startled hare glided over the path, and
whip-poor-wills and crickets broke the restful silence of the night.
robert rode quietly along, quaffing the beauty of the scene and thinking
of his boyish days, when he gathered nuts and wild plums in those woods;
he also indulged pleasant reminiscences of later years, when, with uncle
daniel and tom anderson, he attended the secret prayer-meetings. iola
rode along, conversing with aunt linda, amused and interested at the
quaintness of her speech and the shrewdness of her intellect. to her the
ride was delightful.

"does yer know dis place, robby," asked aunt linda, as they passed an
old resort.

"i should think i did," replied robert. "it is the place where we held
our last prayer-meeting."

"an' dere's dat ole broken pot we used, ter tell 'bout de war. but
warn't ole miss hoppin' wen she foun' out
 
 ___________________________
 
ola soon returned, bringing
with her her mother and grandmother.

"these," said iola, introducing her mother and grandmother, "are the
once-severed branches of our family; and this gentleman you have seen
before," continued iola, as robert entered the room.

dr. gresham looked scrutinizingly at him and said: "your face looks
familiar, but i saw so many faces at the hospital that i cannot just now
recall your name."

"doctor," said robert johnson, "i was one of your last patients, and i
was with tom anderson when he died."

"oh, yes," replied dr. gresham; "it all comes back to me. you were
wounded at the battle of five forks, were you not?"

"yes," said robert.

"i saw you when you were recovering. you told me that you thought you
had a clue to your lost relatives, from whom you had been so long
separated. how have you succeeded?"

"admirably! i have been fortunate in finding my mother, my sister, and
her children."

"ah, indeed! i am delighted to hear it. where are they?"

"they are right here. th