ole 'nough to go to college. wen he went, he allers 'membered me in
de letters he used to write his grandma. wen he war gone, i war
lonesomer dan eber. but, one day, i jis' seed de gal dat took de rag off
de bush. gundover had jis' brought her from de up-country. she war putty
as a picture!" he exclaimed, looking fondly at his wife, who still bore
traces of great beauty. "she had putty hair, putty eyes, putty mouth.
she war putty all over; an' she know'd how to put on style."

"o, daniel," said aunt katie, half chidingly, "how you do talk."

"why, it's true. i 'member when you war de puttiest gal in dese diggins;
when nobody could top your cotton."

"i don't," said aunt katie.

"well, i do. now, let me go on wid my story. de fust time i seed her, i
sez to myself, 'dat's de gal for me, an' i means to hab her ef i kin git
her.' so i scraped 'quaintance wid her, and axed her ef she would hab me
ef our marsters would let us. i warn't 'fraid 'bout marse robert, but i
warn't quite shore 'bout gundover
 
 ___________________________
 
n i
tole him 'bout it, he war tearin' mad, an' went ober an' saw ole
gundover, an' foun' out he war hard up for money, an' he bought katie
and brought her home to lib wid me, and we's been a libin in clover eber
sence. marster robert has been mighty good to me. he stood by me in my
troubles, an' now his trouble's come, i'm a gwine to stan' by him. i
used to think gundover's wife war jealous ob my katie. she war so much
puttier. gundover's wife couldn't tech my katie wid a ten foot pole."

"but, aunt katie, you have had your trials," said robert, now that
daniel had finished his story; "don't you feel bitter towards these
people who are fighting to keep you in slavery?"

aunt katie turned her face towards the speaker. it was a thoughtful,
intelligent face, saintly and calm. a face which expressed the idea of a
soul which had been fearfully tempest tossed, but had passed through
suffering into peace. very touching was the look of resignation and hope
which overspread her features as she replied, w
 
 ___________________________
 
d when i was wounded at five forks she attended me in the
field hospital there. she was just as good as gold."

"well, did i eber! you jis' fotch dat chile to see me, ef she ain't too
fine. i'se pore, but i'se clean, an' i ain't forgot how ter git up good
dinners. now, i wants ter hab a good talk 'bout our feller-sarvants."

"yes, and i," said robert, "want to hear all about uncle daniel, and
jennie, and uncle ben tunnel."

"well, i'se got lots an' gobs ter tell yer. i'se kep' track ob dem all.
aunt katie died an' went ter hebben in a blaze ob glory. uncle dan'el
stayed on de place till marse robert com'd back. when de war war ober he
war smashed all ter pieces. i did pity him from de bottom ob my heart.
when he went ter de war he looked so brave an' han'some; an' wen he
com'd back he looked orful. 'fore he went he gib uncle dan'el a bag full
ob money ter take kere ob. 'an wen he com'd back uncle dan'el gibed him
ebery cent ob it. it warn't ebery white pusson he could hab trusted wid
it. 'cause 
 
 ___________________________
 
yer know, bobby, money's a mighty temptin' thing. dey tells
me dat marster robert los' a heap ob property by de war; but marse
robert war always mighty good ter uncle dan'el and aunt katie. he war
wid her wen she war dyin' an' she got holt his han' an' made him promise
dat he would meet her in glory. i neber seed anybody so happy in my
life. she singed an' prayed ter de last. i tell you dis ole time
religion is good 'nuff fer me. mr. robert didn't stay yere long arter
her, but i beliebs he went all right. but 'fore he went he looked out
fer uncle dan'el. did you see dat nice little cabin down dere wid de
green shutters an' nice little garden in front? well, 'fore marse robert
die