i
intend, after i have graduated, to persuade pa to buy a house in new
orleans, and spend the winter there. you know this will be my first
season out, and i hope that you will come and spend the winter with me.
we will have such gay times, and you will so fall in love with our sunny
south that you will never want to come back to shiver amid the snows and
cold of the north. i think one winter in the south would cure you of
your abolitionism."

"have you seen her yet?"

this question was asked by louis bastine, an attorney who had come north
in the interests of lorraine. the scene was the new england village
where mr. galen's academy was located, and which iola was attending.
this question was addressed to camille lecroix, bastine's intimate
friend, who had lately come north. he was the son of a planter who lived
near leroy's plantation, and was familiar with iola's family history.
since his arrival north, bastine had met him and communicated to him his
intentions.

"yes; just caught a glimpse of her
 
 ___________________________
 
 this morning as she was going down
the street," was camille's reply.

"she is a most beautiful creature," said louis bastine. "she has the
proud poise of leroy, the most splendid eyes i ever saw in a woman's
head, lovely complexion, and a glorious wealth of hair. she would bring
$2000 any day in a new orleans market."

"i always feel sorry," said camille, "when i see one of those creole
girls brought to the auction block. i have known fathers who were deeply
devoted to their daughters, but who through some reverse of fortune were
forced to part with them, and i always think the blow has been equally
terrible on both 
 
 ___________________________
 
would crush you to the earth?"

"not so fast, my lovely tigress," said bastine, "your father knew what
he was doing when he placed you in my charge."

"my father made a great mistake, if he thought he had put me in charge
of a gentleman."

"i am your guardian for the present," replied bastine. "i am to see you
safe home, and then my commission ends."

"i wish it were ended now," she exclaimed, trembling with anger and
mortification. her voice was choked by emotion, and broken by smothered
sobs. louis bastine thought to himself, "she is a real spitfire, but
beautiful even in her wrath."

during the rest of her journey iola preserved a most freezing reserve
towards bastine. at length the journey was ended. pale and anxious she
rode up the avenue which led to her home.

a strange silence pervaded the place. the servants moved sadly from
place to place, and spoke in subdued tones. the windows were heavily
draped with crape, and a funeral air pervaded the house.

mammy liza met her at the door, and, wit