now here in a knot together,
would she come off with such a sentence as the worshipful
magistrates have awarded?  marry, i trow not."

"people say," said another, "that the reverend master
dimmesdale, her godly pastor, takes it very grievously to heart
that such a scandal should have come upon his congregation."

"the magistrates are god-fearing gentlemen, but merciful
overmuch--that is a truth," added a third autumnal matron.  "at
the very least, they should have put the brand of a hot iron on
hester prynne's forehead.  madame hester would have winced at
that, i warrant me.  but she--the naughty baggage--little will
she care what they put upon the bodice of her gown!  why, look
you, she may cover it with a brooch, or such like heathenish
adornment, and so walk the streets as brave as ever!"

"ah, but," interposed, more softly, a young wife, holding a
child by the hand, "let her cover the mark as she will, the pang
of it will be always in her heart."

"what do we talk of marks and brands, whether o
 
 ___________________________
 
ad dark and abundant hair, so glossy that it
threw off the sunshine with a gleam; and a face which, besides
being beautiful from regularity of feature and richness of
complexion, had the impressiveness belonging to a marked brow
and deep black eyes.  she was ladylike, too, after the manner of
the feminine gentility of those days; characterised by a certain
state and dignity, rather than by the delicate, evanescent, and
indescribable grace which is now recognised as its indication.
and never had hester prynne appeared more ladylike, in the
antique interpretation of the term, than as she issued from the
prison.  those who had before known her, and had expected to
behold her dimmed and obscured by a disastrous cloud, were
astonished, and even startled, to perceive how her beauty shone
out, and made a halo of the misfortune and ignominy in which she
was enveloped.  it may be true that, to a sensitive observer,
there was some thing exquisitely painful in it.  her attire,
which indeed, she had wrought fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r the occasion in prison, and
had modelled much after her own fancy, seemed to express the
attitude of her spirit, the desperate recklessness of her mood,
by its wild and picturesque peculiarity.  but the point which
drew all eyes, and, as it were, transfigured the wearer--so that
both men and women who had been familiarly acquainted with
hester prynne were now impressed as if they beheld her for the
first time--was that scarlet letter, so fantastically
embroidered and illuminated upon her bosom.  it had the effect of
a spell, taking her out of the ordinary relations with humanity,
and enclosing her in a sphere by herself.

"she hath good skill at her needle, that's certain," remarked
one of her female spectators; "but did ever a woman, before this
brazen hussy, contrive such a way of showing it?  why, gossips,
what is it but to laugh in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
tress prynne shall be set where
man, woman, and child may have a fair sight of her brave apparel
from this time till an hour past meridian.  a blessing on the
righteous colony of the massachusetts, where iniquity is dragged
out into the sunshine!  come along, madame hester, and show your
scarlet letter in the market-place!"

a lane was forthwith opened through the crowd of spectators.
preceded by the beadle, and attended by an irregular procession
of stern-browed men and unkindly visaged women, hester prynne
set forth towards the place appointed for her punishment.  a
crowd of eager and curious schoolboys, understanding little of
the matter in hand, except that it gave them a half-holiday, ran
before her progress, turning their heads continually to stare
into her face and at the winking baby in her arms, and at the
ignominious letter on her breast.  it was no great distance, in
those days, from the prison door to the market-place.  measured
by the prisoner's experience, however, it might be reckone
 
 ___________________________
 
d a
journey of some length; for haughty as her demeanour was, she
perchance underwent an agony from every footstep of those that
thronged to see her, as if her heart had been flung into the
street for them all to spurn and trample upon.  in our nature,
however, there is a provision, alike marvellous and merciful,
that the sufferer should never know the intensity of what he
endures by its present torture, but chiefly by the pang that
rankles after it.  with almost a serene deportment, therefore,
hester prynne passed through this portion of her ordeal, and
came to a sort of scaffold, at the western extremity of the
market-place.  it stood nearly beneath the eaves of boston's
earliest church, and appeared to be a fixture there.

in fact, this scaffold constituted a portion of a penal machine,
which now, for two or three generations past, has been merely
historical and traditionary among us, but was held, in the old
time, to be as effectual an agent, in the promotion of good
citizenship, as ever was th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
it rose the framework of that instrument of discipline, so
fashioned as to confine the human head in its tight grasp, and
thus hold it up to the public gaze.  the very ideal of ignominy
was embodied and made manifest in this contrivance of wood and
iron.  there can be no outrage, methinks, against our common
nature--whatever be the delinquencies of the individual--no
outrage more flagrant than to forbid the culprit to hide his
face for shame; as it was the essence of this punishment to do.
in hester prynne's instance, however, as not unfrequently in
other cases, her sentence bore that she should stand a certain
time upon the platform, but without undergoing that gripe about
the neck and confinement of the head, the proneness to which was
the most devilish characteristic of this ugly engine.  knowing
well her part, she ascended a flight of wooden steps, and was
thus displayed to the surrounding multitude, at about the height
of a man's shoulders above the street.

had there been a papist among the
 
 ___________________________
 
 motherhood, whose infant was to redeem
the world.  here, there was the taint of deepest sin in the most
sacred quality of human life, working such effect, that the
world was only the darker for this woman's beauty, and the more
lost for the infant that she had borne.

the scene was not without a mixture of awe, such as must always
invest the spectacle of guilt and shame in a fellow-creature,
before society shall have grown corrupt enough to smile, instead
of shuddering at it.  the witnesses of hester prynne's disgrace
had not yet passed beyond their simplicity.  they were stern
enough to look upon her death, had that been the sentence,
without a murmur at its severity, but had none of the
heartlessness of another social state, which would find only a
theme for jest in an exhibition like the present.  even had there
been a disposition to turn the matter into ridicule, it must
have been repressed and overpowered by the solemn presence of
men no less dignified than the governor, and several of his
co
 
 ___________________________
 
c traits of her maiden
years, came swarming back upon her, intermingled with
recollections of whatever was gravest in her subsequent life;
one picture precisely as vivid as another; as if all were of
similar importance, or all alike a play.  possibly, it was an
instinctive device of her spirit to relieve itself by the
exhibition of these phantasmagoric forms, from the cruel weight
and hardness of the reality.

be that as it might, the scaffold of the pillory was a point of
view that revealed to hester prynne the entire track along which
she had been treading, since her happy infancy.  standing on that
miserable eminence, she saw again her native village, in old
england, and her paternal home: a decayed house of grey stone,
with a poverty-stricken aspect, but retaining a half obliterated
shield of arms over the portal, in token of antique gentility.
she saw her father's face, with its bold brow, and reverend
white beard that flowed over the old-fashioned elizabethan ruff;
her mother's, too, with the
 
 ___________________________
 
fares, the tall, grey houses, the huge
cathedrals, and the public edifices, ancient in date and quaint
in architecture, of a continental city; where new life had
awaited her, still in connexion with the misshapen scholar: a
new life, but feeding itself on time-worn materials, like a tuft
of green moss on a crumbling wall.  lastly, in lieu of these
shifting scenes, came back the rude market-place of the puritan,
settlement, with all the townspeople assembled, and levelling
their stern regards at hester prynne--yes, at herself--who stood
on the scaffold of the pillory, an infant on her arm, and the
letter a, in scarlet, fantastically embroidered with gold
thread, upon her bosom.

could it be true?   she clutched the child so fiercely to her
breast that it sent forth a cry; she turned her eyes downward at
the scarlet letter, and even touched it with her finger, to
assure herself that the infant and the shame were real.  yes
these were her realities--all else had vanished!



iii.  the recognition

fro
 
 ___________________________
 
m this intense consciousness of being the object of severe
and universal observation, the wearer of the scarlet letter was
at length relieved, by discerning, on the outskirts of the
crowd, a figure which irresistibly took possession of her
thoughts.  an indian in his native garb was standing there; but
the red men were not so infrequent visitors of the english
settlements that one of them would have attracted any notice
from hester prynne at such a time; much less would he have
excluded all other objects and ideas from her mind.  by the
indian's side, and evidently sustaining a companionship with
him, stood a white man, clad in a strange disarray of civilized
and savage costume.

he was small in stature, with a furrowed visage, which as yet
could hardly be termed aged.  there was a remarkable intelligence
in his features, as of a person who had so cultivated his mental
part that it could not fail to mould the physical to itself 
 
 ___________________________
 
and
become manifest by unmistakable tokens.  although, by a seemingly
careless arrangement of his heterogeneous garb, he had
endeavoured to conceal or abate the peculiarity, it was
sufficiently evident to hester prynne that one of this man's
shoulders rose higher than the other.  again, at the first
instant of perceiving that thin visage, and the slight deformity
of the figure, she pressed her infant to her bosom with so
convulsive a force that the poor babe uttered another cry of
pain.  but the mother did not seem to hear it.

at his arrival in the market-place, and some time before she saw
him, the stranger had bent his eyes on hester prynne.  it was
carelessly at first, like a man chiefly accustomed to loo
 
 ___________________________
 
ed itself across his features, like a snake
gliding swiftly over them, and making one little pause, with all
its wreathed intervolutions in open sight.  his face darkened
with some powerful emotion, which, nevertheless, he so
instantaneously controlled by an effort of his will, that, save
at a single moment, its expression might have passed for
calmness.  after a brief space, the convulsion grew almost
imperceptible, and finally subsided into the depths of his
nature.  when he found the eyes of hester prynne fastened on his
own, and saw that she appeared to recognize him, he slowly and
calmly raised his finger, made a gesture with it in the air, and
laid it on his lips.

then touching the shoulder of a townsman who stood near to him,
he addressed him in a formal and courteous manner:

"i pray you, good sir," said he, "who is this woman?--and
wherefore is she here set up to public shame?"

"you must needs be a stranger in this region, friend," answered
the townsman, looking curiously at the question
 
 ___________________________
 
rked the stranger, gravely, bowing his
head.  "thus she will be a living sermon against sin, until the
ignominious letter be engraved upon her tombstone.  it irks me,
nevertheless, that the partner of her iniquity should not at
least, stand on the scaffold by her side.  but he will be
known--he will be known!--he will be known!"

he bowed courteously to the communicative townsman, and
whispering a few words to his indian attendant, they both made
their way through the crowd.

while this passed, hester prynne had been standing on her
pedestal, still with a fixed gaze towards the stranger--so fixed
a gaze that, at moments of intense absorption, all other objects
in the visible world seemed to vanish, leaving only him and her.
such an interview, perhaps, would have been more terrible than
even to meet him as she now did, with the hot mid-day sun
burning down upon her face, and lighting up its shame; with the
scarlet token of infamy on her breast; with the sin-born infant
in her arms; with a whole peop
 
 ___________________________
 
nscious of a shelter in the presence of these thousand
witnesses.  it was better to stand thus, with so many betwixt him
and her, than to greet him face to face--they two alone.  she
fled for refuge, as it were, to the public exposure, and dreaded
the moment when its protection should be withdrawn from her.
involved in these thoughts, she scarcely heard a voice behind
her until it had repeated her name more than once, in a loud and
solemn tone, audible to the whole multitude.

"hearken unto me, hester prynne!" said the voice.

it has already been noticed that directly over the platform on
which hester prynne stood was a kind of balcony, or open
gallery, appended to the meeting-house.  it was the place whence
proclamations were wont to be made, amidst an assemblage of the
magistracy, with all the ceremonial that attended such public
observances in those days.  here, to witness the scene which we
are describing, sat governor bellingham himself with four
sergeants about his chair, bearing halberds, as
 
 ___________________________
 
s surrounded were
distinguished by a dignity of mien, belonging to a period when
the forms of authority were felt to possess the sacredness of
divine institutions.  they were, doubtless, good men, just and
sage.  but, out of the whole human family, it would not have been
easy to select the same number of wise and virtuous persons, who
should be less capable of sitting in judgment on an erring
woman's heart, and disentangling its mesh of good and evil, than
the sages of rigid aspect towards whom hester prynne now turned
her face.  she seemed conscious, indeed, that whatever sympathy
she might expect lay in the larger and warmer heart of the
multitude; for, as she lifted her eyes towards the balcony, the
unhappy woman grew pale, and trembled.

the voice which had called her attention was that of the
reverend and famous john wilson, the eldest clergyman of boston,
a great scholar, like most of his contemporaries in the
profession, and withal a man of kind and genial spirit.  this
last attribute, howev
 
 ___________________________
 
an self-congratulation with him.  there he stood, with a
border of grizzled locks beneath his skull-cap, while his grey
eyes, accustomed to the shaded light of his study, were winking,
like those of hester's infant, in the unadulterated sunshine.  he
looked like the darkly engraved portraits which we see prefixed
to old volumes of sermons, and had no more right than one of
those portraits would have to step forth, as he now did, and
meddle with a question of human guilt, passion, and anguish.

"hester prynne," said the clergyman, "i have striven with my
young brother here, under whose preaching of the word you have
been privileged to sit"--here mr. wilson laid his hand on the
shoulder of a pale young man beside him--"i have sought, i say,
to persuade this godly youth, that he should deal with you, here
in the face of heaven, and before these wise and upright rulers,
and in hearing of all the people, as touching the vileness and
blackness of your sin.  knowing your natural temper better than
i, he c
 
 ___________________________
 
earing of all men, to that mystery of a
woman's soul, so sacred even in its pollution.  the trying nature
of his position drove the blood from his cheek, and made his
lips tremulous.

"speak to the woman, my brother," said mr. wilson.  "it is of
moment to her soul, and, therefore, as the worshipful governor
says, momentous to thine own, in whose charge hers is.  exhort
her to confess the truth!"

the reverend mr. dimmesdale bent his head, in silent prayer,
as it seemed, and then came forward.

"hester prynne," said he, leaning over the balcony and looking
down steadfastly into her eyes, "thou hearest what this good man
says, and seest the accountability under which i labour.  if thou
feelest it to be for thy soul's peace, and that thy earthly
punishment will thereby be made more effectual to salvation, i
charge thee to speak out the name of thy fellow-sinner and
fellow-sufferer!  be not silent from any mistaken pity and
tenderness for him; for, believe me, hester, though he were to
step down from a
 
 ___________________________
 
 deep, and
broken.  the feeling that it so evidently manifested, rather than
the direct purport of the words, caused it to vibrate within all
hearts, and brought the listeners into one accord of sympathy.
even the poor baby at hester's bosom was affected by the same
influence, for it directed its hitherto vacant gaze towards mr.
dimmesdale, and held up its little arms with a half-pleased,
half-plaintive murmur.  so powerful seemed the minister's appeal
that the people could not believe but that hester prynne would
speak out the guilty name, or else that the guilty one himself
in whatever high or lowly place he stood, would be drawn forth
by an inward and inevitable necessity, and compelled to ascend
the scaffold.

hester shook her head.

"woman, transgress not beyond the limits of heaven's mercy!"
cried the reverend mr. wilson, more harshly than before.  "that
little babe hath been gifted with a voice, to second and confirm
the counsel which thou hast heard.  speak out the name!  that, and
thy repe
 
 ___________________________
 
ntance, may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy
breast."

"never," replied hester prynne, looking, not at mr. wilson, but
into the deep and troubled eyes of the younger clergyman.  "it is
too deeply branded.  ye cannot take it off.  and would that i
might endure his agony as well as mine!"

"speak, woman!" said another voice, coldly and sternly,
proceeding from the crowd about the scaffold, "speak; and give
your child a father!"

"i will not speak!" answered hester, turning pale as death, but
responding to this voice, which she too surely recognised.  "and
my child must seek a heav
 
 ___________________________
 
 impracticable state of the poor culprit's mind,
the elder clergyman, who had carefully prepared himself for the
occasion, addressed to the multitude a discourse on sin, in all
its branches, but with continual reference to the ignominious
letter.  so forcibly did he dwell upon this symbol, for the hour
or more during which his periods were rolling over the people's
heads, that it assumed new terrors in their imagination, and
seemed to derive its scarlet hue from the flames of the infernal
pit.  hester prynne, meanwhile, kept her place upon the pedestal
of shame, with glazed eyes, and an air of weary indifference.
she had borne that morning all that nature could endure; and as
her temperament was not of the order that escapes from too
intense suffering by a swoon, her spirit could only shelter
itself beneath a stony crust of insensibility, while the
faculties of animal life remained entire.  in this state, the
voice of the preacher thundered remorselessly, but unavailingly,
upon her ears.  the infan
 
 ___________________________
 
t, during the latter portion of her
ordeal, pierced the air with its wailings and screams; she
strove to hush it mechanically, but seemed scarcely to
sympathise with its trouble.  with the same hard demeanour, she
was led back to prison, and vanished from the public gaze within
its iron-clamped portal.  it was whispered by those who peered
after her that the scarlet letter threw a lurid gleam along the
dark passage-way of the interior.



iv.   the interview

after her return to the prison, hester prynne was found to be in
a state of nervous excitement, that demanded constant
watchfulness, lest she should perpetrate violence on herself, or
do some half-frenzied mischief to the poor babe.  as night
approached, it proving impossible to quell her insubordination
by rebuke or threats of punishment, master brackett, the jailer,
thought fit to introduce a physician.  he described him as a man
of skill in all christian modes of physical science, and
likewise familiar with whatever the savage people co
 
 ___________________________
 
uld teach in
respect to medicinal herbs and roots that grew in the forest.  to
say the truth, there was much need of professional assistance,
not merely for hester herself, but still more urgently for the
child--who, drawing its sustenance from the maternal bosom,
seemed to have drank in with it all the turmoil, the anguish and
despair, which pervaded the mother's system.  it now writhed in
convulsions of pain, and was a forcible type, in its little
frame, of the moral agony which hester prynne had borne
throughout the day.

closely following the jailer into the dismal apartment, appeared
that individual, of singular aspect whose presence in the crowd
had been of such deep interest to the wearer of the scarlet
letter.  he was lodged in the prison, not as suspected of any
offence, but as the most convenient and suitable mode of
disposing of him, until the magistrates should have conferred
with the indian sagamores respecting his ransom.  his name was
announced as roger chillingworth.  
 
 ___________________________
 
the jailer, after ushering him
into the room, remained a moment, marvelling at the comparative
quiet that followed his entrance; for hester prynne had
immediately become as still as death, although the child
continued to moan.

"prithee, friend, leave me alone with my patient," said the
practitioner.  "trust me, good jailer, you shall briefly have
peace in your house; and, i promise you, mistress prynne shall
hereafter be more amenable to just authority than you may have
found her heretofore."

"nay, if your worship can accomplish that," answered master
brackett, "i shall own you for a man of skill, indeed!  verily,
the woman hath been li
 
 ___________________________
 
e; not precisely a look of fear, yet
full of doubt and questioning as to what his purposes might be.
she looked also at her slumbering child.

"i have thought of death," said she--"have wished for it--would
even have prayed for it, were it fit that such as i should pray
for anything.  yet, if death be in this cup, i bid thee think
again, ere thou beholdest me quaff it.  see! it is even now at my
lips."

"drink, then," replied he, still with the same cold composure.
"dost thou know me so little, hester prynne?  are my purposes
wont to be so shallow?  even if i imagine a scheme of vengeance,
what could i do better for my object than to let thee live--than
to give thee medicines against all harm and peril of life--so
that this burning shame may still blaze upon thy bosom?" as he
spoke, he laid his long fore-finger on the scarlet letter, which
forthwith seemed to scorch into hester's breast, as if it had
been red hot.  he noticed her involuntary gesture, and smiled.
"live, therefore, and bear about thy
 
 ___________________________
 
 doom with thee, in the eyes
of men and women--in the eyes of him whom thou didst call thy
husband--in the eyes of yonder child!  and, that thou mayest
live, take off this draught."

without further expostulation or delay, hester prynne drained
the cup, and, at the motion of the man of skill, seated herself
on the bed, where the child was sleeping; while he drew the only
chair which the room afforded, and took his own seat beside her.
she could not but tremble at these preparations; for she felt
that--having now done all that humanity, or principle, or, if so
it were, a refined cruelty, impelled him to do for the relief of
physical suffering--he was next to treat with her as the man
whom she had most deeply and irreparably inj
 
 ___________________________
 
h which thy presence made there!"

"i have greatly wronged thee," murmured hester.

"we have wronged each other," answered he.  "mine was the first
wrong, when i betrayed thy budding youth into a false and
unnatural relation with my decay.  therefore, as a man who has
not thought and philosophised in vain, i seek no vengeance, plot
no evil against thee.  between thee and me, the scale hangs
fairly balanced.  but, hester, the man lives who has wronged us
both!  who is he?"

"ask me not!" replied hester prynne, looking firmly into his
face.  "that thou shalt never know!"

"never, sayest thou?" rejoined he, with a smile of dark and
self-relying intelligence.  "never know him!  believe me, hester,
there are few things whether in the outward world, or, to a
certain depth, in the invisible sphere of thought--few things
hidden from the man who devotes himself earnestly and
unreservedly to the solution of a mystery.  thou mayest cover up
thy secret from the prying multitude.  thou mayest conceal it,
too, f
 
 ___________________________
 
 sought to wrench the name out of thy heart, and
give thee a partner on thy pedestal.  but, as for me, i come to
the inquest with other senses than they possess.  i shall seek
this man, as i have sought truth in books: as i have sought gold
in alchemy.  there is a sympathy that will make me conscious of
him.  i shall see him tremble.  i shall feel myself shudder,
suddenly and unawares.  sooner or later, he must needs be mine."

the eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her,
that hester prynne clasped her hand over her heart, dreading
lest he should read the secret there at once.

"thou wilt not reveal his name?   not the less he is mine,"
resumed he, with a look of confidence, as if destiny were at one
with him.  "he bears no letter of infamy wrought into his
garment, as thou dost, but i shall read it on his heart.  yet
fear not for him!  think not that i shall interfere with heaven's
own method of retribution, or, to my own loss, betray him to the
gripe of human law.  neither do th
 
 ___________________________
 
holar.  "thou hast kept the secret of thy
paramour.  keep, likewise, mine!  there are none in this land that
know me.  breathe not to any human soul that thou didst ever call
me husband!  here, on this wild outskirt of the earth, i shall
pitch my tent; for, elsewhere a wanderer, and isolated from
human interests, i find here a woman, a man, a child, amongst
whom and myself there exist the closest ligaments.  no matter
whether of love or hate: no matter whether of right or wrong!
thou and thine, hester prynne, belong to me.  my home is where
thou art and where he is.  but betray me not!"

"wherefore dost thou desire it?" inquired hester, shrinking, she
hardly knew why, from this secret bond.  "why not announce
thyself openly, and cast me off at once?"

"it may be," he replied, "because i will not encounter the
dishonour that besmirches the husband of a faithless woman.  it
may be for other reasons.  enough, it is my purpose to live and
die unknown.  let, therefore, thy husband be to the world as one
 
 ___________________________
 
thy
infant and the scarlet letter!  how is it, hester?  doth thy
sentence bind thee to wear the token in thy sleep?  art thou not
afraid of nightmares and hideous dreams?"

"why dost thou smile so at me?" inquired hester, troubled at the
expression of his eyes.  "art thou like the black man that haunts
the forest round about us?  hast thou enticed me into a bond that
will prove the ruin of my soul?"

"not thy soul," he answered, with another smile.  "no, not
thine!"



v.  hester at her needle

hester prynne's term of confinement was now at an end.  her
prison-door was thrown open, and she came forth into the
sunshine, which, falling on all alike, seemed, to her sick and
morbid heart, as if meant for no other purpose than to reveal
the scarlet letter on her breast.  perhaps there was a more real
torture in her first unattended footsteps from the threshold of
the prison than even in the procession and spectacle that have
been described, where she was made the common infamy, at which
all mankind was 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the force of
doom, which almost invariably compels human beings to linger
around and haunt, ghost-like, the spot where some great and
marked event has given the colour to their lifetime; and, still
the more irresistibly, the darker the tinge that saddens it.  her
sin, her ignominy, were the roots which she had struck into the
soil.  it was as if a new birth, with stronger assimilations than
the first, had converted the forest-land, still so uncongenial
to every other pilgrim and wanderer, into hester prynne's wild
and dreary, but life-long home.  all other scenes of earth--even
that village of rural england, where happy infancy and stainless
maidenhood seemed yet to be in her mother's keeping, like
garments put off long ago--were foreign to her, in comparison.
the chain that bound her here was of iron links, and galling to
her inmost soul, but could never be broken.

it might be, too--doubtless it was so, although she hid the
secret from herself, and grew pale whenever it struggled out of
her hear
 
 ___________________________
 
 it in
its dungeon.  what she compelled herself to believe--what,
finally, she reasoned upon as her motive for continuing a
resident of new england--was half a truth, and half a
self-delusion.  here, she said to herself had been the scene of
her guilt, and here should be the scene of her earthly
punishment; and so, perchance, the torture of her daily shame
would at length purge her soul, and work out another purity than
that which she had lost: more saint-like, because the result of
martyrdom.

hester prynne, therefore, did not flee.  on the outskirts of the
town, within the verge of the peninsula, but not in close
vicinity to any other habitation, there was a small thatched
cottage.  it had been built by an earlier settler, and abandoned,
because the soil about it was too sterile for cultivation, while
its comparative remoteness put it out of the sphere of that
social activity which already marked the habits of the
emigrants.  it stood on the shore, looking across a basin of the
sea at the forest-
 
 ___________________________
 
ered
gloves, were all deemed necessary to the official state of men
assuming the reins of power, and were readily allowed to
individuals dignified by rank or wealth, even while sumptuary
laws forbade these and similar extravagances to the plebeian
order.  in the array of funerals, too--whether for the apparel of
the dead body, or to typify, by manifold emblematic devices of
sable cloth and snowy lawn, the sorrow of the survivors--there
was a frequent and characteristic demand for such labour as
hester prynne could supply.  baby-linen--for babies then wore
robes of state--afforded still another possibility of toil and
emolument.

by degrees, not very slowly, her handiwork became what would now
be termed the fashion.  whether from commiseration for a woman of
so miserable a destiny; or from the morbid curiosity that gives
a fictitious value even to common or worthless things; or by
whatever other intangible circumstance was then, as now,
sufficient to bestow, on some persons, what others might seek i
 
 ___________________________
 
 an idea of penance in this mode of occupation,
and that she offered up a real sacrifice of enjoyment in
devoting so many hours to such rude handiwork.  she had in her
nature a rich, voluptuous, oriental characteristic--a taste for
the gorgeously beautiful, which, save in the exquisite
productions of her needle, found nothing else, in all the
possibilities of her life, to exercise itself upon.  women derive
a pleasure, incomprehensible to the other sex, from the delicate
toil of the needle.  to hester prynne it might have been a mode
of expressing, and therefore soothing, the passion of her life.
like all other joys, she rejected it as sin.  this morbid
meddling of conscience with an immaterial matter betokened, it
is to be feared, no genuine and steadfast penitence, but
something doubtful, something that might be deeply wrong
beneath.

in this manner, hester prynne came to have a part to perform in
the world.  with her native energy of character and rare
capacity, it could not entirely cast her of
 
 ___________________________
 
t--had the wintry blast shrieked
it aloud!  another peculiar torture was felt in the gaze of a new
eye.  when strangers looked curiously at the scarlet letter and
none ever failed to do so--they branded it afresh in hester's
soul; so that, oftentimes, she could scarcely refrain, yet
always did refrain, from covering the symbol with her hand.  but
then, again, an accustomed eye had likewise its own anguish to
inflict.  its cool stare of familiarity was intolerable.  from
first to last, in short, hester prynne had always this dreadful
agony in feeling a human eye upon the token; the spot never grew
callous; it seemed, on the contrary, to grow more sensitive with
daily torture.

but sometimes, once in many days, or perchance in many months,
she felt an eye--a human eye--upon the ignominious brand, that
seemed to give a momentary relief, as if half of her agony were
shared.  the next instant, back it all rushed again, with still a
deeper throb of pain; for, in that brief interval, she had
sinned anew. 
 
 ___________________________
 
o a mortal man in fellowship
with angels.  "what evil thing is at hand?" would hester say to
herself.  lifting her reluctant eyes, there would be nothing
human within the scope of view, save the form of this earthly
saint!  again a mystic sisterhood would contumaciously assert
itself, as she met the sanctified frown of some matron, who,
according to the rumour of all tongues, had kept cold snow
within her bosom throughout life.  that unsunned snow in the
matron's bosom, and the burning shame on hester prynne's--what
had the two in common?  or, once more, the electric thrill would
give her warning--"behold hester, here is a companion!" and,
looking up, she would detect the eyes of a young maiden glancing
at the scarlet letter, shyly and aside, and quickly averted,
with a faint, chill crimson in her cheeks as if her purity were
somewhat sullied by that momentary glance.  o fiend, whose
talisman was that fatal symbol, wouldst thou leave nothing,
whether in youth or age, for this poor sinner to revere?
 
 ___________________________
 
--such
loss of faith is ever one of the saddest results of sin.  be it
accepted as a proof that all was not corrupt in this poor victim
of her own frailty, and man's hard law, that hester prynne yet
struggled to believe that no fellow-mortal was guilty like
herself.

the vulgar, who, in those dreary old times, were always
contributing a grotesque horror to what interested their
imaginations, had a story about the scarlet letter which we
might readily work up into a terrific legend.  they averred that
the symbol was not mere scarlet cloth, tinged in an earthly
dye-pot, but was red-hot with infernal fire, and could be seen
glowing all alight whenever hester prynne walked abroad in the
ni
 
 ___________________________
 
's only treasure!  how strange, indeed!  man
had marked this woman's sin by a scarlet letter, which had such
potent and disastrous efficacy that no human sympathy could
reach her, save it were sinful like herself.  god, as a direct
consequence of the sin which man thus punished, had given her a
lovely child, whose place was on that same dishonoured bosom, to
connect her parent for ever with the race and descent of
mortals, and to be finally a blessed soul in heaven!  yet these
thoughts affected hester prynne less with hope than
apprehension.  she knew that her deed had been evil; she could
have no faith, therefore, that its result would be good.  day
after day she looked fearfully into the child's expanding
nature, ever dreading to detect some dark and wild peculiarity
that should correspond with the guiltiness to which she owed her
being.

certainly there was no physical defect.  by its perfect shape,
its vigour, and its natural dexterity in the use of all its
untried limbs, the infant was worthy 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere now illuminated by the
morning radiance of a young child's disposition, but, later in
the day of earthly existence, might be prolific of the storm and
whirlwind.

the discipline of the family in those days was of a far more
rigid kind than now.  the frown, the harsh rebuke, the frequent
application of the rod, enjoined by scriptural authority, were
used, not merely in the way of punishment for actual offences,
but as a wholesome regimen for the growth and promotion of all
childish virtues.  hester prynne, nevertheless, the loving mother
of this one child, ran little risk of erring on the side of
undue severity.  mindful, however, of her own errors and
misfortunes, she early sought to impose a tender but strict
control over the infant immortality that was committed to her
charge.  but the task was beyond her skill.  after testing both
smiles and frowns, and proving that neither mode of treatment
possessed any calculable influence, hester was ultimately
compelled to stand aside and permit the chi
 
 ___________________________
 
ible intelligence.  her only real comfort was when
the child lay in the placidity of sleep.  then she was sure of
her, and tasted hours of quiet, sad, delicious happiness;
until--perhaps with that perverse expression glimmering from
beneath her opening lids--little pearl awoke!

how soon--with what strange rapidity, indeed did pearl arrive at
an age that was capable of social intercourse beyond the
mother's ever-ready smile and nonsense-words!  and then what a
happiness would it have been could hester prynne have heard her
clear, bird-like voice mingling with the uproar of other
childish voices, and have distinguished and unravelled her own
darling's tones, amid all the entangled outcry of a group of
sportive children.  but this could never be.  pearl was a born
outcast of the infantile world.  an imp of evil, emblem and
product of sin, she had no right among christened infants.
nothing was more remarkable than the instinct, as it seemed,
with which the child comprehended her loneliness: the destin
 
 ___________________________
 
n the mood, instead of the fitful
caprice that so often thwarted her in the child's
manifestations.  it appalled her, nevertheless, to discern here,
again, a shadowy reflection of the evil that had existed in
herself.  all this enmity and passion had pearl inherited, by
inalienable right, out of hester's heart.  mother and daughter
stood together in the same circle of seclusion from human
society; and in the nature of the child seemed to be perpetuated
those unquiet elements that had distracted hester prynne before
pearl's birth, but had since begun to be soothed away by the
softening influences of maternity.

at home, within and around her mother's cottage, pearl wanted
not a wide and various circle of acquaintance.  the spell of life
went forth from her ever-creative spirit, and communicated
itself to a thousand objects, as a torch kindles a flame
wherever it may be applied.  the unlikeliest materials--a stick,
a bunch of rags, a flower--were the puppets of pearl's
witchcraft, and, without underg
 
 ___________________________
 
gs of her own heart and mind.  she
never created a friend, but seemed always to be sowing broadcast
the dragon's teeth, whence sprung a harvest of armed enemies,
against whom she rushed to battle.  it was inexpressibly
sad--then what depth of sorrow to a mother, who felt in her own
heart the cause--to observe, in one so young, this constant
recognition of an adverse world, and so fierce a training of the
energies that were to make good her cause in the contest that
must ensue.

gazing at pearl, hester prynne often dropped her work upon her
knees, and cried out with an agony which she would fain have
hidden, but which made utterance for itself betwixt speech and a
groan--"o father in heaven--if thou art still my father--what is
this being which i have brought into the world?" and pearl,
overhearing the ejaculation, or aware through some more subtile
channel, of those throbs of anguish, would turn her vivid and
beautiful little face upon her mother, smile with sprite-like
intelligence, and resume her
 
 ___________________________
 
ussion whether it were indeed a smile.  by no means!  but that
first object of which pearl seemed to become aware was--shall we
say it?--the scarlet letter on hester's bosom!  one day, as her
mother stooped over the cradle, the infant's eyes had been
caught by the glimmering of the gold embroidery about the
letter; and putting up her little hand she grasped at it,
smiling, not doubtfully, but with a decided gleam, that gave her
face the look of a much older child.  then, gasping for breath,
did hester prynne clutch the fatal token, instinctively
endeavouring to tear it away, so infinite was the torture
inflicted by the intelligent touch of pearl's baby-hand.  again,
as if her mother's agonised gesture were meant only to make
sport for her, did little pearl look into her eyes, and smile.
from that epoch, except when the child was asleep, hester had
never felt a moment's safety: not a moment's calm enjoyment of
her.  weeks, it is true, would sometimes elapse, during which
pearl's gaze might never onc
 
 ___________________________
 
l herself.

"yes; i am little pearl!" repeated the child, continuing her
antics.

"thou art not my child!  thou art no pearl of mine!" said the
mother half playfully; for it was often the case that a sportive
impulse came over her in the midst of her deepest suffering.
"tell me, then, what thou art, and who sent thee hither?"

"tell me, mother!" said the child, seriously, coming up to
hester, and pressing herself close to her knees.  "do thou tell
me!"

"thy heavenly father sent thee!" answered hester prynne.

but she said it with a hesitation that did not escape the
acuteness of the child.  whether moved only by her ordinary
freakishness, or because an evil spirit prompted her, she put up
her small forefinger and touched the scarlet letter.

"he did not send me!" cried she, positively.  "i have no
heavenly father!"

"hush, pearl, hush!  thou must not talk so!" answered the
mother, suppressing a groan.  "he sent us all into the world.  he
sent even me, thy mother.  then, much more thee!  or, if not
 
 ___________________________
 
nity, and observing some
of her odd attributes, had given out that poor little pearl was
a demon offspring: such as, ever since old catholic times, had
occasionally been seen on earth, through the agency of their
mother's sin, and to promote some foul and wicked purpose.
luther, according to the scandal of his monkish enemies, was a
brat of that hellish breed; nor was pearl the only child to whom
this inauspicious origin was assigned among the new england
puritans.



vii.  the governor's hall

hester prynne went one day to the mansion of governor
bellingham, with a pair of gloves which she had fringed and
embroidered to his order, and which were to be worn on some
great occasion of state; for, though the chances of a popular
election had caused this former ruler to descend a step or two
from the highest rank, he still held an honourable and
influential place among the colonial magistracy.

another and far more important reason than the delivery of a
pair of embroidered gloves, impelled hester, at 
 
 ___________________________
 
er child.  on the
supposition that pearl, as already hinted, was of demon origin,
these good people not unreasonably argued that a christian
interest in the mother's soul required them to remove such a
stumbling-block from her path.  if the child, on the other hand,
were really capable of moral and religious growth, and possessed
the elements of ultimate salvation, then, surely, it would enjoy
all the fairer prospect of these advantages by being transferred
to wiser and better guardianship than hester prynne's.  among
those who promoted the design, governor bellingham was said to
be one of the most busy.  it may appear singular, and, indeed,
not a little ludicrous, that an affair of this kind, which in
later days would have been referred to no higher jurisdiction
than that of the select men of the town, should then have been a
question publicly discussed, and on which statesmen of eminence
took sides.  at that epoch of pristine simplicity, however,
matters of even slighter public interest, and of f
 
 ___________________________
 
e period was hardly, if at all, earlier than
that of our story, when a dispute concerning the right of
property in a pig not only caused a fierce and bitter contest in
the legislative body of the colony, but resulted in an important
modification of the framework itself of the legislature.

full of concern, therefore--but so conscious of her own right
that it seemed scarcely an unequal match between the public on
the one side, and a lonely woman, backed by the sympathies of
nature, on the other--hester prynne set forth from her solitary
cottage.  little pearl, of course, was her companion.  she was now
of an age to run lightly along by her mother's side, and,
constantly in motion from morn till sunset, could have
accomplished a much longer journey than that before her.  often,
nevertheless, more from caprice than necessity, she demanded to
be taken up in arms; but was soon as imperious to be let down
again, and frisked onward before hester on the grassy pathway,
with many a harmless trip and tumble.
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, and imperatively required that the whole breadth of
sunshine should be stripped off its front, and given her to play
with.

"no, my little pearl!" said her mother; "thou must gather thine
own sunshine.  i have none to give thee!"

they approached the door, which was of an arched form, and
flanked on each side by a narrow tower or projection of the
edifice, in both of which were lattice-windows, the wooden
shutters to close over them at need.  lifting the iron hammer
that hung at the portal, hester prynne gave a summons, which was
answered by one of the governor's bond servant--a free-born
englishman, but now a seven years' slave.  during that term he
was to be the property of his master, and as much a commodity of
bargain and sale as an ox, or a joint-stool.  the serf wore the
customary garb of serving-men at that period, and long before,
in the old hereditary halls of england.

"is the worshipful governor bellingham within?" inquired hester.

"yea, forsooth," replied the bond-servant, staring 
 
 ___________________________
 
with
wide-open eyes at the scarlet letter, which, being a new-comer
in the country, he had never before seen.  "yea, his honourable
worship is within.  but he hath a godly minister or two with him,
and likewise a leech.  ye may not see his worship now."

"nevertheless, i will enter," answered hester prynne; and the
bond-servant, perhaps judging from the decision of her air, and
the glittering symbol in her bosom, that she was a great lady in
the land, offered no opposition.

so the mother and little pearl were admitted into the hall of
entrance.  with many variations, suggested by the nature of his
building materials, diversity of climate, and a different mode
of social life, governor bellingham had planned his new
habitation after the residences of gentlemen of fair estate in
his native land.  h
 
 ___________________________
 
e scarlet
letter was represented in exaggerated and gigantic proportions,
so as to be greatly the most prominent feature of her
appearance.  in truth, she seemed absolutely hidden behind it.
pearl pointed upwards also, at a similar picture in the
head-piece; smiling at her mother, with the elfish intelligence
that was so familiar an expression on her small physiognomy.
that look of naughty merriment was likewise reflected in the
mirror, with so much breadth and intensity of effect, that it
made hester prynne feel as if it could not be the image of her
own child, but of an imp who was seeking to mould itself into
pearl's shape.

"come along, pearl," said she, drawing her away, "come and look
into this fair garden.  it may be we shall see flowers there;
more beautiful ones than we find in the woods."

pearl accordingly ran to the bow-window, at the further end of
the hall, and looked along the vista of a garden walk, carpeted
with closely-shaven grass, and bordered with some rude and
immature attempt
 
 ___________________________
 
over governor bellingham's shoulders, while
its wearer suggested that pears and peaches might yet be
naturalised in the new england climate, and that purple grapes
might possibly be compelled to flourish against the sunny
garden-wall.  the old clergyman, nurtured at the rich bosom of
the english church, had a long established and legitimate taste
for all good and comfortable things, and however stern he might
show himself in the pulpit, or in his public reproof of such
transgressions as that of hester prynne, still, the genial
benevolence of his private life had won him warmer affection
than was accorded to any of his professional contemporaries.

behind the governor and mr. wilson came two other guests--one,
the reverend arthur dimmesdale, whom the reader may remember as
having taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of hester
prynne's disgrace; and, in close companionship with him, old
roger chillingworth, a person of great skill in physic, who for
two or three years past had been settled i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the town.  it was
understood that this learned man was the physician as well as
friend of the young minister, whose health had severely suffered
of late by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labours and
duties of the pastoral relation.

the governor, in advance of his visitors, ascended one or two
steps, and, throwing open the leaves of the great hall window,
found himself close to little pearl.  the shadow of the curtain
fell on hester prynne, and partially concealed her.

"what have we here?" said governor bellingham, looking with
surprise at the scarlet little figure before him.  "i profess, i
have never seen the like since my days of vanity, in old king
james's time, when i was wont to esteem it a high favour to be
admitted to a court mask!  there used to be a swarm of these
small apparitions in holiday time, and we called them children
of the lord of misrule.  but how gat such a guest into my hall?"

"ay, indeed!" cried good old
 
 ___________________________
 
merry old england?"

"i am mother's child," answered the scarlet vision, "and my name
is pearl!"

"pearl?--ruby, rather--or coral!--or red rose, at the very
least, judging from thy hue!" responded the old minister,
putting forth his hand in a vain attempt to pat little pearl on
the cheek.  "but where is this mother of thine?  ah!  i see," he
added; and, turning to governor bellingham, whispered, "this is
the selfsame child of whom we have held speech together; and
behold here the unhappy woman, hester prynne, her mother!"

"sayest thou so?" cried the governor.  "nay, we might have
judged that such a child's mother must needs be a scarlet woman,
and a worthy type of her of babylon!  but she comes at a good
time, and we will look into this matter forthwith."

governor bellingham stepped through the window into the hall,
followed by his three guests.

"hester prynne," said he, fixing his naturally stern regard on
the wearer of the scarlet letter, "there hath been much question
concerning thee of late.
 
 ___________________________
 
mmortal soul,
such as there is in yonder child, to the guidance of one who
hath stumbled and fallen amid the pitfalls of this world.  speak
thou, the child's own mother!  were it not, thinkest thou, for
thy little one's temporal and eternal welfare that she be taken
out of thy charge, and clad soberly, and disciplined strictly,
and instructed in the truths of heaven and earth?  what canst
thou do for the child in this kind?"

"i can teach my little pearl what i have learned from this!"
answered hester prynne, laying her finger on the red token.

"woman, it is thy badge of shame!" replied the stern magistrate.
"it is because of the stain which that letter indicates that we
would transfer thy child to other hands."

"nevertheless," said the mother, calmly, though growing more
pale, "this badge hath taught me--it daily teaches me--it is
teaching me at this moment--lessons whereof my child may be the
wiser and better, albeit they can profit nothing to myself."

"we will judge warily," said bellingham, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ch plumage, ready to take
flight into the upper air.  mr. wilson, not a little astonished
at this outbreak--for he was a grandfatherly sort of personage,
and usually a vast favourite with children--essayed, however, to
proceed with the examination.

"pearl," said he, with great solemnity, "thou must take heed to
instruction, that so, in due season, thou mayest wear in thy
bosom the pearl of great price.  canst thou tell me, my child,
who made thee?"

now pearl knew well enough who made her, for hester prynne, the
daughter of a pious home, very soon after her talk with the
child about her heavenly father, had begun to inform her of
those truths which the human spirit, at whatever stage of
immaturity, imbibes with such eager interest.  pearl,
therefore--so large were the attainments of her three years'
lifetime--could have borne a fair examination in the new england
primer, or the first column of the westminster catechisms,
although unacquainted with the outward form of either of those
celebrated wor
 
 ___________________________
 
 wilson's question, the
child finally announced that she had not been made at all, but
had been plucked by her mother off the bush of wild roses that
grew by the prison-door.

this phantasy was probably suggested by the near proximity of
the governor's red roses, as pearl stood outside of the window,
together with her recollection of the prison rose-bush, which
she had passed in coming hither.

old roger chillingworth, with a smile on his face, whispered
something in the young clergyman's ear.  hester prynne looked at
the man of skill, and even then, with her fate hanging in the
balance, was startled to perceive what a change had come over
his features--how much uglier they were, how his dark complexion
seemed to have grown duskier, and his figure more
misshapen--since the days when she had familiarly known him.  she
met his eyes for an instant, but was immediately constrained to
give all her attention to the scene now going forward.

"this is awful!" cried the governor, slowly recovering from the

 
 ___________________________
 
gs else which ye had taken from me.  she is my
happiness--she is my torture, none the less!  pearl keeps me here
in life!  pearl punishes me, too!  see ye not, she is the scarlet
letter, only capable of being loved, and so endowed with a
millionfold the power of retribution for my sin?  ye shall not
take her!  i will die first!"

"my poor woman," said the not unkind old minister, "the child
shall be well cared for--far better than thou canst do for it."

"god gave her into my keeping!" repeated hester prynne, raising
her voice almost to a shriek.  "i will not give her up!"  and here
by a sudden impulse, she turned to the young clergyman, mr.
dimmesdale, at whom, up to this moment, she had seemed hardly so
much as once to direct her eyes.  "speak thou for me!" cried she.
"thou wast my pastor, and hadst charge of my soul, and knowest
me better than these men can.  i will not lose the child!  speak
for me!  thou knowest--for thou hast sympathies which these men
lack--thou knowest what is in my heart, 
 
 ___________________________
 
se that
child's nature, and, from it make a mould, to give a shrewd
guess at the father?"

"nay; it would be sinful, in such a question, to follow the clue
of profane philosophy," said mr. wilson.  "better to fast and
pray upon it; and still better, it may be, to leave the mystery
as we find it, unless providence reveal it of its own accord.
thereby, every good christian man hath a title to show a
father's kindness towards the poor, deserted babe."

the affair being so satisfactorily concluded, hester prynne,
with pearl, departed from the house.  as they descended the
steps, it is averred that the lattice of a chamber-window was
thrown open, and forth into the sunny day was thrust the face of
mistress hibbins, governor bellingham's bitter-tempered sister,
and the same who, a few years later, was executed as a witch.

"hist, hist!" said she, while her ill-omened physiognomy seemed
to cast a shadow over the cheerful newness of the house.  "wilt
thou go with us to-night?  there will be a merry company
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the
forest; and i well-nigh promised the black man that comely
hester prynne should make one."

"make my excuse to him, so please you!" answered hester, with a
triumphant smile.  "i must tarry at home, and keep watch over my
little pearl.  had they taken her from me, i would willingly have
gone with thee into the forest, and signed my name in the black
man's book too, and that with mine own blood!"

"we shall have thee there anon!" said the witch-lady, frowning,
as she drew back her head.

but here--if we suppose this interview betwixt mistress hibbins
and hester prynne
 
 ___________________________
 
 to be authentic, and not a parable--was
already an illustration of the young minister's argument against
sundering the relation of a fallen mother to the offspring of
her frailty.  even thus early had the child saved her from
satan's snare.



ix.  the leech

under the appellation of roger chillingworth, the reader will
remember, was hidden another name, which its former wearer had
resolved should never more be spoken.  it has been related, how,
in the crowd that witnessed hester prynne's ignominious
exposure, stood a man, elderly, travel-worn, who, just emerging
from the perilous wilderness, beheld the woman, in whom he hoped
to find embodied the warmth and cheerfulness of home, set up as
a type of sin before the people.  her matronly fame was trodden
under all men's feet.  infamy was babbling around her in the
public market-place.  for her kindred, should the tidings ever
reach them, and for the companions of her unspotted life, there
remained nothing but the contagion of he
 
 ___________________________
 
r dishonour; which would
not fail to be distributed in strict accordance and proportion
with the intimacy and sacredness of their previous relationship.
then why--since the choice was with himself--should the
individual, whose connexion with the fallen woman had been the
most intimate and sacred of them all, come forward to vindicate
his claim to an inheritance so little desirable?  he resolved not
to be pilloried beside her on her pedestal of shame.  unknown to
all but hester prynne, and possessing the lock and key of her
silence, he chose to withdraw his name from the roll of mankind,
and, as regarded his former ties and interest, to vanish out of
life as completely as if he indeed lay at the bottom of the
ocean, whither rumour had long ago consigned him.  this purpose
once effected, new interests would immediately spring up, and
likewise a new purpose; dark, it is true, if not guilty, but of
force enough to engage the full strength of his faculties.

in pursuance of this
 
 ___________________________
 
 answered mr.
dimmesdale, in a quiet way, as if he had been discussing the
point within himself, "whether capable of good, i know not."

the child probably overheard their voices, for, looking up to
the window with a bright, but naughty smile of mirth and
intelligence, she threw one of the prickly burrs at the rev.  mr.
dimmesdale.  the sensitive clergyman shrank, with nervous dread,
from the light missile.  detecting his emotion, pearl clapped her
little hands in the most extravagant ecstacy.  hester prynne,
likewise, had involuntarily looked up, and all these four
persons, old and young, regarded one another in silence, till
the child laughed aloud, and shouted--"come away, mother!  come
away, or yonder old black man will catch you!  he hath got hold
of the minister already.  come away, mother or he will catch you!
but he cannot catch little pearl!"

so she drew her mother away, skipping, dancing, and frisking
fantastically among the hillocks of the dead people, like a
creature that had nothing i
 
 ___________________________
 
n common with a bygone and buried
generation, nor owned herself akin to it.  it was as if she had
been made afresh out of new elements, and must perforce be
permitted to live her own life, and be a law unto herself
without her eccentricities being reckoned to her for a crime.

"there goes a woman," resumed roger chillingworth, after a
pause, "who, be her demerits what they may, hath none of that
mystery of hidden sinfulness which you deem so grievous to be
borne.  is hester prynne the less miserable, think you, for that
scarlet letter on her breast?"

"i do verily believe it," answered the clergyman.
"nevertheless, i cannot answer for her.  there was a look of pain
in her face which i would gladly have been spared the sight of.
but still, methinks, it must needs be better for the sufferer to
be free to show his pain, as this poor woman hester is, than to
cover it up in his heart."

there was another pause, and the physician began anew to examine
and arrange the plants wh
 
 ___________________________
 
and beckoned him away with them; now a group of
shining angels, who flew upward heavily, as sorrow-laden, but
grew more ethereal as they rose.  now came the dead friends of
his youth, and his white-bearded father, with a saint-like
frown, and his mother turning her face away as she passed by.
ghost of a mother--thinnest fantasy of a mother--methinks she
might yet have thrown a pitying glance towards her son!  and now,
through the chamber which these spectral thoughts had made so
ghastly, glided hester prynne leading along little pearl, in her
scarlet garb, and pointing her forefinger, first at the scarlet
letter on her bosom, and then at the clergyman's own breast.

none of these visions ever quite deluded him.  at any moment, by
an effort of his will, he could discern substances through their
misty lack of substance, and convince himself that they were not
solid in their nature, like yonder table of carved oak, or that
big, square, leather-bound and brazen-clasped volume of
divinity.  but, for all
 
 ___________________________
 
h her first hours of public ignominy.  the
same platform or scaffold, black and weather-stained with the
storm or sunshine of seven long years, and foot-worn, too, with
the tread of many culprits who had since ascended it, remained
standing beneath the balcony of the meeting-house.  the minister
went up the steps.

it was an obscure night in early may.  an unvaried pall of
cloud muffled the whole expanse of sky from zenith to horizon.
if the same multitude which had stood as eye-witnesses while
hester prynne sustained her punishment could now have been
summoned forth, they would have discerned no face above the
platform nor hardly the outline of a human shape, in the dark
grey of the midnight.  but the town was all asleep.  there was no
peril of discovery.  the minister might stand there, if it so
pleased him, until morning should redden in the east, without
other risk than that the dank and chill night air would creep
into his frame, and stiffen his joints with rheumatism, and clog
his throat with
 
 ___________________________
 
de a shrine
for him in their white bosoms, which now, by-the-bye, in their
hurry and confusion, they would scantly have given themselves
time to cover with their kerchiefs.  all people, in a word, would
come stumbling over their thresholds, and turning up their
amazed and horror-stricken visages around the scaffold.  whom
would they discern there, with the red eastern light upon his
brow?  whom, but the reverend arthur dimmesdale, half-frozen to
death, overwhelmed with shame, and standing where hester prynne
had stood!

carried away by the grotesque horror of this picture, the
minister, unawares, and to his own infinite alarm, burst into a
great peal of laughter.  it was immediately responded to by a
light, airy, childish laugh, in which, with a thrill of the
heart--but he knew not whether of exquisite pain, or pleasure as
acute--he recognised the tones of little pearl.

"pearl!  little pearl!" cried he, after a moment's pause; then,
suppressing his voice--"hester!  hester prynne!  are you there?"

 
 ___________________________
 

"yes; it is hester prynne!" she replied, in a tone of surprise;
and the minister heard her footsteps approaching from the
side-walk, along which she had been passing.  "it is i, and my
little pearl."

"whence come you, hester?" asked the minister.  "what sent you
hither?"

"i have been watching at a death-bed," answered hester prynne
"at governor winthrop's death-bed, and have taken his measure
for a robe, and am now going homeward to my dwelling."

"come up hither, hester, thou and little pearl," said the
reverend mr. dimmesdale.  "ye have both been here before, but i
was not with you.  come up hither once again, and we will stand
all three together."

she silently ascended the steps, and stood on the platform,
holding little pearl by the hand.  the minister felt for the
child's other hand, and took it.  the moment that he
 
 ___________________________
 
,
with their jutting storeys and quaint gable-peaks; the doorsteps
and thresholds with the early grass springing up about them; the
garden-plots, black with freshly-turned earth; the wheel-track,
little worn, and even in the market-place margined with green on
either side--all were visible, but with a singularity of aspect
that seemed to give another moral interpretation to the things
of this world than they had ever borne before.  and there stood
the minister, with his hand over his heart; and hester prynne,
with the embroidered letter glimmering on her bosom; and little
pearl, herself a symbol, and the connecting link between those
two.  they stood in the noon of that strange and solemn
splendour, as if it were the light that is to reveal all
secrets, and the daybreak that shall unite all who belong to one
another.

there was witchcraft in little pearl's eyes; and her face, as
she glanced upward at the minister, wore that naughty smile
which made its expression frequently so elvish.  she withdrew
 
 ___________________________
 
er chillingworth, who stood at no great distance from the
scaffold.  the minister appeared to see him, with the same glance
that discerned the miraculous letter.  to his feature as to all
other objects, the meteoric light imparted a new expression; or
it might well be that the physician was not careful then, as at
all other times, to hide the malevolence with which he looked
upon his victim.  certainly, if the meteor kindled up the sky,
and disclosed the earth, with an awfulness that admonished
hester prynne and the clergyman of the day of judgment, then
might roger chillingworth have passed with them for the
arch-fiend, standing there with a smile and scowl, to claim his
own.  so vivid was the expression, or so intense the minister's
perception of it, that it seemed still to remain painted on the
darkness after the meteor had vanished, with an effect as if the
street and all things else were at once annihilated.

"who is that man, hester?" gasped mr. dimmesdale, overcome with
terror.  "i shiver at
 
 ___________________________
 
 of right and wrong by any standard external to herself,
hester saw--or seemed to see--that there lay a responsibility
upon her in reference to the clergyman, which she owned to no
other, nor to the whole world besides.  the links that united her
to the rest of humankind--links of flowers, or silk, or gold, or
whatever the material--had all been broken.  here was the iron
link of mutual crime, which neither he nor she could break.  like
all other ties, it brought along with it its obligations.

hester prynne did not now occupy precisely the same position in
which we beheld her during the earlier periods of her ignominy.
years had come and gone.  pearl was now seven years old.  her
mother, with the scarlet letter on her breast, glittering in its
fantastic embroidery, had long been a familiar object to the
townspeople.  as is apt to be the case when a person stands out
in any prominence before the community, and, at the same time,
interferes neither with public nor individual interests and
convenienc
 
 ___________________________
 
e, a species of general regard had ultimately grown up
in reference to hester prynne.  it is to the credit of human
nature that, except where its selfishness is brought into play,
it loves more readily than it hates.  hatred, by a gradual and
quiet process, will even be transformed to love, unless the
change be impeded by a continually new irritation of the
original feeling of hostility.  in this matter of hester prynne
there was neither irritation nor irksomeness.  she never battled
with the public, but submitted uncomplainingly to its worst
usage; she made no claim upon it in requital for what she
suffered; she did not weigh upon its sympathies.  then, also, the
blameless purity of her life during all these years in which she
had been set apart to infamy was reckoned largely in her favour.
with nothing now to lose, in the sight of mankind, and with no
hope, and seemingly no wish, of gaining anything, it coul
 
 ___________________________
 
 its badge of
shame, was but the softer pillow for the head that needed one.
she was self-ordained a sister of mercy, or, we may rather say,
the world's heavy hand had so ordained her, when neither the
world nor she looked forward to this result.  the letter was the
symbol of her calling.  such helpfulness was found in her--so
much power to do, and power to sympathise--that many people
refused to interpret the scarlet a by its original
signification.  they said that it meant abel, so strong was
hester prynne, with a woman's strength.

it was only the darkened house that could contain her.  when
sunshine came again, she was not there.  her shadow had faded
across the threshold.  the helpful inmate had departed, without
one backward glance to gather up the meed of gratitude, if any
were in the hearts of those whom she had served so zealously.
meeting them in the street, she never raised her head to receive
their greeting.  if they were resolute to accost her, she laid
her finger on the scarlet letter
 
 ___________________________
 
, and passed on.  this might be
pride, but was so like humility, that it produced all the
softening influence of the latter quality on the public mind.
the public is despotic in its temper; it is capable of denying
common justice when too strenuously demanded as a right; but
quite as frequently it awards more than justice, when the appeal
is made, as despots love to have it made, entirely to its
generosity.  interpreting hester prynne's deportment as an appeal
of this nature, society was inclined to show its former victim a
more benign countenance than she cared to be favoured with, or,
perchance, than she deserved.

the rulers, and the wise and learned men of the community, were
longer in acknowledging the influence of hester's good qualities
than the people.  the prejudices which they shared in common with
the latter were fortified in themselves by an iron frame-work of
reasoning, that made it a far tougher labour to expel
 
 ___________________________
 
 them.  day
by day, nevertheless, their sour and rigid wrinkles were
relaxing into something which, in the due course of years, might
grow to be an expression of almost benevolence.  thus it was with
the men of rank, on whom their eminent position imposed the
guardianship of the public morals.  individuals in private life,
meanwhile, had quite forgiven hester prynne for her frailty;
nay, more, they had begun to look upon the scarlet letter as the
token, not of that one sin for which she had borne so long and
dreary a penance, but of her many good deeds since.  "do you see
that woman with the embroidered badge?" they would say to
strangers.  "it is our hester--the town's own hester--who is so
kind to the poor, so helpful to the sick, so comfortable to the
afflicted!"  then, it is true, the propensity of human nature to
tell the very worst of itself, when em
 
 ___________________________
 
 and lived through, an experience of
peculiar severity.  if she be all tenderness, she will die.  if
she survive, the tenderness will either be crushed out of her,
or--and the outward semblance is the same--crushed so deeply
into her heart that it can never show itself more.  the latter is
perhaps the truest theory.  she who has once been a woman, and
ceased to be so, might at any moment become a woman again, if
there were only the magic touch to effect the transformation.  we
shall see whether hester prynne were ever afterwards so touched
and so transfigured.

much of the marble coldness of hester's impression was to be
attributed to the circumstance that her life had turned, in a
great measure, from passion and feeling to thought.  standing
alone in the world--alone, as to any dependence on society, and
with little pearl to be guided and protected--alone, and
hopeless of retrieving her position, even had she not scorned to
consider it desirable--she cast away the fragment of a broken
chain.  the 
 
 ___________________________
 
world's law was no law for her mind.  it was an age in
which the human intellect, newly emancipated, had taken a more
active and a wider range than for many centuries before.  men of
the sword had overthrown nobles and kings.  men bolder than these
had overthrown and rearranged--not actually, but within the
sphere of theory, which was their most real abode--the whole
system of ancient prejudice, wherewith was linked much of
ancient principle.  hester prynne imbibed this spirit.  she
assumed a freedom of speculation, then common enough on the
other side of the atlantic, but which our forefathers, had they
known it, would have held to be a deadlier crime than that
stigmatised by the scarlet letter.  in her lonesome cottage, by
the seashore, thoughts visited her such as dared to enter no
other dwelling in new england; shadowy guests, that would have
been as perilous as demons to their entertainer, could they have
been seen so much as knocking at her 
 
 ___________________________
 
ssume
what seems a fair and suitable position.  finally, all other
difficulties being obviated, woman cannot take advantage of
these preliminary reforms until she herself shall have undergone
a still mightier change, in which, perhaps, the ethereal
essence, wherein she has her truest life, will be found to have
evaporated.  a woman never overcomes these problems by any
exercise of thought.  they are not to be solved, or only in one
way.  if her heart chance to come uppermost, they vanish.  thus
hester prynne, whose heart had lost its regular and healthy
throb, wandered without a clue in the dark labyrinth of mind;
now turned aside by an insurmountable precipice; now starting
back from a deep chasm.  there was wild and ghastly scenery all
around her, and a home and comfort nowhere.  at times a fearful
doubt strove to possess her soul, whether it were not better to
send pearl at once to heaven, and go herself to such futurity as
eternal justice should provide.

the scarlet letter had not done its off
 
 ___________________________
 
o far as it might yet be
possible.  strengthened by years of hard and solemn trial, she
felt herself no longer so inadequate to cope with roger
chillingworth as on that night, abased by sin and half-maddened
by the ignominy that was still new, when they had talked
together in the prison-chamber.  she had climbed her way since
then to a higher point.  the old man, on the other hand, had
brought himself nearer to her level, or, perhaps, below it, by
the revenge which he had stooped for.

in fine, hester prynne resolved to meet her former husband, and
do what might be in her power for the rescue of the victim on
whom he had so evidently set his gripe.  the occasion was not
long to seek.  one afternoon, walking with pearl in a retired
part of the peninsula, she beheld the old physician with a
basket on one arm and a staff in the other hand, stooping along
the ground in quest of roots and herbs to concoct his medicine
withal.



xiv.  hester and the physician

hester bade little pearl run down to the ma
 
 ___________________________
 
he kind had
happened.

in a word, old roger chillingworth was a striking evidence of
man's faculty of transforming himself into a devil, if he will
only, for a reasonable space of time, undertake a devil's
office.  this unhappy person had effected such a transformation
by devoting himself for seven years to the constant analysis of
a heart full of torture, and deriving his enjoyment thence, and
adding fuel to those fiery tortures which he analysed and
gloated over.

the scarlet letter burned on hester prynne's bosom.  here was
another ruin, the responsibility of which came partly home to
her.

"what see you in my face," asked the physician, "that you look
at it so earnestly?"

"something that would make me weep, if there were any tears
bitter enough for it," answered she.  "but let it pass!  it is of
yonder miserable man that i would speak."

"and what of him?" cried roger chillingworth, eagerly, as if he
loved the topic, and were glad of an opportunity to discuss it
with the only person of whom he
 
 ___________________________
 
and waking.  you search his thoughts.  you burrow and
rankle in his heart!  your clutch is on his life, and you cause
him to die daily a living death, and still he knows you not.  in
permitting this i have surely acted a false part by the only man
to whom the power was left me to be true!"

"what choice had you?" asked roger chillingworth.  "my finger,
pointed at this man, would have hurled him from his pulpit into
a dungeon, thence, peradventure, to the gallows!"

"it had been better so!" said hester prynne.

"what evil have i done the man?" asked roger chillingworth
again.  "i tell thee, hester prynne, the richest fee that ever
physician earned from monarch could not have bought such care as
i have wasted on this miserable priest!  but for my aid his life
would have burned away in torments within the first two years
after the perpetration of his crime and thine.  for, hester, his
spirit lacked the strength that could have borne up, as thine
has, beneath a burden like thy scarlet letter.  oh, i co
 
 ___________________________
 
uld
reveal a goodly secret!  but enough.  what art can do, i have
exhausted on him.  that he now breathes and creeps about on earth
is owing all to me!"

"better he had died at once!" said hester prynne.

"yea, woman, thou sayest truly!" cried old roger chillingworth,
letting the lurid fire of his heart blaze out before her eyes.
"better had he died at once!  never did mortal suffer what this
man has suffered.  and all, all, in the sight of his worst enemy!
he has been conscious of me.  he has felt an influence dwelling
always upon him like a curse.  he knew, by some spiritual
sense--for the creator never made another being so sensitive as
this--he knew that no friendly hand was pulling at his
 
 ___________________________
 
what am i now?" demanded he, looking into her face, and
permitting the whole evil within him to be written on his
features.  "i have already told thee what i am--a fiend!  who made
me so?"

"it was myself," cried hester, shuddering.  "it was i, not less
than he.  why hast thou not avenged thyself on me?"

"i have left thee to the scarlet letter," replied roger
chillingworth.  "if that has not avenged me, i can do no more!"

he laid his finger on it with a smile.

"it has avenged thee," answered hester prynne.

"i judged no less," said the physician.  "and now what wouldst
thou with me touching this man?"

"i must reveal the secret," answered hester, firmly.  "he must
discern thee in thy true character.  what may be the result i
know not.  but this long debt of confidence, due from me to him,
whose bane and ruin i have been, shall at length be paid.  so far
as concerns the overthrow or preservation of his fair fame and
his earthly state, and perchance his life, he is in my hands.
nor do i--whom the 
 
 ___________________________
 
d for thee.  there is no good for little
pearl.  there is no path to guide us out of this dismal maze."

"woman, i could well-nigh pity thee," said roger chillingworth,
unable to restrain a thrill of admiration too, for there was a
quality almost majestic in the despair which she expressed.
"thou hadst great elements.  peradventure, hadst thou met earlier
with a better love than mine, this evil had not been.  i pity
thee, for the good that has been wasted in thy nature."

"and i thee," answered hester prynne, "for the hatred that has
transformed a wise and just man to a fiend!  wilt thou yet purge
it out of thee, and be once more human?  if not for his sake,
then doubly for thine own!  forgive, and leave his further
retribution to the power that claims it!  i said, but now, that
there could be no good event for him, or thee, or me, who are
here wandering together in this gloomy maze of evil, and
stumbling at every step over the guilt wherewith we have strewn
our path.  it is not so!  there might be
 
 ___________________________
 
that have
wronged me are not sinful, save in a kind of typical illusion;
neither am i fiend-like, who have snatched a fiend's office from
his hands.  it is our fate.  let the black flower blossom as it
may!  now, go thy ways, and deal as thou wilt with yonder man."

he waved his hand, and betook himself again to his employment of
gathering herbs.




xv.  hester and pearl

so roger chillingworth--a deformed old figure with a face that
haunted men's memories longer than they liked--took leave of
hester prynne, and went stooping away along the earth.  he
gathered here and there a herb, or grubbed up a root and put it
into the basket on his arm.  his gray beard almost touched the
ground as he crept onward.  hester gazed after him a little
while, looking with a half fantastic curiosity to see whether
the tender grass of early spring would not be blighted beneath
him and show the wavering track of his footsteps, sere and
brown, across its cheerful verdure.  she wondered what sort of
herbs they were whic
 
 ___________________________
 
 moving along with his deformity whichever way he
turned himself?  and whither was he now going?  would he not
suddenly sink into the earth, leaving a barren and blasted spot,
where, in due course of time, would be seen deadly nightshade,
dogwood, henbane, and whatever else of vegetable wickedness the
climate could produce, all flourishing with hideous luxuriance?
or would he spread bat's wings and flee away, looking so much
the uglier the higher he rose towards heaven?

"be it sin or no," said hester prynne, bitterly, as still she
gazed after him, "i hate the man!"

she upbraided herself for the sentiment, but could not overcome
or lessen it.  attempting to do so, she thought of those
long-past days in a distant land, when he used to emerge at
eventide from the seclusion of his study and sit down in the
firelight of their home, and in the light of her nuptial smile.
he needed to bask himself in that smile, he said, in order that
the chill of so many lonely hours among his books might be taken
off 
 
 ___________________________
 
r?  and why dost thou wear it?
and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart?"

"what shall i say?" thought hester to herself.  "no!  if this be
the price of the child's sympathy, i cannot pay it."

then she spoke aloud--

"silly pearl," said she, "what questions are these?  there are
many things in this world that a child must not ask about.  what
know i of the minister's heart?  and as for the scarlet letter, i
wear it for the sake of its gold thread."

in all the seven bygone years, hester prynne had never before
been false to the symbol on her bosom.  it may be that it was the
talisman of a stern and severe, but yet a guardian spirit, who
now forsook her; as recognising that, in spite of his strict
watch over her heart, some new evil had crept into it, or some
old one had never been expelled.  as for little pearl, the
earnestness soon passed out of her face.

but the child did not see fit to let the matter drop.  two or
three times, as her mother and she went homeward, and as often
at 
 
 ___________________________
 
the first indication the child gave of
being awake was by popping up her head from the pillow, and
making that other enquiry, which she had so unaccountably
connected with her investigations about the scarlet letter--

"mother!--mother!--why does the minister keep his hand over his
heart?"

"hold thy tongue, naughty child!" answered her mother, with an
asperity that she had never permitted to herself before.  "do not
tease me; else i shall put thee into the dark closet!"



xvi.  a forest walk

hester prynne remained constant in her resolve to make known to
mr. dimmesdale, at whatever risk of present pain or ulterior
consequences, the true character of the man who had crept into
his intimacy.  for several days, however, she vainly sought an
opportunity of addressing him in some of the meditative walks
which she knew him to be in the habit of taking along the shores
of the peninsula, or on the wooded hills of the neighbouring
country.  there would have been no scandal, indeed, nor peril to
the holy 
 
 ___________________________
 
ith his big
book under his arm?"

"go, silly child!" said her mother impatiently.  "it is no black
man!  thou canst see him now, through the trees.  it is the
minister!"

"and so it is!" said the child.  "and, mother, he has his hand
over his heart!  is it because, when the minister wrote his name
in the book, the black man set his mark in that place?  but why
does he not wear it outside his bosom, as thou dost, mother?"

"go now, child, and thou shalt tease me as thou wilt another
time," cried hester prynne.  "but do not stray far.  keep where
thou canst hear the babble of the brook."

the child went singing away, following up the current of the
brook, and striving to mingle a more lightsome cadence with its
melancholy voice.  but the little stream would not be comforted,
and still kept telling its unintelligible secret of some very
mournful mystery that had happened--or making a prophetic
lamentation about something that was yet to happen--within the
verge of the dismal forest.  so pearl, who had
 
 ___________________________
 
 enough of shadow
in her own little life, chose to break off all acquaintance with
this repining brook.  she set herself, therefore, to gathering
violets and wood-anemones, and some scarlet columbines that she
found growing in the crevice of a high rock.

when her elf-child had departed, hester prynne made a step or
two towards the track that led through the forest, but still
remained under the deep shadow of the trees.  she beheld the
minister advancing along the path entirely alone, and leaning on
a staff which he had cut by the wayside.  he looked haggard and
feeble, and betrayed a nerveless despondency in his air, which
had never so remarkably characterised him in his walks about the
settlement, nor in any other situation where he deemed himself
liable to notice.  here it was wofully vis
 
 ___________________________
 
  the leaves might bestrew
him, and the soil gradually accumulate and form a little hillock
over his frame, no matter whether there were life in it or no.
death was too definite an object to be wished for or avoided.

to hester's eye, the reverend mr. dimmesdale exhibited no
symptom of positive and vivacious suffering, except that, as
little pearl had remarked, he kept his hand over his heart.



xvii.   the pastor and his parishioner

slowly as the minister walked, he had almost gone by before
hester prynne could gather voice enough to attract his
observation.  at length she succeeded.

"arthur dimmesdale!" she said, faintly at first, then louder,
but hoarsely--"arthur dimmesdale!"

"who speaks?" answered the minister.  gathering himself quickly
up, he stood more erect, like a man taken by surprise in a mood
to which he was reluctant to have witnesses.  throwing his eyes
anxiously in the direction of the voice, he indistinctly beheld
a form under the trees, clad in garments so sombre, and so
littl
 
 ___________________________
 
e relieved from the gray twilight into which the clouded
sky and the heavy foliage had darkened the noontide, that he
knew not whether it were a woman or a shadow.  it may be that his
pathway through life was haunted thus by a spectre that had
stolen out from among his thoughts.

he made a step nigher, and discovered the scarlet letter.

"hester!  hester prynne!", said he; "is it thou?  art thou in
life?"

"even so." she answered.  "in such life as has been mine these
seven years past!  and thou, arthur dimmesdale, dost thou yet
live?"

it was no wonder that they thus questioned one another's actual
and bodily existence, and even doubted of their own.  so
strangely did they meet in the dim wood that it was like the
first encounter in the world beyond the grave of two spirits who
had been intimately connected in their former life, but now
stood coldly 
 
 ___________________________
 
host, and awe-stricken at the other ghost.  they
were awe-stricken likewise at themselves, because the crisis
flung back to them their consciousness, and revealed to each
heart its history and experience, as life never does, except at
such breathless epochs.  the soul beheld its features in the
mirror of the passing moment.  it was with fear, and tremulously,
and, as it were, by a slow, reluctant necessity, that arthur
dimmesdale put forth his hand, chill as death, and touched the
chill hand of hester prynne.  the grasp, cold as it was, took
away what was dreariest in the interview.  they now felt
themselves, at least, inhabitants of the same sphere.

without a word more spoken--neither he nor she assuming the
guidance, but with an unexpressed consent--they glided back into
the shadow of the woods whence hester had emerged, and sat down
on the heap of moss where she and pearl had before been sitting.
when they found voice to speak, it was at first only to utter
remarks and inquiries such as any two
 
 ___________________________
 
 acquaintances might have
made, about the gloomy sky, the threatening storm, and, next,
the health of each.  thus they went onward, not boldly, but step
by step, into the themes that were brooding deepest in their
hearts.  so long estranged by fate and circumstances, they needed
something slight and casual to run before and throw open the
doors of intercourse, so that their real thoughts might be led
across the threshold.

after awhile, the minister fixed his eyes on hester prynne's.

"hester," said he, "hast thou found peace?"

she smiled drearily, looking down upon her bosom.

"hast thou?" she asked.

"none--nothing but despair!" he answered.  "what else could i
look for, being what i am, and leading such a life as mine?  were
i an atheist--a man devoid of conscience--a wretch with coarse
and brutal instincts--i might have found peace long ere now.
nay, i never should have lost it.  but, as matters stand with my
soul, whatever of good capacity there originally was in m
 
 ___________________________
 
our bosom!  mine burns in secret!
thou little knowest what a relief it is, after the torment of a
seven years' cheat, to look into an eye that recognises me for
what i am!  had i one friend--or were it my worst enemy!--to
whom, when sickened with the praises of all other men, i could
daily betake myself, and be known as the vilest of all sinners,
methinks my soul might keep itself alive thereby.  even thus much
of truth would save me!  but now, it is all falsehood!--all
emptiness!--all death!"

hester prynne looked into his face, but hesitated to speak.
yet, uttering his long-restrained emotions so vehemently as he
did, his words here offered her the very point of circumstances
in which to interpose what she came to say.  she conquered her
fears, and spoke:

"such a friend as thou hast even now wished for," said she,
"with whom to weep over thy sin, thou hast in me, the partner of
it!"  again she hesitated, but brought out the words with an
effort.--"thou hast long had such an enemy, and dwellest w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith
him, under the same roof!"

the minister started to his feet, gasping for breath, and
clutching at his heart, as if he would have torn it out of his
bosom.

"ha!  what sayest thou?" cried he.  "an enemy!  and under mine
own roof!  what mean you?"

hester prynne was now fully sensible of the deep injury for
which she was responsible to this unhappy man, in permitting him
to lie for so many years, or, indeed, for a single moment, at
the mercy of one whose purposes could not be other than
malevolent.  the very contiguity of his enemy, beneath whatever
mask the latter might conceal himself, was enough to disturb the
magnetic sphere of a being so sensitive as arthur dimmesdale.
there had been a period when hester was less alive to this
consideration; or, p
 
 ___________________________
 
 encountered.  for the brief space that it
lasted, it was a dark transfiguration.  but his character had
been so much enfeebled by suffering, that even its lower
energies were incapable of more than a temporary struggle.  he
sank down on the ground, and buried his face in his hands.

"i might have known it," murmured he--"i did know it!  was not
the secret told me, in the natural recoil of my heart at the
first sight of him, and as often as i have seen him since?  why
did i not understand?  oh, hester prynne, thou little, little
knowest all the horror of this thing!  and the shame!--the
indelicacy!--the horrible ugliness of this exposure of a sick
and guilty heart to the very eye that would gloat over it!
woman, woman, thou art accountable for this!--i cannot forgive
thee!"

"thou shalt forgive me!" cried hester, flinging herself on the
fallen leaves beside him.  "let god punish!  thou shalt forgive!"

with sudden and desperate tenderness she threw her arms around
him, and pressed his head against 
 
 ___________________________
 
harm that made them linger upon it, and claim
another, and another, and, after all, another moment.  the forest
was obscure around them, and creaked with a blast that was
passing through it.  the boughs were tossing heavily above their
heads; while one solemn old tree groaned dolefully to another,
as if telling the sad story of the pair that sat beneath, or
constrained to forbode evil to come.

and yet they lingered.  how dreary looked the forest-track that
led backward to the settlement, where hester prynne must take up
again the burden of her ignominy and the minister the hollow
mockery of his good name!  so they lingered an instant longer.  no
golden light had ever been so precious as the gloom of this dark
forest.  here seen only by his eyes, the scarlet letter need not
burn into the bosom of the fallen woman!  here seen only by her
eyes, arthur dimmesdale, false to god and man, might be, for one
moment true!

he started at a thought that suddenly occurred to him.

"hester!" cried he, "here is 
 
 ___________________________
 
, and die at once?"

"alas!  what a ruin has befallen thee!" said hester, with the
tears gushing into her eyes.  "wilt thou die for very weakness?
there is no other cause!"

"the judgment of god is on me," answered the conscience-stricken
priest.  "it is too mighty for me to struggle with!"

"heaven would show mercy," rejoined hester, "hadst thou but the
strength to take advantage of it."

"be thou strong for me!" answered he.  "advise me what to do."

"is the world, then, so narrow?" exclaimed hester prynne, fixing
her deep eyes on the minister's, and instinctively exercising a
magnetic power over a spirit so shattered and subdued that it
could hardly hold itself erect.  "doth the universe lie within
the compass of yonder town, which only a little time ago was but
a leaf-strewn desert, as lonely as this around us?  whither leads
yonder forest-track?  backward to the settlement, thou sayest!
yes; but, onward, too!  deeper it goes, and deeper into the
wilderness, less plainly to be seen at every ste
 
 ___________________________
 
of the despondency of a broken
spirit.  he lacked energy to grasp the better fortune that seemed
within his reach.

he repeated the word--"alone, hester!"

"thou shall not go alone!" answered she, in a deep whisper.
then, all was spoken!



xviii.  a flood of sunshine

arthur dimmesdale gazed into hester's face with a look in which
hope and joy shone out, indeed, but with fear betwixt them, and
a kind of horror at her boldness, who had spoken what he vaguely
hinted at, but dared not speak.

but hester prynne, with a mind of native courage and activity,
and for so long a period not merely estranged, but outlawed from
society, had habituated herself to such latitude of speculation
as was altogether foreign to the clergyman.  she had wandered,
without rule or guidance, in a moral wilderness, as vast, as
intricate, and shadowy as the untamed forest, amid the gloom of
which they were now holding a colloquy that was to decide their
fate.  her intellect and heart had their home, as it were, in
desert plac
 
 ___________________________
 
t.  at the head of
the social system, as the clergymen of that day stood, he was
only the more trammelled by its regulations, its principles, and
even its prejudices.  as a priest, the framework of his order
inevitably hemmed him in.  as a man who had once sinned, but who
kept his conscience all alive and painfully sensitive by the
fretting of an unhealed wound, he might have been supposed safer
within the line of virtue than if he had never sinned at all.

thus we seem to see that, as regarded hester prynne, the whole
seven years of outlaw and ignominy had been little other than a
preparation for this very hour.  but arthur dimmesdale!  were such
a man once more to fall, what plea could be urged in extenuation
of his crime?  none; unless it avail him somewhat that he was
broken down by long and exquisite suffering; that his mind was
darkened and confused by the very remorse which harrowed it;
that, between fleeing as an avowed criminal, and remaining as a
hypocrite, conscience might find it hard t
 
 ___________________________
 
nt,
there was inevitably a tinge of the devotional in his mood.

"do i feel joy again?" cried he, wondering at himself.
"methought the germ of it was dead in me!  oh, hester, thou art
my better angel!  i seem to have flung myself--sick, sin-stained,
and sorrow-blackened--down upon these forest leaves, and to have
risen up all made anew, and with new powers to glorify him that
hath been merciful!  this is already the better life!  why did we
not find it sooner?"

"let us not look back," answered hester prynne.  "the past is
gone!  wherefore should we linger upon it now?  see!  with this
symbol i undo it all, and make it as if it had never been!"

so speaking, she undid the clasp that fastened the scarlet
letter, and, taking it from her bosom, threw it to a distance
among the withered leaves.  the mystic token alighted on the
hither verge of the stream.  with a hand's-breadth further
flight, it would have fallen into the water, and have given the
little brook another woe to carry onward, besides the

 
 ___________________________
 
violets, and
anemones, and columbines, and some twigs of the freshest green,
which the old trees held down before her eyes.  with these she
decorated her hair and her young waist, and became a nymph
child, or an infant dryad, or whatever else was in closest
sympathy with the antique wood.  in such guise had pearl adorned
herself, when she heard her mother's voice, and came slowly
back.

slowly--for she saw the clergyman!



xix.  the child at the brookside

"thou wilt love her dearly," repeated hester prynne, as she and
the minister sat watching little pearl.  "dost thou not think her
beautiful?  and see with what natural skill she has made those
simple flowers adorn her!  had she gathered pearls, and diamonds,
and rubies in the wood, they could not have become her better!
she is a splendid child!  but i know whose brow she has!"

"dost thou know, hester," said arthur dimmesdale, with an
unquiet smile, "that this dear child, tripping about always at
thy side, hath caused me many an alarm?  methough
 
 ___________________________
 
ich they did
not acknowledge or define--threw an awe about the child as she
came onward.

"let her see nothing strange--no passion or eagerness--in thy
way of accosting her," whispered hester.  "our pearl is a fitful
and fantastic little elf sometimes.  especially she is generally
intolerant of emotion, when she does not fully comprehend the
why and wherefore.  but the child hath strong affections!  she
loves me, and will love thee!"

"thou canst not think," said the minister, glancing aside at
hester prynne, "how my heart dreads this interview, and yearns
for it!  but, in truth, as i already told thee, children are not
readily won to be familiar with me.  they will not climb my knee,
nor prattle in my ear, nor answer to my smile, but stand apart,
and eye me strangely.  even little babes, when i take them in my
arms, weep bitterly.  yet pearl, twice in her little lifetime,
hath been kind to me!  the first time--thou knowest it well!  the
last was when thou ledst her with thee to the house of yonder
 
 ___________________________
 
to a close.  the dell
was to be left in solitude among its dark, old trees, which,
with their multitudinous tongues, would whisper long of what had
passed there, and no mortal be the wiser.  and the melancholy
brook would add this other tale to the mystery with which its
little heart was already overburdened, and whereof it still kept
up a murmuring babble, with not a whit more cheerfulness of tone
than for ages heretofore.



xx.  the minister in a maze

as the minister departed, in advance of hester prynne and little
pearl, he threw a backward glance, half expecting that he should
discover only some faintly traced features or outline of the
mother and the child, slowly fading into the twilight of the
woods.  so great a vicissitude in his life could not at once be
received as real.  but there was hester, clad in her gray robe,
still standing beside the tree-trunk, which some blast had
overthrown a long antiquity ago, and which time had ever since
been covering with moss, so that these two fated on
 
 ___________________________
 
a home only in the midst of civilization and
refinement; the higher the state the more delicately adapted to
it the man.  in furtherance of this choice, it so happened that a
ship lay in the harbour; one of those unquestionable cruisers,
frequent at that day, which, without being absolutely outlaws of
the deep, yet roamed over its surface with a remarkable
irresponsibility of character.  this vessel had recently arrived
from the spanish main, and within three days' time would sail
for bristol.  hester prynne--whose vocation, as a self-enlisted
sister of charity, had brought her acquainted with the captain
and crew--could take upon herself to secure the passage of two
individuals and a child with all the secrecy which circumstances
rendered more than desirable.

the minister had inquired of hester, with no little interest,
the precise time at which the vessel might be expected to
depart.  it would probably be on the fourth day from the present.
"this is most fortunate!" he had then said to himself. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have breathed have done me good, after so long
confinement in my study.  i think to need no more of your drugs,
my kind physician, good though they be, and administered by a
friendly hand."

all this time roger chillingworth was looking at the minister
with the grave and intent regard of a physician towards his
patient.  but, in spite of this outward show, the latter was
almost convinced of the old man's knowledge, or, at least, his
confident suspicion, with respect to his own interview with
hester prynne.  the physician knew then that in the minister's
regard he was no longer a trusted friend, but his bitterest
enemy.  so much being known, it would appear natural that a part
of it should be expressed.  it is singular, however, how long a
time often passes before words embody things; and with what
security two persons, who choose to avoid a certain subject, may
approach its very verge, and retire without disturbing it.  thus
the minister felt no apprehension that roger chillingworth would
touch,
 
 ___________________________
 
ht fled away, as if it were a winged steed, and he
careering on it; morning came, and peeped, blushing, through the
curtains; and at last sunrise threw a golden beam into the
study, and laid it right across the minister's bedazzled eyes.
there he was, with the pen still between his fingers, and a
vast, immeasurable tract of written space behind him!



xxi.  the new england holiday

betimes in the morning of the day on which the new governor was
to receive his office at the hands of the people, hester prynne
and little pearl came into the market-place.  it was already
thronged with the craftsmen and other plebeian inhabitants of
the town, in considerable numbers, among whom, likewise, were
many rough figures, whose attire of deer-skins marked them as
belonging to some of the forest settlements, which surrounded
the little metropolis of the colony.

on this public holiday, as on all other occasions for seven
years past, hester was clad in a garment of coarse gray cloth.
not more by its hue than by s
 
 ___________________________
 
arb and shown this face, and worn and shown them
both with such a galliard air, without undergoing stern question
before a magistrate, and probably incurring a fine or
imprisonment, or perhaps an exhibition in the stocks.  as
regarded the shipmaster, however, all was looked upon as
pertaining to the character, as to a fish his glistening scales.

after parting from the physician, the commander of the bristol
ship strolled idly through the market-place; until happening to
approach the spot where hester prynne was standing, he appeared
to recognise, and did not hesitate to address her.  as was
usually the case wherever hester stood, a small vacant area--a
sort of magic circle--had formed itself about her, into which,
though the people were elbowing one another at a little
distance, none ventured or felt disposed to intrude.  it was a
forcible type of the moral solitude in which the scarlet letter
enveloped its fated wearer; partly by her own reserve, and
partly by the instinctive, though no longer so
 
 ___________________________
 
 unkindly,
withdrawal of her fellow-creatures.  now, if never before, it
answered a good purpose by enabling hester and the seaman to
speak together without risk of being overheard; and so changed
was hester prynne's repute before the public, that the matron in
town, most eminent for rigid morality, could not have held such
intercourse with less result of scandal than herself.

"so, mistress," said the mariner, "i must bid the steward make
ready one more berth than you bargained for!  no fear of scurvy
or ship fever this voyage.  what with the ship's surgeon and this
other doctor, our only danger will be from drug or pill; more by
token, as there is a lot of apothecary's stuff aboard, which i
traded for w
 
 ___________________________
 
t," cried the shipmaster, "that this physician
here--chillingworth he calls himself--is minded to try my
cabin-fare with you?  ay, ay, you must have known it; for he
tells me he is of your party, and a close friend to the
gentleman you spoke of--he that is in peril from these sour old
puritan rulers."

"they know each other well, indeed," replied hester, with a mien
of calmness, though in the utmost consternation.  "they have long
dwelt together."

nothing further passed between the mariner and hester prynne.
but at that instant she beheld old roger chillingworth himself,
standing in the remotest corner of the market-place and smiling
on her; a smile which--across the wide and bustling square, and
through all the talk and laughter, and various thoughts, moods,
and interests of the crowd--conveyed secret and fearful meaning.



xxii.  the procession

before hester prynne could call together her thoughts, and
consider what was practicable to be done in this new and
startling aspect of affairs, the so
 
 ___________________________
 
preternatural activity, to marshal a procession of stately
thoughts that were soon to issue thence; and so he saw nothing,
heard nothing, knew nothing of what was around him; but the
spiritual element took up the feeble frame and carried it along,
unconscious of the burden, and converting it to spirit like
itself.  men of uncommon intellect, who have grown morbid,
possess this occasional power of mighty effort, into which they
throw the life of many days and then are lifeless for as many
more.

hester prynne, gazing steadfastly at the clergyman, felt a
dreary influence come over her, but wherefore or whence she knew
not, unless that he seemed so remote from her own sphere, and
utterly beyond her reach.  one glance of recognition she had
imagined must needs pass between them.  she thought of the dim
forest, with its little dell of solitude, and love, and anguish,
and the mossy tree-trunk, where, sitting hand-in-hand, they had
mingled their sad and passionate talk with the melancholy murmur
of the br
 
 ___________________________
 
d in great magnificence, with a
triple ruff, a broidered stomacher, a gown of rich velvet, and a
gold-headed cane, had come forth to see the procession.  as this
ancient lady had the renown (which subsequently cost her no less
a price than her life) of being a principal actor in all the
works of necromancy that were continually going forward, the
crowd gave way before her, and seemed to fear the touch of her
garment, as if it carried the plague among its gorgeous folds.
seen in conjunction with hester prynne--kindly as so many now
felt towards the latter--the dread inspired by mistress hibbins
had doubled, and caused a general movement from that part of the
market-place in which the two women stood.

"now, what mortal imagination could conceive it?" whispered the
old lady confidentially to hester.  "yonder divine man!  that
saint on earth, as the people uphold him to be, and as--i must
needs say--he really looks!  who, now, that saw him pass in the
procession, would think how little while it is sin
 
 ___________________________
 
ce he went
forth out of his study--chewing a hebrew text of scripture in
his mouth, i warrant--to take an airing in the forest!  aha! we
know what that means, hester prynne!  but truly, forsooth, i find
it hard to believe him the same man.  many a church member saw i,
walking behind the music, that has danced in the same measure
with me, when somebody was fiddler, and, it might be, an indian
powwow or a lapland wizard changing hands with us!  that is but a
trifle, when a woman knows the world.  but this minister.  couldst
thou surely tell, hester, whether he was the same man that
encountered thee on the forest path?"

"madam, i know not of what you speak," answere
 
 ___________________________
 
d hester prynne,
feeling mistress hibbins to be of infirm mind; yet strangely
startled and awe-stricken by the confidence with which she
affirmed a personal connexion between so many persons (herself
among them) and the evil one.  "it is not for me to talk lightly
of a learned and pious minister of the word, like the reverend
mr. dimmesdale."

"fie, woman--fie!" cried the old lady, shaking her finger at
hester.  "dost thou think i have been to the forest so many
times, and have yet no skill to judge who else h
 
 ___________________________
 
e! and it
glows like a red flame in the dark.  thou wearest it openly, so
there need be no question about that.  but this minister!  let me
tell thee in thine ear!  when the black man sees one of his own
servants, signed and sealed, so shy of owning to the bond as is
the reverend mr. dimmesdale, he hath a way of ordering matters
so that the mark shall be disclosed, in open daylight, to the
eyes of all the world!  what is that the minister seeks to hide,
with his hand always over his heart?  ha, hester prynne?"

"what is it, good mistress hibbins?" eagerly asked little pearl.
"hast thou seen it?"

"no matter, darling!" responded mistress hibbins, making pearl a
profound reverence.  "thou thyself wilt see it, one time or
another.  they say, child, thou art of the lineage of the prince
of air!  wilt thou ride with me some fine night to see thy
father?  then thou shalt know wherefore the minister keeps his
hand over his heart!"

laughing so shrilly that all the market-place could hear her,
the weird ol
 
 ___________________________
 
 indistinct but varied murmur and flow of the minister's very
peculiar voice.

this vocal organ was in itself a rich endowment, insomuch that a
listener, comprehending nothing of the language in which the
preacher spoke, might still have been swayed to and fro by the
mere tone and cadence.  like all other music, it breathed passion
and pathos, and emotions high or tender, in a tongue native to
the human heart, wherever educated.  muffled as the sound was by
its passage through the church walls, hester prynne listened
with such intenseness, and sympathized so intimately, that the
sermon had throughout a meaning for her, entirely apart from its
indistinguishable words.  these, perhaps, if more distinctly
heard, might have been only a grosser medium, and have clogged
the spiritual sense.  now she caught the low undertone, as of the
wind sinking down to repose itself; then ascended with it, as it
rose through progressive gradations of sweetness and power,
until its volume seemed to envelop her with an 
 
 ___________________________
 
er than his own.  thence, with native
audacity, but still with a reserve as characteristic, she flew
into the midst of a group of mariners, the swarthy-cheeked wild
men of the ocean, as the indians were of the land; and they
gazed wonderingly and admiringly at pearl, as if a flake of the
sea-foam had taken the shape of a little maid, and were gifted
with a soul of the sea-fire, that flashes beneath the prow in
the night-time.

one of these seafaring men the shipmaster, indeed, who had
spoken to hester prynne was so smitten with pearl's aspect, that
he attempted to lay hands upon her, with purpose to snatch a
kiss.  finding it as impossible to touch her as to catch a
humming-bird in the air, he took from his hat the gold chain
that was twisted about it, and threw it to the child.  pearl
immediately twined it around her neck and waist with such happy
skill, that, once seen there, it became a part of her, and it
was difficult to imagine her without it.

"thy mother is yonder woman with the scarlet let
 
 ___________________________
 
g smile, right in the
midst of their path.

with her mind harassed by the terrible perplexity in which the
shipmaster's intelligence involved her, she was also subjected
to another trial.  there were many people present from the
country round about, who had often heard of the scarlet letter,
and to whom it had been made terrific by a hundred false or
exaggerated rumours, but who had never beheld it with their own
bodily eyes.  these, after exhausting other modes of amusement,
now thronged about hester prynne with rude and boorish
intrusiveness.  unscrupulous as it was, however, it could not
bring them nearer than a circuit of several yards.  at that
distance they accordingly stood, fixed there by the centrifugal
force of the repugnance which the mystic symbol inspired.  the
whole gang of sailors, likewise, observing the press of
spectators, and learning the purport of the scarlet letter, came
and thrust their sunburnt and desperado-looking faces into the
ring.  even the indians were affected by a s
 
 ___________________________
 
ort of cold shadow of
the white man's curiosity and, gliding through the crowd,
fastened their snake-like black eyes on hester's bosom,
conceiving, perhaps, that the wearer of this brilliantly
embroidered badge must needs be a personage of high dignity
among her people.  lastly, the inhabitants of the town (their own
interest in this worn-out subject languidly reviving itself, by
sympathy with what they saw others feel) lounged idly to the
same quarter, and tormented hester prynne, perhaps more than all
the rest, with their cool, well-acquainted gaze at her familiar
shame.  hester saw and recognized the selfsame faces of that
group of matrons, who had awaited her forthcoming from the
prison-door seven years ago; all save one, the youngest and only
compassionate among them, whose burial-robe she had since made.
at the final hour, when she was so soon to fling aside the
burning letter, it had strangely become the centre of more
remark and excitement, and was thus made to s
 
 ___________________________
 
 one, or than any which could
hereafter be.  he stood, at this moment, on the very proudest
eminence of superiority, to which the gifts or intellect, rich
lore, prevailing eloquence, and a reputation of whitest
sanctity, could exalt a clergyman in new england's earliest
days, when the professional character was of itself a lofty
pedestal.  such was the position which the minister occupied, as
he bowed his head forward on the cushions of the pulpit at the
close of his election sermon.  meanwhile hester prynne was
standing beside the scaffold of the pillory, with the scarlet
letter still burning on her breast!

now was heard again the clamour of the music, and the measured
tramp of the military escort issuing from the church door.  the
procession was to be marshalled thence to the town hall, where a
solemn banquet would complete the ceremonies of the day.

once more, therefore, the train of venerable and majestic
fathers were seen moving through a broad pathway of the people,
who drew back reverently
 
 ___________________________
 
rd
hastily to offer his support.  the minister tremulously, but
decidedly, repelled the old man's arm.  he still walked onward,
if that movement could be so described, which rather resembled
the wavering effort of an infant, with its mother's arms in
view, outstretched to tempt him forward.  and now, almost
imperceptible as were the latter steps of his progress, he had
come opposite the well-remembered and weather-darkened scaffold,
where, long since, with all that dreary lapse of time between,
hester prynne had encountered the world's ignominious stare.
there stood hester, holding little pearl by the hand!  and there
was the scarlet letter on her breast!  the minister here made a
pause; although the music still played the stately and rejoicing
march to which the procession moved.  it summoned him
onward--inward to the festival!--but here he made a pause.

bellingham, for the last few moments, had kept an anxious eye
upon him.  he now left his own place in the procession, and
advanced to give assis
 
 ___________________________
 
 for one so holy, had he ascended
before their eyes, waxing dimmer and brighter, and fading at
last into the light of heaven!

he turned towards the scaffold, and stretched forth his arms.

"hester," said he, "come hither!  come, my little pearl!"

it was a ghastly look with which he regarded them; but there was
something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it.  the
child, with the bird-like motion, which was one of her
characteristics, flew to him, and clasped her arms about his
knees.  hester prynne--slowly, as if impelled by inevitable fate,
and against her strongest will--likewise drew near, but paused
before she reached him.  at this instant old roger chillingworth
thrust himself through the crowd--or, perhaps, so dark,
disturbed, and evil was his look, he rose up out of some nether
region--to snatch back his victim from what he sought to do!  be
that as it might, the old man rushed forward, and caught the
minister by the arm.

"madman, hold!  what is your purpose?" whispered he.  "wave
 
 ___________________________
 
 back
that woman!  cast off this child!  all shall be well!  do not
blacken your fame, and perish in dishonour!  i can yet save you!
would you bring infamy on your sacred profession?"

"ha, tempter!  methinks thou art too late!" answered the
minister, encountering his eye, fearfully, but firmly.  "thy
power is not what it was!  with god's help, i shall escape thee
now!"

he again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter.

"hester prynne," cried he, with a piercing earnestness, "in the
name of him, so terrible and so merciful, who gives me grace, at
this last moment, to do what--for my own heavy sin and miserable
agony--i withheld myself from doing seven years ago, come hither
now, and twine thy strength about me!  thy strength, hester; but
let it be guided by the will which god hath granted me!  this
wretched and wronged old man is opposing it with all his
might!--with all his own might, and the fiend's!  come,
hester--come!  
 
 ___________________________
 
d,
that there was a feeble smile upon his lips.

"is not this better," murmured he, "than what we dreamed of in
the forest?"

"i know not!  i know not!" she hurriedly replied.  "better?  yea;
so we may both die, and little pearl die with us!"

"for thee and pearl, be it as god shall order," said the
minister; "and god is merciful!  let me now do the will which he
hath made plain before my sight.  for, hester, i am a dying man.
so let me make haste to take my shame upon me!"

partly supported by hester prynne, and holding one hand of
little pearl's, the reverend mr. dimmesdale turned to the
dignified and venerable rulers; to the holy ministers, who were
his brethren; to the people, whose great heart was thoroughly
appalled yet overflowing with tearful sympathy, as knowing that
some deep life-matter--which, if full of sin, was full of
anguish and repentance likewise--was now to be laid open to
them.  the sun, but little past its meridian, shone down upon the
clergyman, and gave a distinctness to his 
 
 ___________________________
 
ange, deep
voice of awe and wonder, which could not as yet find utterance,
save in this murmur that rolled so heavily after the departed
spirit.



xxiv.  conclusion

after many days, when time sufficed for the people to arrange
their thoughts in reference to the foregoing scene, there was
more than one account of what had been witnessed on the
scaffold.


most of the spectators testified to having seen, on the breast
of the unhappy minister, a scarlet letter--the very semblance of
that worn by hester prynne--imprinted in the flesh.  as regarded
its origin there were various explanations, all of which must
necessarily have been conjectural.  some affirmed that the
reverend mr. dimmesdale, on the very day when hester prynne
first wore her ignominious badge, had begun a course of
penance--which he afterwards, in so many futile methods,
followed out--by inflicting a hideous torture on himself.  others
contended that the stigma had not been produced until a long
time subsequent, when old roger chilling
 
 ___________________________
 
brain, where long meditation
has fixed it in very undesirable distinctness.

it is singular, nevertheless, that certain persons, who were
spectators of the whole scene, and professed never once to have
removed their eyes from the reverend mr. dimmesdale, denied that
there was any mark whatever on his breast, more than on a
new-born infant's.  neither, by their report, had his dying words
acknowledged, nor even remotely implied, any--the
slightest--connexion on his part, with the guilt for which
hester prynne had so long worn the scarlet letter.  according to
these highly-respectable witnesses, the minister, conscious that
he was dying--conscious, also, that the reverence of the
multitude placed him already among saints and angels--had
desired, by yielding up his breath in the arms of that fallen
woman, to express to the world how utterly nugatory is the
choicest of man's own righteousness.  after exhausting life in
his efforts for mankind's spiritual good, he had made the manner
of his death a para
 
 ___________________________
 
h so momentous,
we must be allowed to consider this version of mr. dimmesdale's
story as only an instance of that stubborn fidelity with which a
man's friends--and especially a clergyman's--will sometimes
uphold his character, when proofs, clear as the mid-day sunshine
on the scarlet letter, establish him a false and sin-stained
creature of the dust.

the authority which we have chiefly followed--a manuscript of
old date, drawn up from the verbal testimony of individuals,
some of whom had known hester prynne, while others had heard the
tale from contemporary witnesses fully confirms the view taken
in the foregoing pages.  among many morals which press upon us
from the poor minister's miserable experience, we put only this
into a sentence:--"be true!  be true!  be true!  show freely to the
world, if not your worst, yet some trait whereby the worst may
be inferred!"

nothing was more remarkable than the change which took place,
almost immediately after mr. dimmesdale's death, in the
appearance and de
 
 ___________________________
 
ey have
been--may, unawares, have found their earthly stock of hatred
and antipathy transmuted into golden love.

leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business to
communicate to the reader.  at old roger chillingworth's decease,
(which took place within the year), and by his last will and
testament, of which governor bellingham and the reverend mr.
wilson were executors, he bequeathed a very considerable amount
of property, both here and in england to little pearl, the
daughter of hester prynne.

so pearl--the elf child--the demon offspring, as some people up
to that epoch persisted in considering her--became the richest
heiress of her day in the new world.  not improbably this
circumstance wrought a very material change in the public
estimation; and had the mother and child remained here, little
pearl at a marriageable period of life might have mingled her
wild blood with the lineage of the devoutest puritan among them
all.  but, in no long time after the physician's death, the
weare
 
 ___________________________
 
of the scarlet letter disappeared, and pearl along with
her.  for many years, though a vague report would now and then
find its way across the sea--like a shapeless piece of driftwood
tossed ashore with the initials of a name upon it--yet no
tidings of them unquestionably authentic were received.  the
story of the scarlet letter grew into a legend.  its spell,
however, was still potent, and kept the scaffold awful where the
poor minister had died, and likewise the cottage by the
sea-shore where hester prynne had dwelt.  near this latter spot,
one afternoon some children were at play, when they beheld a
tall woman in a gray robe approach the cottage-door.  in all
those years it had never once been opened; but either she
unlocked it or the decaying wood and iron yielded to her hand,
or she glided shadow-like through these impediments--and, at all
events, went in.

on the threshold she paused--turned partly round--for perchance
the idea of entering alone and all so changed, the home of so
intense a fo
 
 ___________________________
 
rmer life, was more dreary and desolate than even
she could bear.  but her hesitation was only for an instant,
though long enough to display a scarlet letter on her breast.

and hester prynne had returned, and taken up her long-forsaken
shame!  but where was little pearl? if still alive she must now
have been in the flush and bloom of early womanhood.  none
knew--nor ever learned with the fulness of perfect
certainty--whether the elf-child had gone thus untimely to a
maiden grave; or whether her wild, rich nature had been softened
and subdued and made capable of a woman's gentle happiness.  but
through the remainder of hester's life there were indications
that the recluse of the sca
 
 ___________________________
 
 raised a public tumult had any infant
thus apparelled, been shown to our sober-hued community.

in fine, the gossips of that day believed--and mr. surveyor pue,
who made investigations a century later, believed--and one of
his recent successors in office, moreover, faithfully
believes--that pearl was not only alive, but married, and happy,
and mindful of her mother; and that she would most joyfully have
entertained that sad and lonely mother at her fireside.

but there was a more real life for hester prynne, here, in new
england, than in that unknown region where pearl had found a
home.  here had been her sin; here, her sorrow; and here was yet
to be her penitence.  she had returned, therefore, and resumed--of
her own free will, for not the sternest magistrate of that iron
period would have imposed it--resumed the symbol of which we
have related so dark a tale.  never afterwards did it quit her
bosom.  but, in the lapse of the toilsome, thoughtful, and
self-devoted years that made up hester's life
 
 ___________________________
 
, the scarlet
letter ceased to be a stigma which attracted the world's scorn
and bitterness, and became a type of something to be sorrowed
over, and looked upon with awe, yet with reverence too.  and, as
hester prynne had no selfish ends, nor lived in any measure for
her own profit and enjoyment, people brought all their sorrows
and perplexities, and besought her counsel, as one who had
herself gone through a mighty trouble.  women, more
especially--in the continually recurring trials of wounded,
wasted, wronged, misplaced, or erring and sinful passion--or
with the dreary burden of a heart unyielded, because unvalued
and unsought came to hester's cottage, demanding why they were
so wretched, and what the rem
 
 ___________________________
 
d long since recognised
the impossibility that any mission of divine and mysterious
truth should be confided to a woman stained with sin, bowed down
with shame, or even burdened with a life-long sorrow.  the angel
and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman, indeed,
but lofty, pure, and beautiful, and wise; moreover, not through
dusky grief, but the ethereal medium of joy; and showing how
sacred love should make us happy, by the truest test of a life
successful to such an end.

so said hester prynne, and glanced her sad eyes downward at the
scarlet letter.  and, after many, many years, a new grave was
delved, near an old and sunken one, in that burial-ground beside
which king's chapel has since been built.  it was near that old
and sunken grave, yet with a space between, as if the dust of
the two sleepers had no right to mingle.  yet one tomb-stone
served for both.  all around, there were monuments carved with
armorial bearings; and on this simple slab of slate--as the
curious investigator