arden-wall.  the old clergyman, nurtured at the rich bosom of
the english church, had a long established and legitimate taste
for all good and comfortable things, and however stern he might
show himself in the pulpit, or in his public reproof of such
transgressions as that of hester prynne, still, the genial
benevolence of his private life had won him warmer affection
than was accorded to any of his professional contemporaries.

behind the governor and mr. wilson came two other guests--one,
the reverend arthur dimmesdale, whom the reader may remember as
having taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of hester
prynne's disgrace; and, in close companionship with him, old
roger chillingworth, a person of great skill in physic, who for
two or three years past had been settled in the town.  it was
understood that this learned man was the physician as well as
friend of the young minister, whose health had severely suffered
of late by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labours and
duties of the pastoral re
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
laboratory: not such as a modern man of science would reckon
even tolerably complete, but provided with a distilling
apparatus and the means of compounding drugs and chemicals,
which the practised alchemist knew well how to turn to purpose.
with such commodiousness of situation, these two learned persons
sat themselves down, each in his own domain, yet familiarly
passing from one apartment to the other, and bestowing a mutual
and not incurious inspection into one another's business.

and the reverend arthur dimmesdale's best discerning friends, as
we have intimated, very reasonably imagined that the hand of
providence had done all this for the purpose--besought in so
many public and domestic and secret prayers--of restoring the
young minister to health.  but, it must now be said, another
portion of the community had latterly begun to take its own view
of the relation betwixt mr. dimmesdale and the mysterious old
physician.  when an uninstructed multitude attempts to see with
its eyes, it is exceedingly apt t
 
 ___________________________
 
 of mr. dimmesdale's church, and the young
virgins who so idolized their minister, and had made a shrine
for him in their white bosoms, which now, by-the-bye, in their
hurry and confusion, they would scantly have given themselves
time to cover with their kerchiefs.  all people, in a word, would
come stumbling over their thresholds, and turning up their
amazed and horror-stricken visages around the scaffold.  whom
would they discern there, with the red eastern light upon his
brow?  whom, but the reverend arthur dimmesdale, half-frozen to
death, overwhelmed with shame, and standing where hester prynne
had stood!

carried away by the grotesque horror of this picture, the
minister, unawares, and to his own infinite alarm, burst into a
great peal of laughter.  it was immediately responded to by a
light, airy, childish laugh, in which, with a thrill of the
heart--but he knew not whether of exquisite pain, or pleasure as
acute--he recognised the tones of little pearl.

"pearl!  little pearl!" cried he, after a moment'