oud and
solemn tone, audible to the whole multitude.

"hearken unto me, hester prynne!" said the voice.

it has already been noticed that directly over the platform on
which hester prynne stood was a kind of balcony, or open
gallery, appended to the meeting-house.  it was the place whence
proclamations were wont to be made, amidst an assemblage of the
magistracy, with all the ceremonial that attended such public
observances in those days.  here, to witness the scene which we
are describing, sat governor bellingham himself with four
sergeants about his chair, bearing halberds, as a guard of
honour.  he wore a dark feather in his hat, a border of
embroidery on his cloak, and a black velvet tunic beneath--a
gentleman advanced in years, with a hard experience written in
his wrinkles.  he was not ill-fitted to be the head and
representative of a community which owed its origin and
progress, and its present state of development, not to the
impulses of youth, but to the stern and tempered energies of
manhood an
 
 ___________________________
 
 beyond his
years--that it were wronging the very nature of woman to force
her to lay open her heart's secrets in such broad daylight, and
in presence of so great a multitude.  truly, as i sought to
convince him, the shame lay in the commission of the sin, and
not in the showing of it forth.  what say you to it, once again,
brother dimmesdale?  must it be thou, or i, that shall deal with
this poor sinner's soul?"

there was a murmur among the dignified and reverend occupants of
the balcony; and governor bellingham gave expression to its
purport, speaking in an authoritative voice, although tempered
with respect towards the youthful clergyman whom he addressed:

"good master dimmesdale," said he, "the responsibility of this
woman's soul lies greatly with you.  it behoves you; therefore,
to exhort her to repentance and to confession, as a proof and
consequence thereof."

the directness of this appeal drew the eyes of the whole crowd
upon the reverend mr. dimmesdale--young clergyman, who had come
from one o
 
 ___________________________
 
nted, was of demon origin,
these good people not unreasonably argued that a christian
interest in the mother's soul required them to remove such a
stumbling-block from her path.  if the child, on the other hand,
were really capable of moral and religious growth, and possessed
the elements of ultimate salvation, then, surely, it would enjoy
all the fairer prospect of these advantages by being transferred
to wiser and better guardianship than hester prynne's.  among
those who promoted the design, governor bellingham was said to
be one of the most busy.  it may appear singular, and, indeed,
not a little ludicrous, that an affair of this kind, which in
later days would have been referred to no higher jurisdiction
than that of the select men of the town, should then have been a
question publicly discussed, and on which statesmen of eminence
took sides.  at that epoch of pristine simplicity, however,
matters of even slighter public interest, and of far less
intrinsic weight than the welfare of hester and her c
 
 ___________________________
 
utters to close over them at need.  lifting the iron hammer
that hung at the portal, hester prynne gave a summons, which was
answered by one of the governor's bond servant--a free-born
englishman, but now a seven years' slave.  during that term he
was to be the property of his master, and as much a commodity of
bargain and sale as an ox, or a joint-stool.  the serf wore the
customary garb of serving-men at that period, and long before,
in the old hereditary halls of england.

"is the worshipful governor bellingham within?" inquired hester.

"yea, forsooth," replied the bond-servant, staring with
wide-open eyes at the scarlet letter, which, being a new-comer
in the country, he had never before seen.  "yea, his honourable
worship is within.  but he hath a godly minister or two with him,
and likewise a leech.  ye may not see his worship now."

"nevertheless, i will enter," answered hester prynne; and the
bond-servant, perhaps judging from the decision of her air, and
the glittering symbol in her bosom, that
 
 ___________________________
 
 she was a great lady in
the land, offered no opposition.

so the mother and little pearl were admitted into the hall of
entrance.  with many variations, suggested by the nature of his
building materials, diversity of climate, and a different mode
of social life, governor bellingham had planned his new
habitation after the residences of gentlemen of fair estate in
his native land.  here, then, was a wide and reasonably lofty
hall, extending through the whole depth of the house, and
forming a medium of general communication, more or less
directly, with all the other apartments.  at one extremity, this
spacious room was lighted by the windows of the two towers,
which formed a small recess on either side of the portal.  at the
other end, though partly muffled by a curtain, it
 
 ___________________________
 
reastplate, so highly burnished as to glow with
white radiance, and scatter an illumination everywhere about
upon the floor.  this bright panoply was not meant for mere idle
show, but had been worn by the governor on many a solemn muster
and training field, and had glittered, moreover, at the head of
a regiment in the pequod war.  for, though bred a lawyer, and
accustomed to speak of bacon, coke, noye, and finch, as his
professional associates, the exigencies of this new country had
transformed governor bellingham into a soldier, as well as a
statesman and ruler.

little pearl, who was as greatly pleased with the gleaming
armour as she had been with the glittering frontispiece of the
house, spent some time looking into the polished mirror of the
breastplate.

"mother," cried she, "i see you here.  look!  look!"

hester looked by way of humouring the child; and she saw that,
owing to the peculiar effect of this convex mirror, the scarlet
letter was represented in exaggerated and gigantic proportions,
so a
 
 ___________________________
 
!  i hear voices in the garden.  the governor is
coming, and gentlemen along with him."

in fact, adown the vista of the garden avenue, a number of
persons were seen approaching towards the house.  pearl, in utter
scorn of her mother's attempt to quiet her, gave an eldritch
scream, and then became silent, not from any notion of
obedience, but because the quick and mobile curiosity of her
disposition was excited by the appearance of those new
personages.



viii.  the elf-child and the minister

governor bellingham, in a loose gown and easy cap--such as
elderly gentlemen loved to endue themselves with, in their
domestic privacy--walked foremost, and appeared to be showing
off his estate, and expatiating on his projected improvements.
the wide circumference of an elaborate ruff, beneath his grey
beard, in the antiquated fashion of king james's reign, caused
his head to look not a little like that of john the baptist in a
charger.  the impression made by his aspect, so rigid and severe,
and frost-bitten wit
 
 ___________________________
 
rround himself.  but it is an
error to suppose that our great forefathers--though accustomed
to speak and think of human existence as a state merely of trial
and warfare, and though unfeignedly prepared to sacrifice goods
and life at the behest of duty--made it a matter of conscience
to reject such means of comfort, or even luxury, as lay fairly
within their grasp.  this creed was never taught, for instance,
by the venerable pastor, john wilson, whose beard, white as a
snow-drift, was seen over governor bellingham's shoulders, while
its wearer suggested that pears and peaches might yet be
naturalised in the new england climate, and that purple grapes
might possibly be compelled to flourish against the sunny
garden-wall.  the old clergyman, nurtured at the rich bosom of
the english church, had a long established and legitimate taste
for all good and comfortable things, and however stern he might
show himself in the pulpit, or in his public reproof of such
transgressions as that of hester prynne, still, th
 
 ___________________________
 
it was
understood that this learned man was the physician as well as
friend of the young minister, whose health had severely suffered
of late by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labours and
duties of the pastoral relation.

the governor, in advance of his visitors, ascended one or two
steps, and, throwing open the leaves of the great hall window,
found himself close to little pearl.  the shadow of the curtain
fell on hester prynne, and partially concealed her.

"what have we here?" said governor bellingham, looking with
surprise at the scarlet little figure before him.  "i profess, i
have never seen the like since my days of vanity, in old king
james's time, when i was wont to esteem it a high favour to be
admitted to a court mask!  there used to be a swarm of these
small apparitions in holiday time, and we called them children
of the lord of misrule.  but how gat such a guest into my hall?"

"ay, indeed!" cried good old mr. wilson.  "what little bird of
scarlet plumage may this be?  methinks i h
 
 ___________________________
 
techism?  or art thou one of those naughty elfs or fairies whom
we thought to have left behind us, with other relics of
papistry, in merry old england?"

"i am mother's child," answered the scarlet vision, "and my name
is pearl!"

"pearl?--ruby, rather--or coral!--or red rose, at the very
least, judging from thy hue!" responded the old minister,
putting forth his hand in a vain attempt to pat little pearl on
the cheek.  "but where is this mother of thine?  ah!  i see," he
added; and, turning to governor bellingham, whispered, "this is
the selfsame child of whom we have held speech together; and
behold here the unhappy woman, hester prynne, her mother!"

"sayest thou so?" cried the governor.  "nay, we might have
judged that such a child's mother must needs be a scarlet woman,
and a worthy type of her of babylon!  but she comes at a good
time, and we will look into this matter forthwith."

governor bellingham stepped through the window into the hall,
followed by his three guests.

"hester prynne," said he,
 
 ___________________________
 
ay upon it; and still better, it may be, to leave the mystery
as we find it, unless providence reveal it of its own accord.
thereby, every good christian man hath a title to show a
father's kindness towards the poor, deserted babe."

the affair being so satisfactorily concluded, hester prynne,
with pearl, departed from the house.  as they descended the
steps, it is averred that the lattice of a chamber-window was
thrown open, and forth into the sunny day was thrust the face of
mistress hibbins, governor bellingham's bitter-tempered sister,
and the same who, a few years later, was executed as a witch.

"hist, hist!" said she, while her ill-omened physiognomy seemed
to cast a shadow over the cheerful newness of the house.  "wilt
thou go with us to-night?  there will be a merry company in the
forest; and i well-nigh promised the black man that comely
hester prynne should make one."

"make my excuse to him, so please you!" answered hester, with a
triumphant smile.  "i must tarry at home, and keep watch over 
 
 ___________________________
 
a far
greater power, to his own startled ears, than it actually
possessed.  the town did not awake; or, if it did, the drowsy
slumberers mistook the cry either for something frightful in a
dream, or for the noise of witches, whose voices, at that
period, were often heard to pass over the settlements or lonely
cottages, as they rode with satan through the air.  the
clergyman, therefore, hearing no symptoms of disturbance,
uncovered his eyes and looked about him.  at one of the
chamber-windows of governor bellingham's mansion, which stood at
some distance, on the line of another street, he beheld the
appearance of the old magistrate himself with a lamp in his hand
a white night-cap on his head, and a long white gown enveloping
his figure.  he looked like a ghost evoked unseasonably from the
grave.  the cry had evidently startled him.  at another window of
the same house, moreover appeared old mistress hibbins, the
governor's sister, also with a lamp, which even thus far off
revealed the expression of her s
 
 ___________________________
 
our and discontented face.  she
thrust forth her head from the lattice, and looked anxiously
upward.  beyond the shadow of a doubt, this venerable witch-lady
had heard mr. dimmesdale's outcry, and interpreted it, with its
multitudinous echoes and reverberations, as the clamour of the
fiends and night-hags, with whom she was well known to make
excursions in the forest.

detecting the gleam of governor bellingham's lamp, the old lady
quickly extinguished her own, and vanished.  possibly, she went
up among the clouds.  the minister saw nothing further of her
motions.  the magistrate, after a wary observation of the
darkness--into which, nevertheless, he could see but little
further than he might into a mill-stone--retired from the
window.

the minister grew comparatively calm.  his eyes, however, were
soon greeted by a little glimmering light, which, at first a
long way off was approaching up the street.
 
 ___________________________
 

that one happens to be seen in a celestial radiance, and the
other in a dusky and lurid glow.  in the spiritual world, the old
physician and the minister--mutual victims as they have
been--may, unawares, have found their earthly stock of hatred
and antipathy transmuted into golden love.

leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business to
communicate to the reader.  at old roger chillingworth's decease,
(which took place within the year), and by his last will and
testament, of which governor bellingham and the reverend mr.
wilson were executors, he bequeathed a very considerable amount
of property, both here and in england to little pearl, the
daughter of hester prynne.

so pearl--the elf child--the demon offspring, as some people up
to that epoch persisted in considering her--became the richest
heiress of her day in the new world.  not improbably this
circumstance wrought a very material change in the public
estimation; and had the mother and child remained here, little
pearl at a marriageab