ny which hester prynne had borne
throughout the day.

closely following the jailer into the dismal apartment, appeared
that individual, of singular aspect whose presence in the crowd
had been of such deep interest to the wearer of the scarlet
letter.  he was lodged in the prison, not as suspected of any
offence, but as the most convenient and suitable mode of
disposing of him, until the magistrates should have conferred
with the indian sagamores respecting his ransom.  his name was
announced as roger chillingworth.  the jailer, after ushering him
into the room, remained a moment, marvelling at the comparative
quiet that followed his entrance; for hester prynne had
immediately become as still as death, although the child
continued to moan.

"prithee, friend, leave me alone with my patient," said the
practitioner.  "trust me, good jailer, you shall briefly have
peace in your house; and, i promise you, mistress prynne shall
hereafter be more amenable to just authority than you may have
found her heretofore.
 
 ___________________________
 
 my purpose to live and
die unknown.  let, therefore, thy husband be to the world as one
already dead, and of whom no tidings shall ever come.  recognise
me not, by word, by sign, by look!  breathe not the secret, above
all, to the man thou wottest of.  shouldst thou fail me in this,
beware!  his fame, his position, his life will be in my hands.
beware!"

"i will keep thy secret, as i have his," said hester.

"swear it!" rejoined he.

and she took the oath.

"and now, mistress prynne," said old roger chillingworth, as he
was hereafter to be named, "i leave thee alone: alone with thy
infant and the scarlet letter!  how is it, hester?  doth thy
sentence bind thee to wear the token in thy sleep?  art thou not
afraid of nightmares and hideous dreams?"

"why dost thou smile so at me?" inquired hester, troubled at the
expression of his eyes.  "art thou like the black man that haunts
the forest round about us?  hast thou enticed me into a bond that
will prove the ruin of my soul?"

"not thy soul," he answered, 
 
 ___________________________
 
might
show himself in the pulpit, or in his public reproof of such
transgressions as that of hester prynne, still, the genial
benevolence of his private life had won him warmer affection
than was accorded to any of his professional contemporaries.

behind the governor and mr. wilson came two other guests--one,
the reverend arthur dimmesdale, whom the reader may remember as
having taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of hester
prynne's disgrace; and, in close companionship with him, old
roger chillingworth, a person of great skill in physic, who for
two or three years past had been settled in the town.  it was
understood that this learned man was the physician as well as
friend of the young minister, whose health had severely suffered
of late by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labours and
duties of the pastoral relation.

the governor, in advance of his visitors, ascended one or two
steps, and, throwing open the leaves of the great hall window,
found himself close to little pearl.  the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ds amiss.  after putting her finger in her mouth, with many
ungracious refusals to answer good mr. wilson's question, the
child finally announced that she had not been made at all, but
had been plucked by her mother off the bush of wild roses that
grew by the prison-door.

this phantasy was probably suggested by the near proximity of
the governor's red roses, as pearl stood outside of the window,
together with her recollection of the prison rose-bush, which
she had passed in coming hither.

old roger chillingworth, with a smile on his face, whispered
something in the young clergyman's ear.  hester prynne looked at
the man of skill, and even then, with her fate hanging in the
balance, was startled to perceive what a change had come over
his features--how much uglier they were, how his dark complexion
seemed to have grown duskier, and his figure more
misshapen--since the days when she had familiarly known him.  she
met his eyes for an instant, but was immediately constrained to
give all her attention to th
 
 ___________________________
 
-to
be trained up by her to righteousness, to remind her, at every
moment, of her fall, but yet to teach her, as if it were by the
creator's sacred pledge, that, if she bring the child to heaven,
the child also will bring its parents thither!  herein is the
sinful mother happier than the sinful father.  for hester
prynne's sake, then, and no less for the poor child's sake, let
us leave them as providence hath seen fit to place them!"

"you speak, my friend, with a strange earnestness," said old
roger chillingworth, smiling at him.

"and there is a weighty import in what my young brother hath
spoken," added the rev.  mr. wilson.

"what say you, worshipful master bellingham?  hath he not
pleaded well for the poor woman?"

"indeed hath he," answered the magistrate; "and hath adduced
such arguments, that we will even leave the matter as it now
stands; so long, at least, as there shall be no further scandal
in the woman.  care must be had nevertheless, to put the child to
due and stated examination in the cat
 
 ___________________________
 
worthy to be loved--the minister
looked round, laid his hand on the child's head, hesitated an
instant, and then kissed her brow.  little pearl's unwonted mood
of sentiment lasted no longer; she laughed, and went capering
down the hall so airily, that old mr. wilson raised a question
whether even her tiptoes touched the floor.

"the little baggage hath witchcraft in her, i profess," said he
to mr. dimmesdale.  "she needs no old woman's broomstick to fly
withal!"

"a strange child!" remarked old roger chillingworth.  "it is
easy to see the mother's part in her.  would it be beyond a
philosopher's research, think ye, gentlemen, to analyse that
child's nature, and, from it make a mould, to give a shrewd
guess at the father?"

"nay; it would be sinful, in such a question, to follow the clue
of profane philosophy," said mr. wilson.  "better to fast and
pray upon it; and still better, it may be, to leave the mystery
as we find it, unless providence reveal it of its own accord.
thereby, every good christian man
 
 ___________________________
 
ook too, and that with mine own blood!"

"we shall have thee there anon!" said the witch-lady, frowning,
as she drew back her head.

but here--if we suppose this interview betwixt mistress hibbins
and hester prynne to be authentic, and not a parable--was
already an illustration of the young minister's argument against
sundering the relation of a fallen mother to the offspring of
her frailty.  even thus early had the child saved her from
satan's snare.



ix.  the leech

under the appellation of roger chillingworth, the reader will
remember, was hidden another name, which its former wearer had
resolved should never more be spoken.  it has been related, how,
in the crowd that witnessed hester prynne's ignominious
exposure, stood a man, elderly, travel-worn, who, just emerging
from the perilous wilderness, beheld the woman, in whom he hoped
to find embodied the warmth and cheerfulness of home, set up as
a type of sin before the people.  her matronly fame was trodden
under all men's feet.  infamy was babblin
 
 ___________________________
 
 to withdraw his name from the roll of mankind,
and, as regarded his former ties and interest, to vanish out of
life as completely as if he indeed lay at the bottom of the
ocean, whither rumour had long ago consigned him.  this purpose
once effected, new interests would immediately spring up, and
likewise a new purpose; dark, it is true, if not guilty, but of
force enough to engage the full strength of his faculties.

in pursuance of this resolve, he took up his residence in the
puritan town as roger chillingworth, without other introduction
than the learning and intelligence of which he possessed more
than a common measure.  as his studies, at a previous period of
his life, had made him extensively acquainted with the medical
science of the day, it was as a physician that he presented
himself and as such was cordially received.  skilful men, of the
medical and chirurgical profession, were of rare occurrence in
the colony.  they seldom, it would appear, partook of the
religious zeal that brought other em
 
 ___________________________
 
rise all of life within itself.  at all events,
the health of the good town of boston, so far as medicine had
aught to do with it, had hitherto lain in the guardianship of an
aged deacon and apothecary, whose piety and godly deportment
were stronger testimonials in his favour than any that he could
have produced in the shape of a diploma.  the only surgeon was
one who combined the occasional exercise of that noble art with
the daily and habitual flourish of a razor.  to such a
professional body roger chillingworth was a brilliant
acquisition.  he soon manifested his familiarity with the
ponderous and imposing machinery of antique physic; in which
every remedy contained a multitude of far-fetched and
heterogeneous ingredients, as elaborately compounded as if the
proposed result had been the elixir of life.  in his indian
captivity, moreover, he had gained much knowledge of the
properties of native herbs and roots; nor did he conceal from
his patients that these simple medicines, nature's boon to the
untut
 
 ___________________________
 
nce of opinion as to the cause of
his decline, there could be no question of the fact.  his form
grew emaciated; his voice, though still rich and sweet, had a
certain melancholy prophecy of decay in it; he was often
observed, on any slight alarm or other sudden accident, to put
his hand over his heart with first a flush and then a paleness,
indicative of pain.

such was the young clergyman's condition, and so imminent the
prospect that his dawning light would be extinguished, all
untimely, when roger chillingworth made his advent to the town.
his first entry on the scene, few people could tell whence,
dropping down as it were out of the sky or starting from the
nether earth, had an aspect of mystery, which was easily
heightened to the miraculous.  he was now known to be a man of
skill; it was observed that he gathered herbs and the blossoms
of wild-flowers, and dug up roots and plucked off twigs from the
forest-trees like one acquainted with hidden virtues in what was
valueless to common eyes.  he was he
 
 ___________________________
 
his
query, a rumour gained ground--and however absurd, was
entertained by some very sensible people--that heaven had
wrought an absolute miracle, by transporting an eminent doctor
of physic from a german university bodily through the air and
setting him down at the door of mr. dimmesdale's study!
individuals of wiser faith, indeed, who knew that heaven
promotes its purposes without aiming at the stage-effect of what
is called miraculous interposition, were inclined to see a
providential hand in roger chillingworth's so opportune arrival.

this idea was countenanced by the strong interest which the
physician ever manifested in the young clergyman; he attached
himself to him as a parishioner, and sought to win a friendly
regard and confidence from his naturally reserved sensibility.
he expressed great alarm at his pastor's state of health, but
was anxious to attempt the cure, and, if early undertaken,
seemed not despondent of a favourable result.  the elders, the
deacons, the motherly dames, and the young 
 
 ___________________________
 
finally promised to confer with the
physician.

"were it god's will," said the reverend mr. dimmesdale, when, in
fulfilment of this pledge, he requested old roger
chillingworth's professional advice, "i could be well content
that my labours, and my sorrows, and my sins, and my pains,
should shortly end with me, and what is earthly of them be
buried in my grave, and the spiritual go with me to my eternal
state, rather than that you should put your skill to the proof
in my behalf."

"ah," replied roger chillingworth, with that quietness, which,
whether imposed or natural, marked all his deportment, "it is
thus that a young clergyman is apt to speak.  youthful men, not
having taken a deep root, give up their hold of life so easily!
and saintly men, who walk with god on earth, would fain be away,
to walk with him on the golden pavements of the new jerusalem."

"nay," rejoined the young minister, putting his hand to his
heart, with a flush of pain flitting over his brow, "were i
worthier to walk there, i coul
 
 ___________________________
 
d be better content to toil here."

"good men ever interpret themselves too meanly," said the
physician.

in this manner, the mysterious old roger chillingworth became
the medical adviser of the reverend mr. dimmesdale.  as not only
the disease interested the physician, but he was strongly moved
to look into the character and qualities of the patient, these
two men, so different in age, came gradually to spend much time
together.  for the sake of the minister's health, and to enable
the leech to gather plants with healing balm in them, they took
long walks on the sea-shore, or in the forest; mingling various
walks with the splash and murmur of the wave
 
 ___________________________
 
e with which he habitually held converse.  it
was as if a window were thrown open, admitting a freer
atmosphere into the close and stifled study, where his life was
wasting itself away, amid lamp-light, or obstructed day-beams,
and the musty fragrance, be it sensual or moral, that exhales
from books.  but the air was too fresh and chill to be long
breathed with comfort.  so the minister, and the physician with
him, withdrew again within the limits of what their church
defined as orthodox.

thus roger chillingworth scrutinised his patient carefully, both
as he saw him in his ordinary life, keeping an accustomed
pathway in the range of thoughts familiar to him, and as he
appeared when thrown amidst other moral scenery, the novelty of
which might call out something new to the surface of his
character.  he deemed it essential, it would seem, to know the
man, before attempting to do him good.  wherever there is a heart
and an intellect, the diseases of the physical frame are tinged
with the peculiarities of t
 
 ___________________________
 
hese.  in arthur dimmesdale, thought
and imagination were so active, and sensibility so intense, that
the bodily infirmity would be likely to have its groundwork
there.  so roger chillingworth--the man of skill, the kind and
friendly physician--strove to go deep into his patient's bosom,
delving among his principles, prying into his recollections, and
probing everything with a cautious touch, like a treasure-seeker
in a dark cavern.  few secrets can escape an investigator, who
has opportunity and licence to undertake such a quest, and skill
to follow it up.  a man burdened with a secret should especially
avoid the intimacy of his physician.  if the latter possess
native sagacity, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ht; if such
revelations be received without tumult, and acknowledged not so
often by an uttered sympathy as by silence, an inarticulate
breath, and here and there a word to indicate that all is
understood; if to these qualifications of a confidant be joined
the advantages afforded by his recognised character as a
physician;--then, at some inevitable moment, will the soul of
the sufferer be dissolved, and flow forth in a dark but
transparent stream, bringing all its mysteries into the
daylight.

roger chillingworth possessed all, or most, of the attributes
above enumerated.  nevertheless, time went on; a kind of
intimacy, as we have said, grew up between these two cultivated
minds, which had as wide a field as the whole sphere of human
thought and study to meet upon; they discussed every topic of
ethics and religion, of public affairs, and private character;
they talked much, on both sides, of matters that seemed personal
to themselves; and yet no secret, such as the physician fancied
must exist there, ev
 
 ___________________________
 
er stole out of the minister's consciousness
into his companion's ear.  the latter had his suspicions, indeed,
that even the nature of mr. dimmesdale's bodily disease had
never fairly been revealed to him.  it was a strange reserve!

after a time, at a hint from roger chillingworth, the friends of
mr. dimmesdale effected an arrangement by which the two were
lodged in the same house; so that every ebb and flow of the
minister's life-tide might pass under the eye of his anxious and
attached physician.  there was much joy throughout the town when
this greatly desirable object was attained.  it was held to be
the best possible measure for the young clergyman's welfare;
unless, indeed, as often urged by such as felt authorised to do
so, he had selected some one of the many blo
 
 ___________________________
 
story of david and bathsheba, and nathan the prophet,
in colours still unfaded, but which made the fair woman of the
scene almost as grimly picturesque as the woe-denouncing seer.
here the pale clergyman piled up his library, rich with
parchment-bound folios of the fathers, and the lore of rabbis,
and monkish erudition, of which the protestant divines, even
while they vilified and decried that class of writers, were yet
constrained often to avail themselves.  on the other side of the
house, old roger chillingworth arranged his study and
laboratory: not such as a modern man of science would reckon
even tolerably complete, but provided with a distilling
apparatus and the means of compounding drugs and chemicals,
which the practised alchemist knew well how to turn to purpose.
with such commodiousness of situation, these two learned persons
sat themselves down, each in his own domain, yet familiarly
passing from one apartment to the other, and bestowing a mutual
and not incurious inspection into one another'
 
 ___________________________
 
r of overbury.  two or three individuals hinted that the man
of skill, during his indian captivity, had enlarged his medical
attainments by joining in the incantations of the savage
priests, who were universally acknowledged to be powerful
enchanters, often performing seemingly miraculous cures by their
skill in the black art.  a large number--and many of these were
persons of such sober sense and practical observation that their
opinions would have been valuable in other matters--affirmed
that roger chillingworth's aspect had undergone a remarkable
change while he had dwelt in town, and especially since his
abode with mr. dimmesdale.  at first, his expression had been
calm, meditative, scholar-like.  now there was something ugly and
evil in his face, which they had not previously noticed, and
which grew still the more obvious to sight the oftener they
looked upon him.  according to the vulgar idea, the fire in his
laboratory had been brought from the lower regions, and was fed
with infernal fuel; and so
 
 ___________________________
 
, as might be expected, his visage was
getting sooty with the smoke.

to sum up the matter, it grew to be a widely diffused opinion
that the rev.  arthur dimmesdale, like many other personages of
special sanctity, in all ages of the christian world, was
haunted either by satan himself or satan's emissary, in the
guise of old roger chillingworth.  this diabolical agent had the
divine permission, for a season, to burrow into the clergyman's
intimacy, and plot against his soul.  no sensible man, it was
confessed, could doubt on which side the victory would turn.  the
people looked, with an unshaken hope, to see the minister come
forth out of the conflict transfigured with the glory which he
would unquestionably win.  meanwhile, nevertheless, it was sad to
think of the perchance mortal agony through which he must
struggle towards his triu
 
 ___________________________
 
mph.

alas!  to judge from the gloom and terror in the depth of the
poor minister's eyes, the battle was a sore one, and the victory
anything but secure.



x.  the leech and his patient

old roger chillingworth, throughout life, had been calm in
temperament, kindly, though not of warm affections, but ever,
and in all his relations with the world, a pure and upright man.
he had begun an investigation, as he imagined, with the severe
and equal integrity of a judge, desirous only of truth, even as
if the question involved no more than the air-drawn lines and
figures of a geometrical problem, instead of human passions, and
wrongs inflicted on himself.  but, as he proceeded, a terrible
fascination, a kind 
 
 ___________________________
 
rpose to steal the very treasure which this man guards as the
apple of his eye.  in spite of his premeditated carefulness, the
floor would now and then creak; his garments would rustle; the
shadow of his presence, in a forbidden proximity, would be
thrown across his victim.  in other words, mr. dimmesdale, whose
sensibility of nerve often produced the effect of spiritual
intuition, would become vaguely aware that something inimical to
his peace had thrust itself into relation with him.  but old
roger chillingworth, too, had perceptions that were almost
intuitive; and when the minister threw his startled eyes towards
him, there the physician sat; his kind, watchful, sympathising,
but never intrusive friend.

yet mr. dimmesdale would perhaps have seen this individual's
character more perfectly, if a certain morbidness, to which sick
hearts are liable, had not rendered him suspicious of all
mankind.  trusting no man as his friend, he could not recognize
his enemy when the latter actually appeared.  he there
 
 ___________________________
 
fore still
kept up a familiar intercourse with him, daily receiving the old
physician in his study, or visiting the laboratory, and, for
recreation's sake, watching the processes by which weeds were
converted into drugs of potency.

one day, leaning his forehead on his hand, and his elbow on the
sill of the open window, that looked towards the grave-yard, he
talked with roger chillingworth, while the old man was examining
a bundle of unsightly plants.

"where," asked he, with a look askance at them--for it was the
clergyman's peculiarity that he seldom, now-a-days, looked
straight forth at any object, whether human or inanimate,
"where, my kind doctor, did you gather those herbs, with such a
dark, flabby leaf?"

"even in the graveyard here at hand," answered the physician,
continuing his employment.  "they are new to me.  i found them
growing on a grave, which bore no tombstone, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 unless
i greatly err, are meant merely to promote the intellectual
satisfaction of all intelligent beings, who will stand waiting,
on that day, to see the dark problem of this life made plain.  a
knowledge of men's hearts will be needful to the completest
solution of that problem.  and, i conceive moreover, that the
hearts holding such miserable secrets as you speak of, will
yield them up, at that last day, not with reluctance, but with a
joy unutterable."

"then why not reveal it here?" asked roger chillingworth,
glancing quietly aside at the minister.  "why should not the
guilty ones sooner avail themselves of this unutterable solace?"

"they mostly do," said the clergyman, griping hard at his
breast, as if afflicted with an importunate throb of pain.
"many, many a poor soul hath given its confidence to me, not
only on the death-bed, but while strong in life, and fair in
reputation.  and ever, after such an outpouring, oh, what a
relief have i witnessed in those sinful brethren! even as in one
who at 
 
 ___________________________
 
ning, nevertheless, a
zeal for god's glory and man's welfare, they shrink from
displaying themselves black and filthy in the view of men;
because, thenceforward, no good can be achieved by them; no evil
of the past be redeemed by better service.  so, to their own
unutterable torment, they go about among their fellow-creatures,
looking pure as new-fallen snow, while their hearts are all
speckled and spotted with iniquity of which they cannot rid
themselves."

"these men deceive themselves," said roger chillingworth, with
somewhat more emphasis than usual, and making a slight gesture
with his forefinger.  "they fear to take up the shame that
rightfully belongs to them.  their love for man, their zeal for
god's service--these holy impulses may or may not coexist in
their hearts with the evil inmates to which their guilt has
unbarred the door, and which must needs propagate a hellish
breed within them.  but, if they seek to glorify god, let them
not lift heavenward their unclean hands!  if they would serve
t
 
 ___________________________
 
d's
glory, or man' welfare--than god's own truth?  trust me, such men
deceive themselves!"

"it may be so," said the young clergyman, indifferently, as
waiving a discussion that he considered irrelevant or
unseasonable.  he had a ready faculty, indeed, of escaping from
any topic that agitated his too sensitive and nervous
temperament.--"but, now, i would ask of my well-skilled
physician, whether, in good sooth, he deems me to have profited
by his kindly care of this weak frame of mine?"

before roger chillingworth could answer, they heard the clear,
wild laughter of a young child's voice, proceeding from the
adjacent burial-ground.  looking instinctively from the open
window--for it was summer-time--the minister beheld hester
prynne and little pearl passing along the footpath that
traversed the enclosure.  pearl looked as beautiful as the day,
but was in one of those moods of perverse merriment which,
whenever they occurred, seemed to remove her entirely out of the
sphere of sympathy or human contact.  s
 
 ___________________________
 
 armorial tombstone of a departed worthy--perhaps of
isaac johnson himself--she began to dance upon it.  in reply to
her mother's command and entreaty that she would behave more
decorously, little pearl paused to gather the prickly burrs from
a tall burdock which grew beside the tomb.  taking a handful of
these, she arranged them along the lines of the scarlet letter
that decorated the maternal bosom, to which the burrs, as their
nature was, tenaciously adhered.  hester did not pluck them off.

roger chillingworth had by this time approached the window and
smiled grimly down.

"there is no law, nor reverence for authority, no regard for
human ordinances or opinions, right or wrong, mixed up with that
child's composition," remarked he, as much to himself as to his
companion.  "i saw her, the other day, bespatter the governor
himself with water at the cattle-trough in spring lane.  what, in
heaven's name, is she?  is the imp altogether evil?  hath she
affections?  hath she any discoverable principle of bei
 
 ___________________________
 
ch you!
but he cannot catch little pearl!"

so she drew her mother away, skipping, dancing, and frisking
fantastically among the hillocks of the dead people, like a
creature that had nothing in common with a bygone and buried
generation, nor owned herself akin to it.  it was as if she had
been made afresh out of new elements, and must perforce be
permitted to live her own life, and be a law unto herself
without her eccentricities being reckoned to her for a crime.

"there goes a woman," resumed roger chillingworth, after a
pause, "who, be her demerits what they may, hath none of that
mystery of hidden sinfulness which you deem so grievous to be
borne.  is hester prynne the less miserable, think you, for that
scarlet letter on her breast?"

"i do verily believe it," answered the clergyman.
"nevertheless, i cannot answer for her.  there was a look of pain
in her face which i would gladly have been spared the sight of.
but still, methinks, it must needs be better for the sufferer to
be free to show his pain
 
 ___________________________
 
f, may, after all, be but a
symptom of some ailment in the spiritual part.  your pardon once
again, good sir, if my speech give the shadow of offence.  you,
sir, of all men whom i have known, are he whose body is the
closest conjoined, and imbued, and identified, so to speak, with
the spirit whereof it is the instrument."

"then i need ask no further," said the clergyman, somewhat
hastily rising from his chair.  "you deal not, i take it, in
medicine for the soul!"

"thus, a sickness," continued roger chillingworth, going on, in
an unaltered tone, without heeding the interruption, but
standing up and confronting the emaciated and white-cheeked
minister, with his low, dark, and misshapen figure,--"a
sickness, a sore place, if we may so call it, in your spirit
hath immediately its appropriate manifestation in your bodily
frame.  would you, therefore, that your physician heal the bodily
evil?  how may this be unless you first lay open to him the wound
or trouble in your soul?"

"no, not to thee!  not to an e
 
 ___________________________
 
arthly physician!" cried mr.
dimmesdale, passionately, and turning his eyes, full and bright,
and with a kind of fierceness, on old roger chillingworth.  "not
to thee!  but, if it be the soul's disease, then do i commit
myself to the one physician of the soul!  he, if it stand with
his good pleasure, can cure, or he can kill.  let him do with me
as, in his justice and wisdom, he shall see good.  but who art
thou, that meddlest in this matter? that dares thrust himself
between the sufferer and his god?"

with a frantic gesture he rushed out of the room.

"it is as well to have made this step," said roger chillingworth
to himself, looking after 
 
 ___________________________
 
use or palliate.  he
marvelled, indeed, at the violence with which he had thrust back
the kind old man, when merely proffering the advice which it was
his duty to bestow, and which the minister himself had expressly
sought.  with these remorseful feelings, he lost no time in
making the amplest apologies, and besought his friend still to
continue the care which, if not successful in restoring him to
health, had, in all probability, been the means of prolonging
his feeble existence to that hour.  roger chillingworth readily
assented, and went on with his medical supervision of the
minister; doing his best for him, in all good faith, but always
quitting the patient's apartment, at the close of the
professional interview, with a mysterious and puzzled smile upon
his lips.  this expression was invisible in mr. dimmesdale's
presence, but grew strongly evident as the physician crossed the
threshold.

"a rare case," he muttered.  "i must needs look deeper into it.
a strange sympathy betwixt soul and body!  were 
 
 ___________________________
 
his chair, with a
large black-letter volume open before him on the table.  it must
have been a work of vast ability in the somniferous school of
literature.  the profound depth of the minister's repose was the
more remarkable, inasmuch as he was one of those persons whose
sleep ordinarily is as light as fitful, and as easily scared
away, as a small bird hopping on a twig.  to such an unwonted
remoteness, however, had his spirit now withdrawn into itself
that he stirred not in his chair when old roger chillingworth,
without any extraordinary precaution, came into the room.  the
physician advanced directly in front of his patient, laid his
hand upon his bosom, and thrust aside the vestment, that
hitherto had always covered it even from the professional eye.

then, indeed, mr. dimmesdale shuddered, and slightly stirred.

after a brief pause, the physician turned away.

but with what a wild look of wonder, joy, and horror!  with what
a ghastly rapture, as it were, too mighty to be expressed only
by the eye a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd features, and therefore bursting forth through
the whole ugliness of his figure, and making itself even
riotously manifest by the extravagant gestures with which he
threw up his arms towards the ceiling, and stamped his foot upon
the floor!  had a man seen old roger chillingworth, at that
moment of his ecstasy, he would have had no need to ask how
satan comports himself when a precious human soul is lost to
heaven, and won into his kingdom.

but what distinguished the physician's ecstasy from satan's was
the trait of wonder in it!



xi.  the interior of a heart

after the incident last described, the intercourse between the
clergyman and the physician, though externally the same, was
really of another character than it had previously been.  the
intellect of roger chill
 
 ___________________________
 
o whom should be confided all the fear, the remorse,
the agony, the ineffectual repentance, the backward rush of
sinful thoughts, expelled in vain!  all that guilty sorrow,
hidden from the world, whose great heart would have pitied and
forgiven, to be revealed to him, the pitiless--to him, the
unforgiving!  all that dark treasure to be lavished on the very
man, to whom nothing else could so adequately pay the debt of
vengeance!

the clergyman's shy and sensitive reserve had balked this
scheme.  roger chillingworth, however, was inclined to be hardly,
if at all, less satisfied with the aspect of affairs, which
providence--using the avenger and his victim for its own
purposes, and, perchance, pardoning, where it seemed most to
punish--had substituted for his black devices.  a revelation, he
could almost say, had been granted to him.  it mattered little
for his object, whether celestial or from what other region.  by
its aid, in all the subsequent relations betwixt him and mr.
dimmesdale, not merely the ext
 
 ___________________________
 
y fashion of his garments, were odious in the clergyman's
sight; a token implicitly to be relied on of a deeper antipathy
in the breast of the latter than he was willing to acknowledge
to himself.  for, as it was impossible to assign a reason for
such distrust and abhorrence, so mr. dimmesdale, conscious that
the poison of one morbid spot was infecting his heart's entire
substance, attributed all his presentiments to no other cause.
he took himself to task for his bad sympathies in reference to
roger chillingworth, disregarded the lesson that he should have
drawn from them, and did his best to root them out.  unable to
accomplish this, he nevertheless, as a matter of principle,
continued his habits of social familiarity with the old man, and
thus gave him constant opportunities for perfecting the purpose
to which--poor forlorn creature that he was, and more wretched
than his victim--the avenger had devoted himself.

while thus suffering under bodily disease, and gnawed and
tortured by some black trouble 
 
 ___________________________
 
t the meteor may
have shown itself at that point, burning duskily through a veil
of cloud, but with no such shape as his guilty imagination gave
it, or, at least, with so little definiteness, that another's
guilt might have seen another symbol in it.

there was a singular circumstance that characterised mr.
dimmesdale's psychological state at this moment.  all the time
that he gazed upward to the zenith, he was, nevertheless,
perfectly aware that little pearl was pointing her finger towards
old roger chillingworth, who stood at no great distance from the
scaffold.  the minister appeared to see him, with the same glance
that discerned the miraculous letter.  to his feature as to all
other objects, the meteoric light imparted a new expression; or
it might well be that the physician was not careful then, as at
all other times, to hide the malevolence with which he looked
upon his victim.  certainly, if the meteor kindled up the sky,
and disclosed the earth, with an awfulness that admonished
hester prynne an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the clergyman of the day of judgment, then
might roger chillingworth have passed with them for the
arch-fiend, standing there with a smile and scowl, to claim his
own.  so vivid was the expression, or so intense the minister's
perception of it, that it seemed still to remain painted on the
darkness after the meteor had vanished, with an effect as if the
street and all things else were at once annihilated.

"who is that man, hester?" gasped mr. dimmesdale, overcome with
terror.  "i shiver at him!  dost thou know the man?  i hate him,
hester!"

she remembered her 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou do nothing for me?  i
have a nameless horror of the man!"

"minister," said little pearl, "i can tell thee who he is!"

"quickly, then, child!" said the minister, bending his ear close
to her lips.  "quickly, and as low as thou canst whisper."

pearl mumbled something into his ear that sounded, indeed, like
human language, but was only such gibberish as children may be
heard amusing themselves with by the hour together.  at all
events, if it involved any secret information in regard to old
roger chillingworth, it was in a tongue unknown to the erudite
clergyman, and did but increase the bewilderment of his mind.
the elvish child then laughed aloud.

"dost thou mock me now?" said the minister.

"thou wast not bold!--thou wast not true!" answered the child.
"thou wouldst not promise to take my hand, and mother's hand,
to-morrow noon-tide!"

"worthy sir," answered the physician, who had now advanced to
the foot of the platform--"pious master dimmesdale! can this be
you?  well, well, indeed!  we men of 
 
 ___________________________
 
study, whose heads are in our
books, have need to be straitly looked after!  we dream in our
waking moments, and walk in our sleep.  come, good sir, and my
dear friend, i pray you let me lead you home!"

"how knewest thou that i was here?" asked the minister,
fearfully.

"verily, and in good faith," answered roger chillingworth, "i
knew nothing of the matter.  i had spent the better part of the
night at the bedside of the worshipful governor winthrop, doing
what my poor skill might to give him ease.  he, going home to a
better world, i, likewise, was on my way homeward, when this
light shone out.  come with me, i beseech you, reverend sir, else
you will be poorly able to do sabbath duty to-morrow.  aha! see
now how they trouble the brain--these books!--these books!  you
should study less, good sir, and take a little p
 
 ___________________________
 
for tampering with the delicate springs of mr.
dimmesdale's nature.  hester could not but ask herself whether
there had not originally been a defect of truth, courage, and
loyalty on her own part, in allowing the minister to be thrown
into a position where so much evil was to be foreboded and nothing
auspicious to be hoped.  her only justification lay in the fact
that she had been able to discern no method of rescuing him from
a blacker ruin than had overwhelmed herself except by
acquiescing in roger chillingworth's scheme of disguise.  under
that impulse she had made her choice, and had chosen, as it now
appeared, the more wretched alternative of the two.  she
determined to redeem her error so far as it might yet be
possible.  strengthened by years of hard and solemn trial, she
felt herself no longer so inadequate to cope with roger
chillingworth as on that night, abased by sin and half-maddened
by the ignominy that was still new, when they had talked
together in the prison-chamber.  she had climbed her
 
 ___________________________
 
ile, but the latter played him false, and
flickered over his visage so derisively that the spectator could
see his blackness all the better for it.  ever and anon, too,
there came a glare of red light out of his eyes, as if the old
man's soul were on fire and kept on smouldering duskily within
his breast, until by some casual puff of passion it was blown
into a momentary flame.  this he repressed as speedily as
possible, and strove to look as if nothing of the kind had
happened.

in a word, old roger chillingworth was a striking evidence of
man's faculty of transforming himself into a devil, if he will
only, for a reasonable space of time, undertake a devil's
office.  this unhappy person had effected such a transformation
by devoting himself for seven years to the constant analysis of
a heart full of torture, and deriving his enjoyment thence, and
adding fuel to those fiery tortures which he analysed and
gloated over.

the scarlet letter burned on hester prynne's bosom.  here was
another ruin, the respon
 
 ___________________________
 
sibility of which came partly home to
her.

"what see you in my face," asked the physician, "that you look
at it so earnestly?"

"something that would make me weep, if there were any tears
bitter enough for it," answered she.  "but let it pass!  it is of
yonder miserable man that i would speak."

"and what of him?" cried roger chillingworth, eagerly, as if he
loved the topic, and were glad of an opportunity to discuss it
with the only person of whom he could make a confidant.  "not to
hide the truth, mistress hester, my thoughts happen just now to
be busy with the gentleman.  so speak freely and i will make
answer."

"when we last spake together," said hester, "now seven years
ago, it was your pleasure to extort a promise of secrecy as
touching the former relation betwixt yourself and me.  as the
life and good fame of yonder man w
 
 ___________________________
 
at i was betraying it in pledging myself to keep
your counsel.  since that day no man is so near to him as you.
you tread behind his every footstep.  you are beside him,
sleeping and waking.  you search his thoughts.  you burrow and
rankle in his heart!  your clutch is on his life, and you cause
him to die daily a living death, and still he knows you not.  in
permitting this i have surely acted a false part by the only man
to whom the power was left me to be true!"

"what choice had you?" asked roger chillingworth.  "my finger,
pointed at this man, would have hurled him from his pulpit into
a dungeon, thence, peradventure, to the gallows!"

"it had been better so!" said hester prynne.

"what evil have i done the man?" asked roger chillingworth
again.  "i tell thee, hester prynne, the richest fee that ever
physician earned from monarch could not have bought such care as
i have wasted on this miserable priest!  but for my aid his life
would have burned away in torments within the first two years
after the 
 
 ___________________________
 
perpetration of his crime and thine.  for, hester, his
spirit lacked the strength that could have borne up, as thine
has, beneath a burden like thy scarlet letter.  oh, i could
reveal a goodly secret!  but enough.  what art can do, i have
exhausted on him.  that he now breathes and creeps about on earth
is owing all to me!"

"better he had died at once!" said hester prynne.

"yea, woman, thou sayest truly!" cried old roger chillingworth,
letting the lurid fire of his heart blaze out before her eyes.
"better had he died at once!  never did mortal suffer what this
man has suffered.  and all, all, in the sight of his worst enemy!
he has been conscious of me.  he has felt an influence dwelling
always upon him like a curse.  he knew, by some spiritual
sense--for the creator never made another being so sensitive as
this--he knew that no friendly hand was pulling at his
heartstrings, and that an eye was looking curiously into him,
wh
 
 ___________________________
 
life, he is in my hands.
nor do i--whom the scarlet letter has disciplined to truth,
though it be the truth of red-hot iron entering into the
soul--nor do i perceive such advantage in his living any longer
a life of ghastly emptiness, that i shall stoop to implore thy
mercy.  do with him as thou wilt!  there is no good for him, no
good for me, no good for thee.  there is no good for little
pearl.  there is no path to guide us out of this dismal maze."

"woman, i could well-nigh pity thee," said roger chillingworth,
unable to restrain a thrill of admiration too, for there was a
quality almost majestic in the despair which she expressed.
"thou hadst great elements.  peradventure, hadst thou met earlier
with a better love than mine, this evil had not been.  i pity
thee, for the good that has been wasted in thy nature."

"and i thee," answered hester prynne, "for the hatred that has
transformed a wise and just man to a fiend!  wilt thou yet purge
it out of thee, and be once more human?  if not for his sake,

 
 ___________________________
 
  by thy
first step awry, thou didst plant the germ of evil; but since
that moment it has all been a dark necessity.  ye that have
wronged me are not sinful, save in a kind of typical illusion;
neither am i fiend-like, who have snatched a fiend's office from
his hands.  it is our fate.  let the black flower blossom as it
may!  now, go thy ways, and deal as thou wilt with yonder man."

he waved his hand, and betook himself again to his employment of
gathering herbs.




xv.  hester and pearl

so roger chillingworth--a deformed old figure with a face that
haunted men's memories longer than they liked--took leave of
hester prynne, and went stooping away along the earth.  he
gathered here and there a herb, or grubbed up a root and put it
into the basket on his arm.  his gray beard almost touched the
ground as he crept onward.  hester gazed after him a little
while, looking with a half fantastic curiosity to see whether
the tender grass of early spring would not be blighted beneath
him and show the wavering t
 
 ___________________________
 
appy, but now, as viewed through the dismal
medium of her subsequent life, they classed themselves among her
ugliest remembrances.  she marvelled how such scenes could have
been!  she marvelled how she could ever have been wrought upon to
marry him!  she deemed it her crime most to be repented of, that
she had ever endured and reciprocated the lukewarm grasp of his
hand, and had suffered the smile of her lips and eyes to mingle
and melt into his own.  and it seemed a fouler offence committed
by roger chillingworth than any which had since been done him,
that, in the time when her heart knew no better, he had
persuaded her to fancy herself happy by his side.

"yes, i hate him!" repeated hester more bitterly than before.
"he betrayed me!  he has done me worse wrong than i did him!"

let men tremble to win the hand of woman, unless they win along
with it the utmost passion of her heart!  else it may be their
miserable fortune, as it was roger chillingworth's, when some
mightier touch than their own may have
 
 ___________________________
 
 awakened all her
sensibilities, to be reproached even for the calm content, the
marble image of happiness, which they will have imposed upon her
as the warm reality.  but hester ought long ago to have done with
this injustice.  what did it betoken?  had seven long years, under
the torture of the scarlet letter, inflicted so much of misery
and wrought out no repentance?

the emotion of that brief space, while she stood gazing after
the crooked figure of old roger chillingworth, threw a dark
light on hester's state of mind, revealing much that she might
not otherwise have acknowledged to herself.

he being gone, she summoned back her child.

"pearl!  little pearl!  where are you?"

pearl, whose activity of spirit never flagged, had been at no
loss for amusement while her mother talked with the old gatherer
of herbs.  at first, as already told, she had flirted fancifully
with her own image in a pool of water, beckoning the phantom
forth, and--as it declined to venture-
 
 ___________________________
 
e of the meditative walks
which she knew him to be in the habit of taking along the shores
of the peninsula, or on the wooded hills of the neighbouring
country.  there would have been no scandal, indeed, nor peril to
the holy whiteness of the clergyman's good fame, had she visited
him in his own study, where many a penitent, ere now, had
confessed sins of perhaps as deep a dye as the one betokened by
the scarlet letter.  but, partly that she dreaded the secret or
undisguised interference of old roger chillingworth, and partly
that her conscious heart imparted suspicion where none could
have been felt, and partly that both the minister and she would
need the whole wide world to breathe in, while they talked
together--for all these reasons hester never thought of meeting
him in any narrower privacy than beneath the open sky.

at last, while attending a sick chamber, whither the rev.  mr.
dimmesdale had been summoned to make a prayer, she learnt that
he had gone, the day before, to visit the apostle eliot, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e tendency of which was, not
to cure by wholesome pain, but to disorganize and corrupt his
spiritual being.  its result, on earth, could hardly fail to be
insanity, and hereafter, that eternal alienation from the good
and true, of which madness is perhaps the earthly type.

such was the ruin to which she had brought the man, once--nay,
why should we not speak it?--still so passionately loved!  hester
felt that the sacrifice of the clergyman's good name, and death
itself, as she had already told roger chillingworth, would have
been infinitely preferable to the alternative which she had
taken upon herself to choose.  and now, rather than have had this
grievous wrong to confess, she would gladly have laid down on
the forest leaves, and died there, at arthur dimmesdale's feet.

"oh, arthur!" cried she, "forgive me!  in all things else, i
have striven to be true!  truth was the one virtue which i might
have held fast, and did hold fast, through all extremity; save
when thy good--thy life--thy fame--were put i
 
 ___________________________
 
gain the burden of her ignominy and the minister the hollow
mockery of his good name!  so they lingered an instant longer.  no
golden light had ever been so precious as the gloom of this dark
forest.  here seen only by his eyes, the scarlet letter need not
burn into the bosom of the fallen woman!  here seen only by her
eyes, arthur dimmesdale, false to god and man, might be, for one
moment true!

he started at a thought that suddenly occurred to him.

"hester!" cried he, "here is a new horror!  roger chillingworth
knows your purpose to reveal his true character.  will he
continue, then, to keep our secret?  what will now be the course
of his revenge?"

"there is a strange secrecy in his nature," replied hester,
thoughtfully; "and it has grown upon him by the hidden practices
of his revenge.  i deem it not likely that he will betray the
secret.  he will doubtless seek other means of satiating his dark
passion."

"and i!--how am i to live longer, breathing the same air with
this deadly enemy?" exclaimed ar
 
 ___________________________
 
 forest-track?  backward to the settlement, thou sayest!
yes; but, onward, too!  deeper it goes, and deeper into the
wilderness, less plainly to be seen at every step; until some
few miles hence the yellow leaves will show no vestige of the
white man's tread.  there thou art free!  so brief a journey would
bring thee from a world where thou hast been most wretched, to
one where thou mayest still be happy!  is there not shade enough
in all this boundless forest to hide thy heart from the gaze of
roger chillingworth?"

"yes, hester; but only under the fallen leaves!" replied the
minister, with a sad smile.

"then there is the broad pathway of the sea!" continued hester.
"it brought thee hither.  if thou so choose, it will bear thee
back again.  in our native land, whether in some remote rural
village, or in vast london--or, surely, in germany, in france,
in pleasant italy--thou wouldst be beyond his power and
knowledge!  and what hast thou to do with all these iron men, and
their opinions?  they have kept 
 
 ___________________________
 
art,
and eye this former self with scornful pitying, but half-envious
curiosity.  that self was gone.  another man had returned out of
the forest--a wiser one--with a knowledge of hidden mysteries
which the simplicity of the former never could have reached.  a
bitter kind of knowledge that!

while occupied with these reflections, a knock came at the door
of the study, and the minister said, "come in!"--not wholly
devoid of an idea that he might behold an evil spirit.  and so he
did!  it was old roger chillingworth that entered.  the minister
stood white and speechless, with one hand on the hebrew
scriptures, and the other spread upon his breast.

"welcome home, reverend sir," said the physician "and how found
you that godly man, the apostle eliot?  but methinks, dear sir,
you look pale, as if the travel through the wilderness had been
too sore for you.  will not my aid be requisite to put you in
heart and strength to preach your election sermon?"

"nay, i think not so," rejoined the reverend mr. dimmesda
 
 ___________________________
 
le.  "my
journey, and the sight of the holy apostle yonder, and the free
air which i have breathed have done me good, after so long
confinement in my study.  i think to need no more of your drugs,
my kind physician, good though they be, and administered by a
friendly hand."

all this time roger chillingworth was looking at the minister
with the grave and intent regard of a physician towards his
patient.  but, in spite of this outward show, the latter was
almost convinced of the old man's knowledge, or, at least, his
confident suspicion, with respect to his own interview with
hester prynne.  the physician knew then that in the minister's
regard he was no longer a trusted friend, but his bitterest
enemy.  so much being known, it would appear natural that a part
of it should be expressed.  it is singu
 
 ___________________________
 
lar, however, how long a
time often passes before words embody things; and with what
security two persons, who choose to avoid a certain subject, may
approach its very verge, and retire without disturbing it.  thus
the minister felt no apprehension that roger chillingworth would
touch, in express words, upon the real position which they
sustained towards one another.  yet did the physician, in his
dark way, creep frightfully near the secret.

"were it not better," said he, "that you use my poor skill
tonight?  verily, dear sir, we must take pains to make you strong
and vigorous for this occasion of the election discourse.  the
people look for great things from you, apprehending that another
year may come about and find their pastor gone."

"yes, to another world,
 
 ___________________________
 
linquish his calling and become at
once if he chose, a man of probity and piety on land; nor, even
in the full career of his reckless life, was he regarded as a
personage with whom it was disreputable to traffic or casually
associate.  thus the puritan elders in their black cloaks,
starched bands, and steeple-crowned hats, smiled not
unbenignantly at the clamour and rude deportment of these jolly
seafaring men; and it excited neither surprise nor animadversion
when so reputable a citizen as old roger chillingworth, the
physician, was seen to enter the market-place in close and
familiar talk with the commander of the questionable vessel.

the latter was by far the most showy and gallant figure, so far
as apparel went, anywhere to be seen among the multitude.  he
wore a profusion of ribbons on his garment, and gold lace on his
hat, which was also encircled by a gold chain, and surmounted
with a feather.  there was a sword at his side and a sword-cut on
his forehead, which, by the arrangement of his hair, h
 
 ___________________________
 
e--chillingworth he calls himself--is minded to try my
cabin-fare with you?  ay, ay, you must have known it; for he
tells me he is of your party, and a close friend to the
gentleman you spoke of--he that is in peril from these sour old
puritan rulers."

"they know each other well, indeed," replied hester, with a mien
of calmness, though in the utmost consternation.  "they have long
dwelt together."

nothing further passed between the mariner and hester prynne.
but at that instant she beheld old roger chillingworth himself,
standing in the remotest corner of the market-place and smiling
on her; a smile which--across the wide and bustling square, and
through all the talk and laughter, and various thoughts, moods,
and interests of the crowd--conveyed secret and fearful meaning.



xxii.  the procession

before hester prynne could call together her thoughts, and
consider what was practicable to be done in this new and
startling aspect of affairs, the sound of military music was
heard approaching along a cont
 
 ___________________________
 
etched forth his arms.

"hester," said he, "come hither!  come, my little pearl!"

it was a ghastly look with which he regarded them; but there was
something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it.  the
child, with the bird-like motion, which was one of her
characteristics, flew to him, and clasped her arms about his
knees.  hester prynne--slowly, as if impelled by inevitable fate,
and against her strongest will--likewise drew near, but paused
before she reached him.  at this instant old roger chillingworth
thrust himself through the crowd--or, perhaps, so dark,
disturbed, and evil was his look, he rose up out of some nether
region--to snatch back his victim from what he sought to do!  be
that as it might, the old man rushed forward, and caught the
minister by the arm.

"madman, hold!  what is your purpose?" whispered he.  "wave back
that woman!  cast off this child!  all shall be well!  do not
blacken your fame, and perish in dishonour!  i can yet save you!
would you bring infamy on your sacred p
 
 ___________________________
 
 hester prynne--imprinted in the flesh.  as regarded
its origin there were various explanations, all of which must
necessarily have been conjectural.  some affirmed that the
reverend mr. dimmesdale, on the very day when hester prynne
first wore her ignominious badge, had begun a course of
penance--which he afterwards, in so many futile methods,
followed out--by inflicting a hideous torture on himself.  others
contended that the stigma had not been produced until a long
time subsequent, when old roger chillingworth, being a potent
necromancer, had caused it to appear, through the agency of
magic and poisonous drugs.  others, again and those best able to
appreciate the minister's peculiar sensibility, and the
wonderful operation of his spirit upon the body--whispered their
belief, that the awful symbol was the effect of the ever-active
tooth of remorse, gnawing from the inmost heart outwardly, and
at last manifesting heaven's dreadful judgment by the visible
presence of the letter.  the reader may choose a
 
 ___________________________
 
made the very principle of his
life to consist in the pursuit and systematic exercise of
revenge; and when, by its completest triumph consummation that
evil principle was left with no further material to support
it--when, in short, there was no more devil's work on earth for
him to do, it only remained for the unhumanised mortal to betake
himself whither his master would find him tasks enough, and pay
him his wages duly.  but, to all these shadowy beings, so long
our near acquaintances--as well roger chillingworth as his
companions we would fain be merciful.  it is a curious subject of
observation and inquiry, whether hatred and love be not the same
thing at bottom.  each, in its utmost development, supposes a
high degree of intimacy and heart-knowledge; each renders one
individual dependent for the food of his affections and
spiritual fife upon another: each leaves the passionate lover,
or the no less passionate hater, forlorn and desolate by the
withdrawal of his subject.  philosophically considered,
t
 
 ___________________________
 
herefore, the two passions seem essentially the same, except
that one happens to be seen in a celestial radiance, and the
other in a dusky and lurid glow.  in the spiritual world, the old
physician and the minister--mutual victims as they have
been--may, unawares, have found their earthly stock of hatred
and antipathy transmuted into golden love.

leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business to
communicate to the reader.  at old roger chillingworth's decease,
(which took place within the year), and by his last will and
testament, of which governor bellingham and the reverend mr.
wilson were executors, he bequeathed a very considerable amount
of property, both here and in england to little pearl, the
daughter of hester prynne.

so pearl--the elf child--the demon offspring, as some people up
to that epoch persisted in considering her--became the richest
heiress of her day in the new world.  not improbably this
circumstance wrought a very ma