 it not been invested with a
certain sad fierceness and hungry eagerness.  the front man turned his
head until his eyes met the eyes of the man behind.  and then, across the
narrow oblong box, each nodded to the other.

a second cry arose, piercing the silence with needle-like shrillness.
both men located the sound.  it was to the rear, somewhere in the snow
expanse they had just traversed.  a third and answering cry arose, also
to the rear and to the left of the second cry.

"they're after us, bill," said the man at the front.

his voice sounded hoarse and unreal, and he had spoken with apparent
effort.

"meat is scarce," answered his comrade.  "i ain't seen a rabbit sign for
days."

thereafter they spoke no more, though their ears were keen for the
hunting-cries that continued to rise behind them.

at the fall of darkness they swung the dogs into a cluster of spruce
trees on the edge of the waterway and made a camp.  the coffin, at the
side of the fire, served for seat and table.  the wo
 
 ___________________________
 
lf-dogs, clustered on
the far side of the fire, snarled and bickered among themselves, but
evinced no inclination to stray off into the darkness.

"seems to me, henry, they're stayin' remarkable close to camp," bill
commented.

henry, squatting over the fire and settling the pot of coffee with a
piece of ice, nodded.  nor did he speak till he had taken his seat on the
coffin and begun to eat.

"they know where their hides is safe," he said.  "they'd sooner eat grub
than be grub.  they're pretty wise, them dogs."

bill shook his head.  "oh, i don't know."

his comrade looked at him curiously.  "first time i ever heard you say
anything about their not bein' wise."

"henry," said the other, munching with deli
 
 ___________________________
 
beration the beans he was
eating, "did you happen to notice the way them dogs kicked up when i was
a-feedin' 'em?"

"they did cut up more'n usual," henry acknowledged.

"how many dogs 've we got, henry?"

"six."

"well, henry . . . " bill stopped for a moment, in order that his words
might gain greater significance.  "as i was sayin', henry, we've got six
dogs.  i took six fish out of the bag.  i gave one fish to each dog, an',
henry, i was one fish short."

"you counted wrong."

"we've got six dogs," the other reiterated dispassionately.  "i took out
six fish.  one ear didn't get no fish.  i came back to the bag afterward
an' got 'm his fish."

"we've only got six dogs," henry said.

"henry," bill went on.  "i won't say they wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s all dogs, but there was
seven of 'm that got fish."

henry stopped eating to glance across the fire and count the dogs.

"there's only six now," he said.

"i saw the other one run off across the snow," bill announced with cool
positiveness.  "i saw seven."

henry looked at him commiseratingly, and said, "i'll be almighty glad
when this trip's over."

"what d'ye mean by that?" bill demanded.

"i mean that this load of ourn is gettin' on your nerves, an' that you're
beginnin' to see things."

"i thought of that," bill answered gravely.  "an' so, when i saw it run
off across the snow, i looked in the snow an' saw its tracks.  then i
counted the dogs an' there was still six of 'em.  the tracks is there in
the snow now.  d'ye want to look at 'em?  i'll show 'em to you."

henry did not reply, but munched on in silence, until, the meal finished,
he topped it with a final cup of
 
 ___________________________
 
 coffee.  he wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand and said:

"then you're thinkin' as it was--"

a long wailing cry, fiercely sad, from somewhere in the darkness, had
interrupted him.  he stopped to listen to it, then he finished his
sentence with a wave of his hand toward the sound of the cry, "--one of
them?"

bill nodded.  "i'd a blame sight sooner think that than anything else.
you noticed yourself the row the dogs made."

cry after cry, and answering cries, were turning the silence into a
bedlam.  from every side the cries arose, and the dogs betrayed their
fear by huddling together and so close to the fire that their hair was
scorched by the heat.  bill threw on more wood, before lighting his pipe.

"i'm thinking you're down in the mouth some," henry said.

"henry . . . "  he sucked meditatively at hi
 
 ___________________________
 
dogs off of us."

"but we ain't got people an' money an' all the rest, like him," henry
rejoined.  "long-distance funerals is somethin' you an' me can't exactly
afford."

"what gets me, henry, is what a chap like this, that's a lord or
something in his own country, and that's never had to bother about grub
nor blankets; why he comes a-buttin' round the godforsaken ends of the
earth--that's what i can't exactly see."

"he might have lived to a ripe old age if he'd stayed at home," henry
agreed.

bill opened his mouth to speak, but changed his mind.  instead, he
pointed towards the wall of darkness that pressed about them from every
side.  there was no suggestion of form in the utter blackness; only could
be seen a pair of eyes gleaming like live coals.  henry indicated with
his head a second pair, and a third.  a circle of the gleaming eyes had
drawn about their camp.  now and again a pair of eyes moved, or
disappeared to appear again a moment later.

the unrest of the dogs had been increas
 
 ___________________________
 
 stampeded, in a
surge of sudden fear, to the near side of the fire, cringing and crawling
about the legs of the men.  in the scramble one of the dogs had been
overturned on the edge of the fire, and it had yelped with pain and
fright as the smell of its singed coat possessed the air.  the commotion
caused the circle of eyes to shift restlessly for a moment and even to
withdraw a bit, but it settled down again as the dogs became quiet.

"henry, it's a blame misfortune to be out of ammunition."

bill had finished his pipe and was helping his companion to spread the
bed of fur and blanket upon the spruce boughs which he had laid over the
snow before supper.  henry grunted, and began unlacing his moccasins.

"how many cartridges did you say you had left?" he asked.

"three," came the answer.  "an' i wisht 'twas three hundred.  then i'd
show 'em what for, damn 'em!"

he shook his fist angrily at the gleaming eyes, and began securely to
prop his moccasins before the fire.

"an' i wisht this col
 
 ___________________________
 
his trip, henry.  i
don't like the looks of it.  i don't feel right, somehow.  an' while i'm
wishin', i wisht the trip was over an' done with, an' you an' me
a-sittin' by the fire in fort mcgurry just about now an' playing
cribbage--that's what i wisht."

henry grunted and crawled into bed.  as he dozed off he was aroused by
his comrade's voice.

"say, henry, that other one that come in an' got a fish--why didn't the
dogs pitch into it?  that's what's botherin' me."

"you're botherin' too much, bill," came the sleepy response.  "you was
never like this before.  you jes' shut up now, an' go to sleep, an'
you'll be all hunkydory in the mornin'.  your stomach's sour, that's
what's botherin' you."

the men slept, breathing heavily, side by side, under the one covering.
the fire died down, and the gleaming eyes drew closer the circle they had
flung about the camp.  the dogs clustered together in fear, now and again
snarling menacingly as a pair of eyes drew close.  once their uproar
became so l
 
 ___________________________
 
oud that bill woke up.  he got out of bed carefully, so as not
to disturb the sleep of his comrade, and threw more wood on the fire.  as
it began to flame up, the circle of eyes drew farther back.  he glanced
casually at the huddling dogs.  he rubbed his eyes and looked at them
more sharply.  then he crawled back into the blankets.

"henry," he said.  "oh, henry."

henry groaned as he passed from sleep to waking, and demanded, "what's
wrong now?"

"nothin'," came the answer; "only there's seven of 'em again.
 
 ___________________________
 
  i just
counted."

henry acknowledged receipt of the information with a grunt that slid into
a snore as he drifted back into sleep.

in the morning it was henry who awoke first and routed his companion out
of bed.  daylight was yet three hours away, though it was already six
o'clock; and in the darkness henry went about preparing breakfast, while
bill rolled the blankets and made the sled ready for lashing.

"say, henry," he asked suddenly, "how many dogs did you say we had?"

"six."

"wrong," bill proclaimed triumphantly.

"seven again?" henry queried.

"no, five; one's gone."

"the hell!"  henry cried in wrath, leaving the cooking to come and count
the dogs.

"you're right, bill," he concluded.  "fatty's gone."

"an' he went like greased lightnin' once he got started.  couldn't 've
seen 'm for smoke."

"no chance at all," henry concluded.  "they jes' swallowed 'm alive.  i
bet he was yelpin' as he went down their throats, damn 'em!"

"he always was a fool dog," said bill.

"but no fool 
 
 ___________________________
 
dog ought to be fool enough to go off an' commit suicide
that way."  he looked over the remainder of the team with a speculative
eye that summed up instantly the salient traits of each animal.  "i bet
none of the others would do it."

"couldn't drive 'em away from the fire with a club," bill agreed.  "i
always did think there was somethin' wrong with fatty anyway."

and this was the epitaph of a dead dog on the northland trail--less scant
than the epitaph of many another dog, of many a man.



chapter ii--the she-wolf


breakfast eaten and the slim camp-outfit lashed to the sled, the men
turned their backs on the cheery fire and launched out into the darkness.
at once began to rise the cries that were fiercely sad--cries that called
through the darkness and cold to one another and 
 
 ___________________________
 
hern world.  but
the rose-colour swiftly faded.  the grey light of day that remained
lasted until three o'clock, when it, too, faded, and the pall of the
arctic night descended upon the lone and silent land.

as darkness came on, the hunting-cries to right and left and rear drew
closer--so close that more than once they sent surges of fear through the
toiling dogs, throwing them into short-lived panics.

at the conclusion of one such panic, when he and henry had got the dogs
back in the traces, bill said:

"i wisht they'd strike game somewheres, an' go away an' leave us alone."

"they do get on the nerves horrible,"  henry sympathised.

they spoke no more until camp was made.

henry was bending over and adding ice to the babbling pot of beans when
he was startled by the sound of a blow, an exclamation from bill, and a
sharp snarling cry of pain from among the dogs.  he straightened up in
time to see a dim form disappearing across the snow into the shelter of
the dark.  then he saw bill, st
 
 ___________________________
 
hat'd it look like?" henry asked.

"couldn't see.  but it had four legs an' a mouth an' hair an' looked like
any dog."

"must be a tame wolf, i reckon."

"it's damned tame, whatever it is, comin' in here at feedin' time an'
gettin' its whack of fish."

that night, when supper was finished and they sat on the oblong box and
pulled at their pipes, the circle of gleaming eyes drew in even closer
than before.

"i wisht they'd spring up a bunch of moose or something, an' go away an'
leave us alone," bill said.

henry grunted with an intonation that was not all sympathy, and for a
quarter of an hour they sat on in silence, henry staring at the fire, and
bill at the circle of eyes that burned in the darkness just beyond the
firelight.

"i wisht we was pullin' into mcgurry right now," he began again.

"shut up your wishin' and your croakin'," henry burst out angrily.  "your
stomach's sour.  that's what's ailin' you.  swallow a spoonful of sody,
an' you'll sweeten up wonderful an' be more pleasant 
 
 ___________________________
 
company."

in the morning henry was aroused by fervid blasphemy that proceeded from
the mouth of bill.  henry propped himself up on an elbow and looked to
see his comrade standing among the dogs beside the replenished fire, his
arms raised in objurgation, his face distorted with passion.

"hello!" henry called.  "what's up now?"

"frog's gone," came the answer.

"no."

"i tell you yes."

henry leaped out of the blankets and to the dogs.  he counted them with
care, and then joined his partner in cursing the power of the wild that
had robbed them of another dog.

"frog was the strongest dog of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e bunch," bill pronounced finally.

"an' he was no fool dog neither," henry added.

and so was recorded the second epitaph in two days.

a gloomy breakfast was eaten, and the four remaining dogs were harnessed
to the sled.  the day was a repetition of the days that had gone before.
the men toiled without speech across the face of the frozen world.  the
silence was unbroken save by the cries of their pursuers, that, unseen,
hung upon their rear.  with the coming of night in the mid-afternoon, the
cries sounded
 
 ___________________________
 
 closer as the pursuers drew in according to their custom;
and the dogs grew excited and frightened, and were guilty of panics that
tangled the traces and further depressed the two men.

"there, that'll fix you fool critters," bill said with satisfaction that
night, standing erect at completion of his task.

henry left the cooking to come and see.  not only had his partner tied
the dogs up, but he had tied them, after the indian fashion, with sticks.
about the neck of each dog he had fastened a leather thong.  to this, and
so close to the neck that the dog could not get his teeth to it, he had
tied a stout stick four or five feet in length.  the other end of the
stick, in turn, was made fast to a stake in the ground by me
 
 ___________________________
 
ans of a
leather thong.  the dog was unable to gnaw through the leather at his own
end of the stick.  the stick prevented him from getting at the leather
that fastened the other end.

henry nodded his head approvingly.

"it's the only contraption that'll ever hold one ear," he said.  "he can
gnaw through leather as clean as a knife an' jes' about half as quick.
they all'll be here in the mornin' hunkydory."

"you jes' bet they will," bill affirmed.  "if one of em' turns up
missin', i'll go without my coffee."

"they jes' know we ain't loaded to kill," henry remarked at bed-time,
indicating the gleaming circle that hemmed them in.  "if we could put a
couple of shots into 'em, they'd be more respectful.  they come closer
every night.  get the firelight out of your eyes an' look hard--there!
did you see that one?"

for some time the two men amused themselves with watching the movement of
vague forms on the edge of the firelight.  b
 
 ___________________________
 
y looking closely and
steadily at where a pair of eyes burned in the darkness, the form of the
animal would slowly take shape.  they could even see these forms move at
times.

a sound among the dogs attracted the men's attention.  one ear was
uttering quick, eager whines, lunging at the length of his stick toward
the darkness, and desisting now and again in order to make frantic
attacks on the stick with his teeth.

"look at that, bill," henry whispered.

full into the firelight, with a stealthy, sidelong movement, glided a
doglike animal.  it moved with commingled mistrust and daring, cautiously
observing the men, its attention fixed on the dogs.  one ear strained the
full length of the stick toward the intruder and whined with eagerness.

"that fool one ear don't seem scairt much," bill said in a low tone.

"it's a she-wolf," henry whispered back, "an' that accounts for fatty an'
frog.  she's the decoy for the pack.  she dr
 
 ___________________________
 
aws out the dog an' then all
the rest pitches in an' eats 'm up."

the fire crackled.  a log fell apart with a loud spluttering noise.  at
the sound of it the strange animal leaped back into the darkness.

"henry, i'm a-thinkin'," bill announced.

"thinkin' what?"

"i'm a-thinkin' that was the one i lambasted with the club."

"ain't the slightest doubt in the world," was henry's response.

"an' right here i want to remark," bill went on, "that that animal's
familyarity with campfires is suspicious an' immoral."

"it knows for certain more'n a self-respectin' wolf ought to know," henry
agreed.  "a wolf that knows enough to come in with the dogs at feedin'
time has had experiences."

"ol' villan had a dog once that run away with the wolves," bill cogitates
aloud.  "i ought to know.  i shot it out of the pack in a moose pasture
over 'on little stick.  an' ol' villan cried like a baby.  hadn't seen it
for three years, he s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid.  ben with the wolves all that time."

"i reckon you've called the turn, bill.  that wolf's a dog, an' it's
eaten fish many's the time from the hand of man."

"an if i get a chance at it, that wolf that's a dog'll be jes' meat,"
bill declared.  "we can't afford to lose no more animals."

"but you've only got three cartridges," henry objected.

"i'll wait for a dead sure shot," was the reply.

in the morning henry renewed the fire and cooked breakfast to the
accompaniment of his partner's snoring.

"you was sleepin' jes' too comfortable for anything," henry told him, as
he routed him out for breakfast.  "i hadn't the heart to rouse you."

bill began to eat sleepily.  he noticed that his cup was empty and
started to reach for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the pot.  but the pot was beyond arm's length and
beside henry.

"say, henry," he chided gently, "ain't you forgot somethin'?"

henry looked about with great carefulness and shook his head.  bill held
up the empty cup.

"you don't get no coffee," henry announced.

"ain't run out?" bill asked anxiously.

"nope."

"ain't thinkin' it'll hurt my digestion?"

"nope."

a flush of angry blood pervaded bill's face.

"then it's jes' warm an' anxious i am to be hearin' you explain
yourself," he said.

"spanker's gone," henry answered.

without haste, with the air of one resigned to misfortune bill turned his
head, and from where he sat counted the dogs.

"how'd it happen?" he asked apathetically.

henry shrugged his shoulders.  "don't know.  unless one ear gnawed 'm
loose.  he couldn't a-done it himself, that's sure."

"the darned cuss."  bill spoke gravely and slowly, with no hint of the
anger that
 
 ___________________________
 
 was raging within.  "jes' because he couldn't chew himself
loose, he chews spanker loose."

"well, spanker's troubles is over anyway; i guess he's digested by this
time an' cavortin' over the landscape in the bellies of twenty different
wolves," was henry's epitaph on this, the latest lost dog.  "have some
coffee, bill."

but bill shook his head.

"go on," henry pleaded, elevating the pot.

bill shoved his cup aside.  "i'll be ding-dong-danged if i do.  i said i
wouldn't if ary dog turned up missin', an' i won't."

"it's darn good coffee," henry said enticingly.

but bill was stubborn, and he ate a dry breakfast washed down with
mumbled curses at one ear for the trick he had played.

"i'll tie 'em up out of reach of each other to-night," bill said, as they
took the trail.

they had travelled little more than a hundred yards, when henry, who was
in front, bent down and picked up somethi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng with which his snowshoe had
collided.  it was dark, and he could not see it, but he recognised it by
the touch.  he flung it back, so that it struck the sled and bounced
along until it fetched up on bill's snowshoes.

"mebbe you'll need that in your business," henry said.

bill uttered an exclamation.  it was all that was left of spanker--the
stick with which he had been tied.

"they ate 'm hide an' all," bill announced.  "the stick's as clean as a
whistle.  they've ate the leather offen both ends.  they're damn hungry,
henry, an' they'll have you an' me guessin' before this trip's over."

henry laughed defiantly.  "i ain't been trailed this way by wolves
before, but i've gone through a whole lot worse an' kept my health.  takes
more'n a handful of them pesky critters to do for yours truly, bill, my
son."

"i don't know, i don't know," bill muttered ominously.

"well, you'll know all right when we pu
 
 ___________________________
 
ll into mcgurry."

"i ain't feelin' special enthusiastic," bill persisted.

"you're off colour, that's what's the matter with you," henry dogmatised.
"what you need is quinine, an' i'm goin' to dose you up stiff as soon as
we make mcgurry."

bill grunted his disagreement with the diagnosis, and lapsed into
silence.  the day was like all the days.  light came at nine o'clock.  at
twelve o'clock the southern horizon was warmed by the unseen sun; and
then began the cold grey of afternoon that would merge, three hours
later, into night.

it was just after the sun's futile effort to appear, that bill slipped
the rifle from under the sled-lashings and said:

"you keep right on, henry, i'm goin' to see what i can see."

"you'd better stick by 
 
 ___________________________
 
the sled," his partner protested.  "you've only
got three cartridges, an' there's no tellin' what might happen."

"who's croaking now?" bill demanded triumphantly.

henry made no reply, and plodded on alone, though often he cast anxious
glances back into the grey solitude where his partner had disappeared.  an
hour later, taking advantage of the cut-offs around which the sled had to
go, bill arrived.

"they're scattered an' rangin' along wide," he said: "keeping up with us
an' lookin' for game at the same time.  you see, they're sure of us, only
they know they've got to wait to get us.  in the meantime they're willin'
to pick up anything eatable that comes handy."

"you mean they _think_ they're sure of us," henry objected pointedly.

but bill ignored him.  "i seen some of them.  they're pretty thin.  they
ain't had a bite in weeks i reckon, outside of fatty an' frog an'
spanker; a
 
 ___________________________
 
n' there's so many of 'em that that didn't go far.  they're
remarkable thin.  their ribs is like wash-boards, an' their stomachs is
right up against their backbones.  they're pretty desperate, i can tell
you.  they'll be goin' mad, yet, an' then watch out."

a few minutes later, henry, who was now travelling behind the sled,
emitted a low, warning whistle.  bill turned and looked, then quietly
stopped the dogs.  to the rear, from around the last bend and plainly
into view, on the very trail they had just covered, trotted a furry,
slinking form.  its nose was to the trail, and it trotted with a
peculiar, sliding, effortless gait.  when they halted, it halted,
throwing up its head and regarding them steadily with nostrils that
twitched as it caught and studied the scent of them.

"it's the she-wolf," bill answered.

the dogs had lain down in the snow, an
 
 ___________________________
 

strangely wistful way, after the manner of a dog; but in its wistfulness
there was none of the dog affection.  it was a wistfulness bred of
hunger, as cruel as its own fangs, as merciless as the frost itself.

it was large for a wolf, its gaunt frame advertising the lines of an
animal that was among the largest of its kind.

"stands pretty close to two feet an' a half at the shoulders," henry
commented.  "an' i'll bet it ain't far from five feet long."

"kind of strange colour for a wolf," was bill's criticism.  "i never seen
a red wolf before.  looks almost cinnamon to me."

the animal was certainly not cinnamon-coloured.  its coat was the true
wolf-coat.  the dominant colour was grey, and yet there was to it a faint
reddish hue--a hue that was baffling, that appeared and disappeared, that
was more like an illusion of the vision, now grey, distinctly grey, and
again giving hints and glints of a vague redness of colour not
classifiable in terms of ordinary experience.

"looks for all the 
 
 ___________________________
 
world like a big husky sled-dog," bill said.  "i
wouldn't be s'prised to see it wag its tail."

"hello, you husky!" he called.  "come here, you whatever-your-name-is."

"ain't a bit scairt of you," henry laughed.

bill waved his hand at it threateningly and shouted loudly; but the
animal betrayed no fear.  the only change in it that they could notice
was an accession of alertness.  it still regarded them with the merciless
wistfulness of hunger.  they were meat, and it was hungry; and it would
like to go in and eat them if it dared.

"look here, henry," bill said, unconsciously lowering his voice to a
whisper because of what he imitated.  "we've got three cartridges.  but
it's a dead shot.  couldn't miss it. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it's got away with three of our
dogs, an' we oughter put a stop to it.  what d'ye say?"

henry nodded his consent.  bill cautiously slipped the gun from under the
sled-lashing.  the gun was on the way to his shoulder, but it never got
there.  for in that instant the she-wolf leaped sidewise from the trail
into the clump of spruce trees and disappeared.

the two men looked at each other.  henry whistled long and
comprehendingly.

"i might have knowed it," bill chided himself aloud as he replaced the
gun.  "of course a wolf that knows enough to come in with the dogs at
feedin' time, 'd know all about shooting-irons.  i tell you right now,
henry, that critter's the cause of all our trouble.  we'd have six dogs
at the present time, 'stead of three, if it wasn't for her.  an' i tell
you right now, henry, i'm goin' to get her.  she's too smart to be shot
in the open.  but i'm goin' to lay for her.  i'll bushwhack her as sure
as my name is bill."

"you nee
 
 ___________________________
 
dn't stray off too far in doin' it," his partner admonished.  "if
that pack ever starts to jump you, them three cartridges'd be wuth no
more'n three whoops in hell.  them animals is damn hungry, an' once they
start in, they'll sure get you, bill."

they camped early that night.  three dogs could not drag the sled so fast
nor for so long hours as could six, and they were showing unmistakable
signs of playing out.  and the men went early to bed, bill first seeing
to it that the dogs were tied out of gnawing-reach of one another.

but the wolves were growing bolder, and the men were aroused more than
once from their sleep.  so near did the wolves approach, that the dogs
became frantic with terror, and it was necessary to replenish the fire
from time to time in order to keep the adventurous marauders at safer
distance.

"i've hearn sailors talk of sharks followin' a ship," bill remarked, as
he crawled back into the blankets after one such rep
 
 ___________________________
 
lenishing of the
fire.  "well, them wolves is land sharks.  they know their business
better'n we do, an' they ain't a-holdin' our trail this way for their
health.  they're goin' to get us.  they're sure goin' to get us, henry."

"they've half got you a'ready, a-talkin' like that," henry retorted
sharply.  "a man's half licked when he says he is.  an' you're half eaten
from the way you're goin' on about it."

"they've got away with better men than you an' me," bill answered.

"oh, shet up your croakin'.  you make me all-fired tired."

henry rolled over angrily on his side, but was surprised that bill made
no similar display of temper.  this was not bill's way, for he was easily
angered by sharp words.  henry thought long over it before he went to
sleep, and as his eyelids fluttered down and he dozed off, the thought in
his mind was: "there's no mistakin' it, bill's almighty blue.  i'll have
to cheer him up to-morrow."



chapter iii--the hunger cry


the 
 
 ___________________________
 
day began auspiciously.  they had lost no dogs during the night, and
they swung out upon the trail and into the silence, the darkness, and the
cold with spirits that were fairly light.  bill seemed to have forgotten
his forebodings of the previous night, and even waxed facetious with the
dogs when, at midday, they overturned the sled on a bad piece of trail.

it was an awkward mix-up.  the sled was upside down and jammed between a
tree-trunk and a huge rock, and they were forced to unharness the dogs in
order to straighten out the tangle.  the two men were bent over the sled
and trying to right it, when henry observed one ear sidling away.

"here, you, one ear!" he cried, straighte
 
 ___________________________
 
ep she was luring him away from the security of his
human companionship.  once, as though a warning had in vague ways flitted
through his intelligence, he turned his head and looked back at the
overturned sled, at his team-mates, and at the two men who were calling
to him.

but whatever idea was forming in his mind, was dissipated by the
she-wolf, who advanced upon him, sniffed noses with him for a fleeting
instant, and then resumed her coy retreat before his renewed advances.

in the meantime, bill had bethought himself of the rifle.  but it was
jammed beneath the overturned sled, and by the time henry had helped him
to right the load, one ear and the she-wolf were too close together and
the distance too great to risk a shot.

too late one ear learned his mistake.  before they saw the cause, the two
men saw him turn and start to run back toward them.  then, approaching at
right angles to the trail and cutting off his retreat they saw a dozen
wolves, lean and grey, bounding across the snow
 
 ___________________________
 
.  on the instant, the she-
wolf's coyness and playfulness disappeared.  with a snarl she sprang upon
one ear.  he thrust her off with his shoulder, and, his retreat cut off
and still intent on regaining the sled, he altered his course in an
attempt to circle around to it.  more wolves were appearing every moment
and joining in the chase.  the she-wolf was one leap behind one ear and
holding her own.

"where are you goin'?" henry suddenly demanded, laying his hand on his
partner's arm.

bill shook it off.  "i won't stand it," he said.  "they ain't a-goin' to
get any more of our dogs if i can help it."

gun in hand, he plunged into the underbrush that lined the side of the
trail.  his intention was apparent enough.  taking the sled as the centre
of the circle that one ear was making, bill planned to tap that circle at
a point in advance of the pursuit.  with his rifle, in the broad
daylight, it might be possible for him to awe the wolves and save the
dog.

"say, bill!" henry called 
 
 ___________________________
 
after him.  "be careful!  don't take no
chances!"

henry sat down on the sled and watched.  there was nothing else for him
to do.  bill had already gone from sight; but now and again, appearing
and disappearing amongst the underbrush and the scattered clumps of
spruce, could be seen one ear.  henry judged his case to be hopeless.  the
dog was thoroughly alive to its danger, but it was running on the outer
circle while the wolf-pack was running on the inner and shorter circle.
it was vain to think of one ear so outdistancing his pursuers as to be
able to cut across their circle in advance of them and to regain the
sled.

the dif
 
 ___________________________
 
ferent lines were rapidly approaching a point.  somewhere out
there in the snow, screened from his sight by trees and thickets, henry
knew that the wolf-pack, one ear, and bill were coming together.  all too
quickly, far more quickly than he had expected, it happened.  he heard a
shot, then two shots, in rapid succession, and he knew that bill's
ammunition was gone.  then he heard a great outcry of snarls and yelps.
he recognised one ear's yell of pain and terror, and he heard a wolf-cry
that bespoke a stricken animal.  and that was all.  the snarls ceased.
the yelping died away.  silence settled down again over the lonely land.

he sat for a long while upon the sled.  there was no need for him to go
and see what had happened.  he knew it as though it had taken place
before his eyes.  once, he roused with a start and hastily got the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ggard and worn, wide-eyed from want of sleep.  he
cooked breakfast in the darkness, and at nine o'clock, when, with the
coming of daylight, the wolf-pack drew back, he set about the task he had
planned through the long hours of the night.  chopping down young
saplings, he made them cross-bars of a scaffold by lashing them high up
to the trunks of standing trees.  using the sled-lashing for a heaving
rope, and with the aid of the dogs, he hoisted the coffin to the top of
the scaffold.

"they got bill, an' they may get me, but they'll sure never get you,
young man," he said, addressing the dead body in its tree-sepulchre.

then he took the trail, the lightened sled bounding along behind the
willing dogs; for they, too, knew that safety lay open in the gaining of
fort mcgurry.  the wolves were now more open in their pursuit, trotting
sedately behind and ranging along on either side, their red tongues
lolling out, their lean sides showing the undulating ribs with every
movement.  they were ver
 
 ___________________________
 
 of harnesses,
and the eager whimpering of straining dogs.  four sleds pulled in from
the river bed to the camp among the trees.  half a dozen men were about
the man who crouched in the centre of the dying fire.  they were shaking
and prodding him into consciousness.  he looked at them like a drunken
man and maundered in strange, sleepy speech.

"red she-wolf. . . . come in with the dogs at feedin' time. . . . first
she ate the dog-food. . . . then she ate the dogs. . . . an' after that
she ate bill. . . . "

"where's lord alfred?" one of the men bellowed in his ear, shaking him
roughly.

he shook his head slowly.  "no, she didn't eat him. . . . he's roostin'
in a tree at the last camp."

"dead?" the man shouted.

"an' in a box," henry answered.  he jerked his shoulder petulantly away
from the grip of his questioner.  "say, you lemme alone. . . . i'm jes'
plump tuckered out. . . . goo' night, everybody."

his eyes fluttered and went shut.  his chin fell forward on his chest.
and even as th
 
 ___________________________
 
" scott asked.

the dog-musher, still on his knees and stooped over white fang,
calculated for a moment.

"three hundred dollars," he answered.

"and how much for one that's all chewed up like this one?" scott asked,
nudging white fang with his foot.

"half of that," was the dog-musher's judgment.  scott turned upon beauty
smith.

"did you hear, mr. beast?  i'm going to take your dog from you, and i'm
going to give you a hundred and fifty for him."

he opened his pocket-book and counted out the bills.

beauty smith put his hands behind his back, refusing to touch the
proffered money.

"i ain't a-sellin'," he said.

"oh, yes you are," the other assured him.  "because i'm buying.  here's
your money.  the dog's mine."

beauty smith, his hands still behind him, began to back away.

scott sprang toward him, drawing his fist back to strike.  beauty smith
cowered down in anticipation of the blow.

"i've got my rights," he whimpered.

"you've forfeited your rights to own that dog," was the rejoind